
Lake Elmo, MN Code of Ordinances


LAKE ELMO, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2017 S-10 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 08-180, passed 7-5-2017





Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 97-207



AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF LAKE ELMO,
MINNESOTA, RESTATING, REVISING, UPDATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH THE SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF THE CODE OF
ORDINANCES.



WHEREAS, M.S. §§ 415.02 and 415.03 authorize the city to cause its
ordinances to be codified and printed in a book,



NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of Lake Elmo, Minnesota, ordains:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the city as restated, revised,
updated, codified and compiled in book form, including penalties for the
violations of various provisions thereof, are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Lake Elmo.” This Code of
Ordinances also adopts by reference certain statutes and administrative rules
of the State of Minnesota as named in the Code of Ordinances.



Section 2.   The Code of Ordinance as adopted in Section 1 shall consist
of the following titles:



Title I: General Provisions



Title III: Administration



Title V: Public Works



Title VII: Traffic Code



Title IX: General Regulations



Title XI: Business Regulations



Title XIII: General Offenses



Title XV: Land Usage



Table of Special Ordinances



Parallel References



Section 3.   All prior ordinances, pertaining to the subjects treated in
the Code of Ordinances, shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective
date of this ordinance, except as they are included and re-ordained in whole
or in part in the Code of Ordinances; provided, this repeal shall not affect
any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to
the effective date of this ordinance, nor shall this repeal affect the
provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or
detaching territory, establishing franchises, or granting special rights to
certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of
bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or
personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of
land to public use, vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other
public places; nor shall this repeal affect any other ordinance of a
temporary or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained in or
covered by the Code of Ordinances.



Section 4.   This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances shall be a
sufficient publication of any ordinance included in it and not previously
published in the city's official newspaper. The Clerk of the city shall cause
a substantial quantity of the Code of Ordinances to be printed for general
distribution to the public at actual cost and shall furnish a copy of the
Code of Ordinances to the County Law Library or its designated depository.
The official copy of this Code of Ordinances shall be marked and be kept in
the office of the City Clerk.



Section 5.   The Code of Ordinance is declared to be prima facie evidence
of the law of the city and shall be received in evidence as provided by
Minnesota Statutes by the courts of the State of Minnesota.



Section 6.   This ordinance adopting the Code of Ordinances, and the Code
of Ordinances itself, shall take effect upon publication of this ordinance in
the city's official newspaper.



ADOPTION DATE: This Ordinance No. 97-207 was adopted on this 11th day of
December, 2007, by a vote of 5 Ayes and 0 Nays.



CITY OF LAKE ELMO



Dean Johnston  /s/                             



Mayor Dean Johnston



ATTEST:



Susan Hoyt  /s/               



Susan Hoyt, Administrator



EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall be effective the day following its
publication.



PUBLICATION DATE: Published on the 27th day of December, 2007.



This ordinance was adopted by the City Council of the City of Lake Elmo on
the 11th day of December 2007, by a vote of 5 Ayes and 0 Nays.



Mayor Johnston - Aye, Council Member DeLapp - Aye, Council Member Johnson -
Aye Council Member Park - Aye, Council Member Smith - Aye



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   RULES OF CODE CONSTRUCTION



   11.   GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CODE CONSTRUCTION



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Application to future ordinances



   10.03   Captions



   10.04   Severability



   10.05   Reference to other sections



   10.06   Reference to offices



   10.07   Errors and omissions



   10.08   Official time



   10.09   Reasonable time



   10.10   Ordinances repealed



   10.11   Ordinances unaffected



   10.12   Effective date of ordinances



   10.13   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.14   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.15   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities



   10.16   Copies of code



   10.17   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.18   Statutory rules adopted by reference



 



   10.99   Penalties



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the City
of Lake Elmo, Minnesota, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and
consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be
known and designated as the “city code,” for which designation “code of
ordinances,” “codified ordinances,” or “code” may be substituted. 
Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the
law as contained in the code.



   (B)   (1)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and
sections are to the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any
component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the
“Traffic Code.”



      (2)   Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation
“§” followed by the number, such as “§ 10.01.”



      (3)   Headings and captions used in this code other than the
title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only
and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.03  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.05  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.06  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.07  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.08  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.09  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.10  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain
all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein
enumerated and embraced.



   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.12  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.13  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.15  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.



   (A)   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the
effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as
provided by those laws.



   (B)   This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election
of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.16  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection.  The City Clerk shall provide a copy for sale
for a reasonable charge.



§ 10.17  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this code,
all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by
reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by
reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this
code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to
the contrary.



§ 10.18  STATUTORY RULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The definitions and rules of construction, presumptions, and
miscellaneous provisions pertaining to construction contained in M.S. Ch.
645, as it may be amended from time to time, are adopted by reference and
made a part of this code.  As so adopted, references in that M.S. Ch. 645 to
laws and statutes mean provisions of the code and references to the
legislature mean the City Council.



(1997 Code, § 100.03)



§ 10.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   Any person must not do any of the following:



         (a)   Violate, fail to comply with, or assist,
authorize, or permit the violation of a provision of this code;



         (b)   Violate, fail to comply with, or assist,
authorize, or permit the violation of the terms and conditions of a city
approval, including permits and licenses, required or granted under this
code; or



         (c)   Knowingly make or submit a false statement,
document, or material omission in connection with an application or procedure
required by this code.



      (2)   No section of part of this code designating the duties
of an official, employee, or appointee of the city may be construed to make
that person liable for the penalties provided herein.



   (B)   Penalties.



      (1)   A person who violated division (A) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction will be punished in accordance with state
law; provided, that if a different punishment is stated in this code, that
provision governs the punishment for the violation.



      (2)   Designation as a petty misdemeanor means that upon
conviction the sentence will be in accordance with state law. If not
designated as petty misdemeanor, a violation is a misdemeanor as set forth
above in division (B)(1) above.



      (3)   Each calendar day that division (A) above is violated
constitutes a separate offense.



      (4)   A violation of division (A) above constitutes sufficient
grounds for denial of an application required by this code that is related to
the violation.



      (5)   Action prohibited by division  (A) above may, at the
option of the city, void a city approval that is related to the violation.



      (6)   The City Attorney may institute a legal proceeding in
the name of the City of Lake Elmo to prevent, restrain, remedy, or abate a
violation of division (A) above.



      (7)   Nothing in this section prevents the city from taking
other action permitted by law, and the penalties and remedies provided here
and under other law are cumulative.



(Ord. 08-028, passed 7-20-2010; Am. Ord. 08-141, passed 7-5-2016)



CHAPTER 11:  GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS



Section



   11.01   Definitions



   11.02   Fees



§ 11.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   10-YEAR FLOOD.  The flood which can be expected to occur, on an
average, of once in 10 years; or the level to which flood waters have a 10%
chance of rising in any given year.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING.  A subordinate building, or a portion of the main
building, which is located on the same lot as the main building and the
purpose of which is clearly incidental to that of the principal building.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use incidental or subordinate to the principal use
of the same land.



   ADJACENT LANDS.  Lands within 300 feet of the normal high water mark
or any identified wetland.



   ADMINISTRATION (WASTE WATER SERVICE CHARGE).  Those costs attributable
to monitoring a reporting card maintenance record system of the waste water
treatment works.



   ADMINISTRATOR, CITY CLERK.  Means City Clerk/Administrator.



   ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING.  The City Zoning Administrator.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  Administrator of the city and the duties imposed upon
the Administrator in §§ 95.15et seq. with respect to registration through
the Administrator’s duly designated agents subject to the Administrator’s
supervision, direction, and control.



   AGRICULTURAL BUILDING.  A structure on agricultural land, as defined
below in the definition for FARM, RURAL of this section, designed,
constructed, and used to house farm implements, livestock, or agricultural
produce or products grown by the owner, lessee, or sublessee of the building
and members of their immediate families, their employees, and persons engaged
in the pickup or delivery of agricultural produce or products.



   AGRICULTURAL ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS.  An agricultural sales business
that combines the elements and characteristics of agriculture and tourism,
which is not necessarily located in an existing building.  Examples of
agricultural entertainment include: corn mazes, hay rides, sleigh rides,
petting farms, on-farm tours, agricultural related museums, demonstrations of
farming practices, techniques and methods, fee-based fishing and hunting,
horseback riding, nature trails, haunted barns and similar activities which
are related to agriculture.



   AGRICULTURAL MUSEUMS.  The keeping, restoration, maintenance and
display of the structures, tools and equipment utilized in the production of
agricultural products.  Restoration and maintenance activity shall be
limited to those structures, tools, and equipment permanently kept on display
on the premises.  Retail or wholesale sales of any product are specifically
excluded.



   AGRICULTURAL SALES BUSINESS.  The retail sale of fresh fruits,
vegetables, flowers, herbs, trees, or other agricultural, floricultural, or
horticultural products. The operation may be indoors or outdoors, include
pick-your-own or cut-your-own opportunities, and may involve the ancillary
sale of items considered accessory to the agricultural products being sold or
accessory sales of unprocessed foodstuffs; home processed food products such
as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces; or baked goods and homemade handicrafts. 
The floor area devoted to the sale of accessory items shall not exceed 25% of
the total floor area.  No commercially packaged handicrafts or commercially
processed or packaged foodstuffs shall be sold as accessory items.  No
activities other than the sale of goods as outlined above shall be allowed as
part of the AGRICULTURAL SALES BUSINESS.



   AGRICULTURE.  The production of livestock, dairy animals, dairy
products, fur-bearing animals, horticultural and floricultural nursery stock,
fruits of all kinds, vegetables, forage, grains, bees, and apiary products.



   ALARM SITE.  A single premises or location, or a multi-tenant
location, served by an alarm system or systems.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanical, electrical, or radio-controlled device
or system which is designed to emit, transmit, or relay a signal or message
and which, when activated, is intended to summon, or that would reasonably be
expected to summon, police, fire, or emergency medical services.  ALARM
SYSTEMS include intrusion alarms, but does not include:



      (1)   An alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is
permanently located at a site; or



      (2)   An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a
premises, and which does not constitute a local alarm.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE.  A motorized flotation-tired vehicle of not less
than 3 low-pressure tires, but not more than 6 tires, that is limited in
engine displacement of less than 800 cubic centimeters and total dry wet less
than 800 pounds.



   ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve
as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties where the
principal frontage is on a street.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  The person contracted with by the city that
is responsible for animal control operations within its corporate limits.



   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC FARM.  Cattle, hogs, horses, bees, turkeys, geese,
sheep, goats, chickens, and other animals commonly kept for commercial food
producing purposes.



   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC PETS.  Dogs, cats, birds, and similar animals,
commonly kept in a residence.



   ANIMATION.  The movement or the optical illusion of movement of any
part of a sign, sign structure, design, or pictorial segment, including the
movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity;
the automatic changing of all or any part of the facing of a  street sign.



   ANTENNA.  A device placed outdoors on a building or structure and used
to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves, excluding:
satellite dishes, 10 feet or shorter whip antennas 1 inch or less in
diameter, and television antennas having a total length of not more than 6
feet which are located on a dwelling or other permitted building.



   APARTMENT.  A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities designed
to be occupied as a residence by a single family.



   APPLICANT.  A person that makes an application to the city on an
application form provided by the City Administrator.



   AT LARGE.



      (1)   When a dog is off the premises of the owner and not:



         (a)   Under the control of the owner or a member of
owner’s immediate family by a leash, not exceeding 6 feet in length; or



         (b)   At “heel” beside a competent person having
custody of the dog and obedient to that person’s commands.



      (2)   When the dog commits damage to the person or property of
any one other than the owner or creates a nuisance upon the property of one
other than the owner, except in the defense of the owner, owner’s family,
or owner’s property, unless confined in the process of being transported to
or from the premises of the owner.



   AT LARGE.  When the dog is off the premises of the owner and not under
the control of the owner or a member of owner’s immediate family by a
leash, not exceeding 6 feet in length, or at “heel” beside a competent
person having custody of the dog and obedient to that person’s commands;
when the dog commits damage to the person or property of any one other than
the owner or creates a nuisance upon the property of one other than the
owner, except in the defense of the owner, owner’s family, or owner’s
property, unless confined in the process of being transported to or from the
premises of the owner.



(1997 Code, § 1320.01)



   ATTORNEY.  The City Attorney.



   AUTO OR MOTOR VEHICLE REDUCTION YARD.  A lot or yard where 1 or more
unlicensed motor vehicles, or the remains of an unlicensed motor vehicle, are
kept for the purpose of dismantling, wrecking, crushing, repairing,
rebuilding, sale of parts, sale as scrap, storage, or abandonment.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR.  The replacement of any part or repair of any part
which does not require the removal of the engine head or pan, engine,
transmission, or differential, incidental body and fender work, minor
painting, and upholstering service when the service is applied to passenger
automobiles and trucks not in excess of 7,000 pounds gross vehicle weight.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (GAS STATION).  A place where any motor
fuel, lubricating oil, or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for
sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles. 
This definition includes greasing and oiling and sale of automobile
accessories on the premises.  This definition also includes minor repairs
and replacement of parts and motor services to passenger vehicles and small
trucks not exceeding 1 and 1/2 ton capacity.  This definition shall not
include major repair, rebuilding, or conditioning of engines, motor vehicles,
or trailers; collision service, including body, frame, or fender
straightening or repair; overhaul, painting or paint job, vehicle steam
cleaning, or automatic car or vehicle washing devices.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE USES.  Those uses catering to the traveling
public.  These include auto and truck laundry, service station, repair
garage, public garage, motel, hotel, seasonal produce sales, motor vehicle
sales, trailer sales and rental, boat sales, rental services, and
restaurants.  The sale of groceries and dry goods is also included in this
section when the sale of the goods is an accessory use to the above
automobile service uses.



   AWNING.  A roof-like cover including, but not limited to, fabric,
metal, or glass designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a
decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a
structure over a window, walk, door or the like.



   B.O.D. (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at 20°C expressed in milligrams per liter.  Laboratory
procedures shall be in accordance with the latest edition of Standards
Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all 4 sides, regardless of the
depth of excavation below ground level.



   BEAUTY SALON.  Any commercial establishment, residence, or other
establishment, place, or event wherein cosmetology, including hair care, nail
care, and skin care, is offered or practiced on a regular basis for
compensation.



   BEDROOM.  Any room within a dwelling unit which, by virtue of its
design and location, might reasonably be used as a sleeping room. This
definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   BEER or 3.2% MALT LIQUOR.  Any fermented, potable malt beverage
containing not less than 1/2 of 1% alcohol by volume nor more than 3.2%
alcohol by weight.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water
conveyance systems.  BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (B.O.D.5).  The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in 5 days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BLOCK.  An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded
by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.



   BLUFF IMPACT ZONE.  A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the
top of a bluff.



   BLUFF.  A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment
having the following characteristics.  (An area with an average slope of
less than 18% over a distance of 50 feet or more shall not be considered part
of the bluff.)



      (1)   Part or all of the feature is in a Shoreland area;



      (2)   The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high
water level of the water body;



      (3)   The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a
point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or
greater; and



      (4)   The slope must drain toward the water body.



   BOARDING HOUSE.  A building other than a motel or hotel where, for
compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging
are provided for 3 or more unrelated persons, but not to exceed 8 persons.



   BOATHOUSE.  A structure designed and used solely for the storage of
boats and boating equipment.



   BONA FIDE CLUB.  A club organized for social or business purposes, for
intellectual improvement, or for the promotion of sports, where the serving
of 3.2% malt liquor is incidental to and not a major purpose of the club.



   BOULEVARD.  The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb
line and the property line.



   BUILDABLE LAND AREA.  The gross land area less the unbuildable land
area that includes hydric and restrictive soils, land with slopes over 25%,
wetlands, areas that cannot accommodate septic systems, and land that has
been acquired for municipal purposes.



   BUILDING CODE.  Minnesota State Building Code.



   BUILDING FOOTPRINT.  The outline of the total area covered by a
building’s perimeter at the ground level.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance from the average of the
highest and lowest point of grade for that portion of the lot covered by
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the roof deck
line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and highest ridge
for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.



   BUILDING LINE.  A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high
water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The officer or other designated authority,
certified by the state, charged with the administration and enforcement of
the State Building Code, or officer’s duly authorized representative.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  A line within a lot parallel to a public
right-of-way line, a side or rear lot line, a bluff line, or a high water
mark or line, behind which buildings or structures must be placed.



   BUILDING SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between 1 building
and the lot line.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The part of the drainage system which extends from
the building drain to the point of connection to either a public sewer, a
septic tank, pumping chamber, or an individual sewage treatment system, for
the purpose of conveying waste water. This definition shall not apply to §§
51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   BUILDING.  Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal, or
movable property of any kind.  When any portion of a building is completely
separated from every other part of a building by area separation, each
portion of the building shall be deemed as a separate building.



   BUSINESS OF REFUSE COLLECTION.  Operating a refuse collection service
for hire.



   BUSINESS.  Any occupation, employment, or enterprise where merchandise
is exhibited or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.



   CAPACITY (SEWER SYSTEMS).  The internal liquid volume of a sewage tank
below the outlet level. This definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001
through 51.005 of this code.



   CANOPY.  A detachable, roof-like cover, supported from the ground or
deck, floor or walls of a structure, for protection from the sun or weather.



   CARPORT.  An automobile shelter having 1 or more sides open.



   CELLAR.  The portion of the building having more than ½ of the clear
floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.



   CESSPOOL.  An underground pit into which raw household sewage or other
untreated liquid waste is discharged and from which the liquid is allowed to
seep into the surrounding soil. This definition shall not apply to §§
51.001 through 51.005 of this code



   CHANNEL.  A natural or artificial watercourse with definite bed and
banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water,
including but not limited to streams, river, creeks, ditches, drainage ways,
canals, conduits, culverts, waterways, gullies, ravines, or washes; and
including any area adjacent to the water course, which is subject to
inundation by reason of overflow or floodwaters.



   CHURCH.  A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses,
where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building,
together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled
by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.



   CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE.  Any automatic vending machine used for the
sale of cigarettes and matches, and controlled by the insertion of a coin or
coins; it shall not include machines or devices used solely for the vending
of service, food, or confections.



   CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Lake
Elmo, Minnesota, as presently established or as amended by ordinance,
annexation, or other legal actions at a future time.  The term CITY when
used in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its
authorized representatives.



   CITY’S TRADE AREA.  The area located within the city limits and the
area located within the limits of all Minnesota cities and townships which
are contiguous to the city.



(1997 Code, § 1110.09)



   CIVIL DEFENSE EMERGENCY.  An emergency declared by the Governor under
Minnesota Statutes, or an emergency proclaimed by the Mayor.



   CIVIL DEFENSE FORCES.  Any personnel employed by the city and any
other volunteer or paid member of the local civil defense agency engaged in
carrying on civil defense functions.



   CIVIL DEFENSE.  The preparations for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions.



   CLEAN WATER ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CLOSURE STATEMENT.  A written statement prepared by the park owner
which includes the following information:



      (1)   A statement that the manufactured home park, or a
portion of the manufactured home park, is closing and the anticipated date of
closing;



      (2)   A statement addressing the availability, location, and
potential cost of other manufactured home park lot sites located within a 25
mile radius of the manufactured home park that is being closed; and



      (3)   A statement of the probable relocation costs within a
reasonable range which will be incurred by the park residents in order to
relocate the park resident’s manufactured home to a manufactured home park
within a 25 mile radius.



   CLUB or LODGE.  A nonprofit association or persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues.



   CLUB.  Any corporation duly organized under the laws of Minnesota for
civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, or for intellectual
improvement or for the promotion of sports or a congressionally chartered
veterans’ organization if it meets all of the following conditions.



      (1)   It shall have more than 50 members.



      (2)   For more than a year, it shall have owned, hired, or
leased a building or space in a building of the extent and character as may
be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable accommodation of
its members.



      (3)   Its affairs and management shall be conducted by a board
of directors, executive committee, or other similar body chosen by the
members at a meeting held for that purpose.



      (4)   None of its members, officers, agents, or employees
shall be paid directly or indirectly any compensation by way of profit from
the distribution or sale of beverages to the members of the club, or to its
guests, beyond the amount of the reasonable salary or wages as may be fixed
and voted each year by the governing body of the club.



   CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COLLECTION POINT.  Any residence, place of business, or other place in
the city with respect to which a HAULER, as defined below in this section,
has been hired for the purpose of collecting and transporting solid waste.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and
storm sewer.



   COMMERCIAL LUMBERING OR HARVESTING OF FOREST PRODUCTS.  Any removal of
trees that may result in the commercial sale of any wood or product of the
tree.



   COMMERCIAL SPEECH.  Speech or graphics advertising a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment.



   COMMERCIAL USE.  The principal use of land or buildings for the sale,
lease, rental, or trade of products, goods, and services.



   COMMERCIAL USER (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Any place of business which
discharges sanitary waste as distinct from industrial wastewater.



   COMMISSIONER (INTOXICATING LIQUOR).  The Commissioner of Public Safety
for the State of Minnesota.



   COMMISSIONER (SHORELAND).  The Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources.



   COMMUNITY SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  A sewage treatment and collection
system which collects sewage from 2 or more residences or other
establishments, consisting of collector lines, pumps, sewage tanks, and soil
treatment unit; for purposes of administration, operation, maintenance, and
replacement; individual off-site systems shall be considered community sewage
treatment systems.



   COMPOST SITE.  An area designated by the city for the placement of
uncontaminated leaves and grass clippings.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The policies, statements, goals, and interrelated
plans for private and public land and water use, transportation, and
community facilities, including recommendations for planned execution;
documented in texts, ordinance, and maps, which constitute the guide for the
future development of the community or any portion of the community.



   CONCEALED WEAPON.  Whenever a person is carrying a weapon that is not
readily ascertainable upon observing the person.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A specific type of structure or land use listed in
individual zoning districts that may be allowed but only after an in-depth
review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided
in the zoning code.



   CONDOMINIUM.  See DWELLING, MULTIPLE OR APARTMENT BUILDING.



   CONSERVATION EASEMENT.  An interest in real property created in a
manner that imposes limitations or affirmative obligations regarding the use
of property, including the retention, protection, and maintenance of open
space.



   CONTRACTOR MAINTENANCE SHOP.  An area and/or building devoted to use
by a person who contracts to do certain work in the fields of building or
construction trades.  If there is outside storage of construction equipment,
it shall be placed to the rear of the contractor’s maintenance shop, and
screened from adjacent properties by a landscape plan approved by the City
Council.



   COUNCIL.  The governing body of the city.



   COUNTY.  Washington County, Minnesota.



   CURB LEVEL.  The grade elevation of the curb in front of the center of
the building.  Where no curb has been established, the community engineer
shall determine a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this
section.



   CURRENT LAND USE.  Land use as it appears on tax statement.



   CURRENT RESIDENT LIST.  A list of names and addresses of adult
residents of the manufactured home park.



   D.N.R.  The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.



   DANGEROUS DOG.  Any dog that has:



      (1)   Without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm
on a human being on public or private property;



      (2)   Killed a domestic animal without provocation while off
the owner’s property; or



      (3)   Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the
owner has notice that the dog is potentially dangerous, the dog aggressively
bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.



   DAY CARE CENTER.  Any facility licensed by the Minnesota Department of
Human Services and operated for the purpose of providing care, protection,
and guidance to 14 or more individuals during only part of a 24-hour day.
This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for
individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public and private
educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a
full 24-hour period.



   DAY SPA.  A safe, clean commercial establishment, which employs
professional licensed therapists whose services include massage and body or
facial treatments. Treatments may include body packs and wraps, exfoliation,
cellulite and heat treatments, electrolysis, body toning, waxing,
aromatherapy, cleansing facials, medical facials, nonsurgical face lifts,
electrical toning, and electrolysis. Services may also include Hydrotherapy
and steam and sauna facilities, nutrition and weight management. No services
or facilities may be offered or constructed that would include customer over
night stay.



   DEADMAN THROTTLE (SAFETY THROTTLE).  A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.



   DECIBEL.  The unit of sound measured on the “A” weighing scale of
a sound level meter, set on slow response, the weighing characteristics of
which are specified in the Standards on Sound Level Meters of the USA
Standards Institute.



   DECK.  A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached
railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally
related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than 3
feet above ground.



   DEDICATED CONSERVATION EASEMENTS.  A non-possessory interest in real
property imposing limitations on a parcel of land for the purposes of
retaining and protecting natural or open space values of real property,
assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or other
open space uses, and protecting natural resources.  A conservation easement
must be granted to a qualified land trust and the City of Lake Elmo.  At the
city’s discretion, the conservation easement may go to the City of Lake
Elmo if a qualified land trust does not accept the easement.



   DEPTH OF LOT.  The horizontal distance between the frontage
right-of-way line and rear lot line.  On a corner lot, the side with the
largest frontage is its depth, and the side with the lesser frontage is its
width.



   DEPTH OF REAR YARD.  The horizontal distance between the rear building
line and the rear lot line.



   DESIGN STANDARDS.  The specifications to landowners or subdividers for
the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating, among other
things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of the items as
rights-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots.



   DESIGNATED RECYCLING PROGRAM.  A program for the collection and
recycling of recyclable materials which is instituted, sponsored, and
controlled by the city and its contracted recycler.



   DIRECT LIGHT. Light emitted directly from a lamp, off a reflector, or
through a refractor of a luminaire.



   DREDGING.  The process by which soils or other surface materials,
normally transported by surface water erosion into a body of water, are
removed for the purpose of deepening the body of water.



   DRIVE-IN.  Any use where products and/or services are provided to the
customer under conditions where the customer does not have to leave the car
or where service to the automobile occupants is offered regardless of whether
service is also provided within a building.



   DUPLEX.  A residential structure containing 2 dwelling units located
on 1 parcel of land.



   DWELLING, DUPLEX OR 2-FAMILY.  A residential building containing 2
complete dwelling units.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE OR APARTMENT BUILDING.  A residential building or
portion of a building, containing 3 or more dwelling units served by a common
entrance.



   DWELLING, SEASONAL.  A residential building not capable of year-round
occupancy due to non-winterized construction or inadequate non-conforming
year-round on-site sewage treatment systems.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED.  Two single-family dwellings sharing
1 or more common wall, each on its own individual lot.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED.  A single-family dwelling that is
surrounded by yards on all sides, is located on its own individual lot, and
which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A residential structure designed for or used
exclusively as 1 dwelling unit of permanent occupancy.



   DWELLING, SINGLE.  A residential building containing 1 detached
dwelling unit.



   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.  A residential building containing 3 or more
dwelling units with at least 1 common wall between adjacent residences and
each unit so oriented as to have all exits directly to the out-of-doors.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A residential accommodation including complete kitchen
and bathroom facilities, permanently installed, which is arranged, designed,
used, or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for 1 family.



   DWELLING.  A building, or 1 or more portions of a building, occupied
or intended to be occupied exclusively for human habitation, but not
including rooms in hotels, motels, nursing homes, boarding houses, nor
trailers, tents, cabins, or trailer coaches. (Also, see DWELLING UNIT.)



   EASEMENT.  The right granted by a property owner to another or to the
public to use a tract of land for the purpose of constructing and maintaining
drives, utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewers, water
mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways,
and gas lines.



   ECOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS.  The features of a wetland which
determines its function as a hydrological, botanical, zoological resource. 
They include, without limitation, water conveyance capacity including size
and configuration of cross section of the wetland, alignment of the wetland,
gradient texture of materials along the wetland, size and configuration of
the characteristics of structures within the wetlands, amount and type of
vegetation within the wetland, amount and type of fish, birds, and mammals
within the wetland, and the water purification function of the wetland.



   ELDERLY HOUSING (SENIOR HOUSING).  A facility consisting of 3 or more
dwelling units, the occupancy of which is limited to persons 55 years of age
or older. The facility may include medical facilities or care as an accessory
use. Senior housing shall typically consist of multiple-household attached
dwellings, but may include other forms of attached or detached dwelling units
as part of a wholly owned and managed senior project.



   ELIGIBLE PARK RESIDENT.  A park resident who satisfies the following
criteria:



      (1)   Park lot rent is current within 30 days of the
anticipated park closing date and personal property taxes have been paid for
the current and prior years.  The owner’s performance of the agreement
shall be secured by a bond or a cash deposit filed with the Administrator in
the amount of $1,000;



      (2)   Manufactured home has been maintained (including the
roofing, siding, windows, flooring, and frame pursuant to the manufactured
home park standards) for the year in which the manufactured home was
constructed and the manufactured home is in good repair as determined by the
city’s Building Inspector;



      (3)   Park resident is unable to locate space in a
manufactured home park within a 25 mile radius which as the same or less
restrictive standards; and



      (4)   Personal credit history is not the reason the park
resident’s inability to relocate to another manufactured home park.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder.  This includes personnel
from city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. 
This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state,
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps.  These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, and chemical, evacuation, congregate
care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions.  Emergency
management includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil
defense” functions.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   ENGINEER.  The City Engineer.



   EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT.  A method of determining the location of
floodway boundaries so that flood plain lands on both sides of a stream are
capable of conveying a proportional share of flood flows.



   EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (E.R.U.) SEWER SYSTEMS.  A unit of waste
water volume of 250 gallons per day and a strength not greater than 250 mg/l
of B.O.D. and 300 mg/l of total suspended solids.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES (PUBLIC UTILITY USES).  Underground or overhead
gas, electric, steam, or water distribution systems; collection,
communication, supply, or disposal system, including poles, wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants, or other similar equipment and accessories, but
not including buildings or transmission services.



   EXCLUSIVE LIQUOR STORE.  An establishment used exclusively for the
sale of intoxicating liquor at retail either “on-sale” or “off-sale”
or both.



   EXTERIOR STORAGE.  The storage of goods, materials, equipment,
manufactured products, and similar items not fully enclosed in a building.



(1997 Code, § 1340.01)



   EXTERIOR STORAGE (INCLUDES OPEN STORAGE).  The storage of goods,
materials, equipment, manufactured products, and similar items not fully
enclosed by a building.



   EXTRA STRENGTH WASTE (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Waste having a B.O.D. and/or
suspended solids greater than domestic waste as defined in DOMESTIC WASTE
WATER above in this section.



   EXTRACTIVE USE.  The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of
sand, gravel, rock, industrial materials, other nonmetallic minerals, and
peat not regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended
from time to time.



   FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system signal or message
which elicits notification to and/or response by the Washington County
Sheriffs Office and/or Lake Elmo Fire Department when there is no evidence of
a crime, fire, medical emergency, or other activity which warrants a call for
immediate police, firefighting, or emergency medical assistance.



   FAMILY.  An individual, or 2 or more persons each related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or foster care arrangement living together as a single
housekeeping unit, or group of not more than 4 persons not so related,
maintaining a common household, exclusive of servants.



   FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT CENTER.  Amusement facilities that may include
indoor miniature golf, child play areas, arcade games, batting cages,
birthday party and family celebration rooms, indoor soccer/field hockey,
children’s adventure play gardens, and laser tag. Also typically included
are a small food and beverage area and a small retail area. All facilities
are non-alcoholic and smoke free.



   FARM, RURAL.  The portion of a 10 or more acre parcel of land which is
devoted to agriculture by the property owner or by a lessee of the property
owner.



   FARM, SUBURBAN.  A suburban farm is a non-commercial, food-producing
use primarily intended for the use of the residents, and usually on less than
10 contiguous acres.  Suburban agricultural uses may include production of
crops such as fruit trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, vegetables, and domestic
pets.



   FARM SCHOOL.  A facility that supports a school program that
emphasizes fostering a child's intellectual, social, physical, and emotional
growth, using farm animals, agriculture, and nature as the learning
environment and conducted as part of an operational farm.



   FARMER.  Person permanently residing on a tract of land of not less
than 10 acres in the city and who farms the land for a livelihood.



   FENCE.  A partition, structure, wall, or gate erected as a dividing
marker, visual or physical barrier, or enclosure, not to include any roof or
covering.



   FILL.  Any act by which soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any
similar material is deposited, placed, pushed, or transported and shall
include the conditions resulting from the act.



   FINAL PLAT.  A drawing or map of an approved subdivision, meeting all
requirements of the subdivision ordinance, and in the form as required by law
for purposes of recording.



   FINISHED FILL.  Soil compaction area and the final grade outside the
wall and foundation of a structure.



   FIRE OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL ALARM.  A system or portion of a combination
system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and
annunciate the status of fire or medical emergency or supervisory signal
initiating devices which are intended to summon fire or emergency medical
services by the Washington County Sheriffs Office and/or the Lake Elmo Fire
Department.



   FISH HOUSE. A water-oriented structure meant to provide periodic
shelter during the winter months while atop a frozen lake for use in fishing.
A structure will be considered a FISH HOUSE only if it is constructed with
sleds, wheels or similar means to allow transport on to a frozen lake; is not
used on land for human habitation; and is not used for boat storage.



   FITNESS STUDIO.  A place or building where passive or active exercises
and related activities are performed for the purpose of physical fitness,
improved circulation or flexibility, and/or weight control. The activities
shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.  FITNESS STUDIO may
include exercise equipment; and shall exclude massage in any form.  The
maximum allowable floor area is 5,000 square feet.



   FIXTURE.  The assembly that holds the lamp.  It may include an
assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor of lens.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state so that it
will separate by gravity from waste water.



   FLOOD.  A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in
the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY.  The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE.  The portion of the flood plain outside the floodway. 
FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous with the term FLOODWAY FRINGE used in the flood
insurance study for Washington County, Minnesota and incorporated areas.



   FLOOD PLAIN.  The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake,
or water course which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional
flood.



   FLOOD-PROOFING.  A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for
the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



   FLOODWAY.  The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a water
course and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably
required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



   FLOOR AREA.  The gross area of the main floor of a residential
building measured in square feet and not an attached garage, breezeway, or
similar attachment.



   FLOOR AREA, GROSS.  The sum of the gross area of the various floors of
a building measured in square feet.  The basement floor area shall not be
included unless the area constitutes a story.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO.  The numerical value obtained through dividing the
gross floor area of a building or buildings by the net area of the lot or
parcel of land on which the building or buildings are located.



   FLOOR PLAN, GENERAL.  A graphic representation of the anticipated use
of the floor area within a building or structure.



   FLORICULTURE.  The cultivation and management of ornamental and
flowering plants.



   FOOT CANDLE.  An illuminance equal to 1 lumen per square foot.



   FOREST LAND CONVERSION.  The clear cutting of forested lands to
prepare for a new land use other than re-establishment of a subsequent forest
stand.



   FORESTED AREA.  Any unit of land which has a density of trees greater
than 10 trees per acre.



   FRONTAGE.  The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street.



   FULL CUTOFF LUMINAIRE.  Luminaire that allows no direct light
emissions higher than 15 degrees below a horizontal plane through the
luminaire’s lowest light-emitting part.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  A detached 1 story accessory building or portion of
the principal building, including a carport, which is used primarily for the
storage of passenger vehicles, trailers, or farm trucks.



   GARAGE, REPAIR.  A building or space for the repair of maintenance of
motor vehicles, but not including factory assembly of the vehicles, auto
wrecking establishments, or junk yards.



   GARAGE, STORAGE.  Any premises, except those described as a private or
repair garage used exclusively for the storage of power-driven vehicles.



   GARBAGE.  Solid waste resulting from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage,
or sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable and condemned food.



   GLARE.  Direct light emitted from a luminaire that causes reduced
vision or momentary blindness.



   GOVERNMENT USER (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Users which are units, agencies, or
instrumentalities of federal, state, or local government discharging normal
domestic strength waste water.



   GRAY WATER.  Liquid waste from a dwelling or other establishment
produced by bathing, laundry, culinary operations, and from floor drains, and
specifically excluding toilet waste.



   GREENHOUSES.  A building used for the growing of plants, all or part
of which are sold at retail or wholesale.



   GROSS ACRES.  The total area of a parcel of land including wetlands,
hydric soils, steep slopes, streets, and dedicated easements.



   HAULER.  Person engaged in the business of refuse collection.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  The vertical distance between the lowest grade
level at the building line and the uppermost point on the roof.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  A structure that is at least 50 years old, in its
original state.  Structure shall add to the visual integrity of the
landscape.



   HISTORICAL SITE.  Any archaeological site, standing structure, or
other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National
Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historical
Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the
provisions of M.S.§ 308.08, as it may be amended from time to time.  A
historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either
register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after
review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota
Historic Society.  All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to
be significant historic sites.



   HOLDING TANK.  A watertight sewage tank for the temporary storage of
sewage until it is transported to an approved point for treatment and
disposal. This definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of
this code.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by
the occupant, only, of a dwelling when carried on within a dwelling unit or
in an accessory building, provided that no signs other than those normally
utilized in a residential district are present, that no stock in trade over
1,000 cubic feet is stored on the premises, that no over-the-counter retail
sales are involved unless ancillary to the permitted business, and that
entrance to the home occupation is or can be gained from within the
structure. Uses include professional office, hair salons serving no more than
2 customers at a time, or teaching limited to no more than 3 students at any
time, and other uses which do not create a nuisance as outlined in Chapter 96
of this Code. A HOME OCCUPATION shall not be interpreted to include tourist
homes, restaurants, disorderly house as defined by M.S. § 609.33, Sudb. 1,
as it may be amended from time to time, or similar uses. No HOME OCCUPATION
shall be permitted that creates the need for more than 3 parking spaces at
any given time in addition to the parking spaces required by the occupants.
HOME OCCUPATIONS shall not be carried on except between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   HORTICULTURE.  The cultivation and management of trees, plants,
grasses, vegetables, and fruits.



   HOTEL.  A building having provision for 9 or more guests in which
lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation, and which is open
to transient or permanent guests or both, and where no provision is made for
cooking in any guest room, and which ingress and egress to and from all rooms
is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.  Either of the following:



      (1)   Either of the following:



         (a)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface that allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system
including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any non-storm water
discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been
previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency; or



         (b)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.



      (2)   This definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through
51.005 of this code.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge
to the storm drain system.



   ILLUMINANCE.  The level of light measured at a surface.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  Any structure or surface which interferes to any
degree with the direct absorption of water into the ground, including but not
limited to building footprints, sidewalks, paved or gravel driveways and
parking areas, patios, sport courts, swimming pools, or any other similar
surface. Decks, pervious landscaping fabric, and retaining walls shall not be
included as impervious surface.



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system, or other sewage treatment device. This definition shall not
apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  An on-site sewage treatment
system connecting to a single dwelling or other establishment, consisting of
soil treatment unit, septic tank, and any associated pumping and piping
systems. This definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005of this
code.



   INDUSTRIAL USE.  The use of land or buildings for the production,
manufacture, warehousing, storage, or transfer of goods, products,
commodities, or other wholesale items.



   INDUSTRIAL USERS OR INDUSTRIES (SEWER SYSTEMS).



      (1)   Entities that discharge into a publicly-owned waste
water treatment works, liquid waste resulting from the process employed in
industrial or manufacturing processes, or from the development of any natural
resources; these are identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented
under 1 of the following divisions:



         (a)   Division A.  Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing;



         (b)   Division B.  Mining;



         (c)   Division D.  Manufacturing;



         (d)   Division E.  Transportation, Communications,
Electric, Gas, and Sanitary Sewers; or



         (e)   Division I.  Services.



      (2)   Any non-governmental user of a publicly-owned treatment
works which discharges waste water to the treatment works which contains
toxic pollutants or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient
quantity either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate
the sludge of any municipal systems, or to injure or to interfere with any
sewage treatment process, or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals,
creates a public nuisance, or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect
on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE WATER (SEWER SYSTEMS).  The liquid, solid, or gaseous
processing wastes from an industrial manufacturing process, trade, or
business including but not limited to all Standard Industrial Classification
Manual Divisions A, B, D, E, or I, as distinct from domestic waste water.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The solid, liquid, or gaseous waste resulting from
industrial or manufacturing processes, trade, or business, or from the
development, recovery, or processing of natural resources.



   INDUSTRY, MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM.  Any non-governmental or
non-residential user of a publicly owned treatment works which is identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, latest edition, categorized
in Divisions A, B, D, E, and I.



   INSTITUTIONAL HOUSING.  Housing for students, mentally ill, infirm,
elderly, nurses, physically retarded, and similar housing of a specialized
nature.



   INSTITUTIONAL USER (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Users other than commercial,
governmental, industrial, or residential users, discharging primarily normal
domestic strength waste water (e.g., non-profit organizations).



   INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING.  The complete removal of trees or
shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.



   INTERIM USE.  A temporary use of property until a particular date,
until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no
longer permit it.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR.  Ethyl alcohol and distilled,
fermented, spirituous, vinous, and malt beverages containing in excess of
3.2% alcohol by weight.



   INTRUSION ALARM.  A robbery, burglary, panic, or other alarm intended
to summon the police, which is designed either to be initiated purposely by a
person or by an alarm system that responds to a stimulus characteristic of
unauthorized intrusion.



   JUNK YARD.  An area where discarded or salvaged materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled, or handled,
including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber
products, bottles, and used building materials. Storage of the material in
conjunction with a permitted manufacturing process when within an enclosed
area or building shall not be included.



   JUNK.  All exterior storage not permitted by § 150.002 or included as
a permitted accessory use, a permitted use, or included as part of a
conditional use permit, or otherwise permitted by the provisions of this
code, is defined as JUNK within the meaning of § 96.03(B)(11).



(1997 Code, § 1340.06)



   KENNEL; ANIMALS.  Any place where 4 or more of any type of domestic
pets, over 4 months of age, are owned, boarded, bred, or offered for sale.



   LAMP.  The component of a luminaire that produces the light.



   LAND ALTERATION.  The excavation or grading of land involving movement
of earth and materials in excess of 50 yards.



   LAND RECLAMATION.  The reclaiming of land by depositing material so as
to elevate the grade.  Depositing of a total of more than 50 cubic yards of
material per lot or parcel, either by hauling in or re-grading the area.



   LANDSCAPING.  Planting trees, shrubs, and turf covers such as grasses
and shrubs.



   LICENSEE.  Any park operator licensed by the State of Minnesota to
maintain and operate a manufactured home park.



   LIFT.  The mechanical system designed to elevate or lower someone or
something up or down a topographical slope.



   LIGHT TRESPASS.  Light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond the
boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located.



   LOADING SPACE.  A space, accessible from a street, alley, or way, in
or outside of a building, for the use of trucks while loading and unloading
merchandise or materials.



   LOCAL ALARM.  An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site
that is audible or visible from the exterior of the structure.



   LODGING ROOM.  A room rented as sleeping and living quarters, but
without cooking facilities.  In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities,
each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as 1
lodging room.



   LOT.  A parcel of land designated by plat, metes and bounds,
registered land survey, auditors plot, or other accepted means and separated
from other parcels or portions by the description for the purpose of sale,
lease or separation.



   LOT.  An area within a manufactured home park designed or used for the
accommodation of a manufactured home.



   LOT, BUILDABLE.  A lot which meets or exceeds all requirements of the
community land use and development ordinances without the necessity of
variances.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on 2 or
more intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of a deflection in alignment
of a single street, the interior angle or which does not exceed 135 degrees.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot situated at the intersection of 2 streets, the
interior angle of the intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot, including through lots.



   LOT, NON-RIPARIAN.  A separate parcel of land within a designated
shoreland area but which does not have frontage along a lake or tributary
stream.



   LOT, RIPARIAN.  A separate parcel of land within a designated
shoreland area having frontage along a lake or tributary stream.



   LOT, THROUGH.  Any lot other than a corner lot which abuts more than 1
street.  On a THROUGH LOT, all the street lines shall be considered the
front lines for applying this section.



   LOT AREA.  The minimum of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.



   LOT AREA MINIMUM PER FAMILY.  The minimum number of square feet or
acres of lot area required per dwelling unit.



   LOT CONSOLIDATION.  The combining of 2 or more existing parcels into 1
parcel and recorded as 1 parcel with the County Recorder’s Office.



   LOT DEPTH.  The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lines of a lot.



   LOT IMPROVEMENT.  Any building, structure, place, work of art, or
other object, or improvement of the land on which they are situated
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of the
betterment.



   LOT LINE.  A lot line is the property line bounding a lot except that
where any portion of a lot extends into a public right-of-way or a proposed
public right-of-way, the line of the public right-of-way shall be the lot
line.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  The boundary of a lot which abuts a public street.
In the case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest dimension of a public
street.  If the dimensions of a corner lot are equal, the front lot line
shall be designated by the owner.  In the case of a corner lot in a
non-residential area, the lot shall be deemed to have frontage on both
streets.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  The boundary of a lot which is opposite to the front
lot line.  If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the
lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line 10 feet in
length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line
or a rear lot line.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a
lot measured at the setback line.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.



   LUMEN.  A unit of measurement of the light emitted from a source.



   LUMINAIRE.  The complete lighting system, including the lamp and the
fixture.



   M.H.D.  The Minnesota Department of Health.



   M.P.C.A.  The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, not affixed to or a part of real
estate, transportable in 1 or more sections, which in the traveling mode is 8
body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when placed
on a lot, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical system contained in it.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections,
which in the traveling mode, is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet
or more in length, or, when erected on side, is 320 or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained in the structure.  The term includes any
structure which meets all the requirements and with respect to which the
manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary and
complies with the standards established under the M.S. Ch. 327.31, Subd. 3,
as it may be amended from time to time.  No manufactured dwelling shall be
moved into the city that does not meet the Manufactured Home Building Code as
defined in M.S. Ch. 327.31, Subd. 3.  This does not include recreational
vehicles as regulated in the zoning code.



   MANUFACTURED HOME LOT.  A parcel of land for the placement of a single
manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which 2 or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of
charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of
the manufactured home park.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which 2 or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of
charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of
the manufactured home park.  MANUFACTURED HOME PARK does not include
facilities which are open daily during 3 or fewer seasons of the year.



   MANUFACTURING; GENERAL.  All manufacturing, compounding, processing,
packaging, treatment, or assembly of goods or materials which involve a risk
of offensive or dangerous noise, odor, or pollution beyond the lot on which
the use is located.  Uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
sawmill, refineries, commercial feedlots, acid, cement, explosives, flour,
feed, and grain milling or storage, meat packaging, slaughter houses, coal or
tar asphalt distillation, rendering of fat, grease, lard, or tallow,
alcoholic beverages, poisons, exterminating agents, glue or size, lime,
gypsum, plaster of pans, tanneries, automobile parts, paper and paper
products including storage, electric power generation facilities, vinegar
works, junk yards, auto reduction yards, foundry, forge, casting of metal
products, rock, stone, and cement products.



   MANUFACTURING; LIMITED.  All compounding, processing, packaging,
treating, or assembling of goods and materials, provided the use will not
constitute a nuisance because of offensive odors, glare, smoke, dust, noise,
vibrations, or other pollution extending beyond the lot on which the use is
located.  Uses include, but are not limited to, the following:  machine
shops, products assembly, sheet metal shops, plastics, electronics, general
vehicle repair (repair garage), body work and painting, contractor shops and
storage yards, food and non-alcoholic beverages, signs and displays,
printing, publishing, fabricated metal parts, appliances, clothing, textiles,
used auto parts, warehousing, and wholesale business.



   MANURE.  Any solid or liquid containing animal excreta.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MEDICAL USES.  Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and
care of human beings.  These include:  hospitals, dental services, medical
services or clinic, nursing or convalescent home, orphan’s home, rest home,
and sanitarium.



   MINING.  The excavation, removal, or storage of sand, gravel, rock,
soil, clay, and other natural deposits within the city, except:



      (1)   For the purpose of the foundation, cellar, or basement
of some pending structure, for which a permit has been issued, and which is
to be erected immediately following the excavation, removal, or storage;



      (2)   For the purpose of construction of sewer lines, storm
sewers, water mains, surface water drainage, agricultural or conservation
purposes, and sod removal;



      (3)   For the moving of dirt for landscaping purposes on a lot
used or to be used for residential purposes; or



      (4)   For the moving of dirt within the construction limits of
a road project.



(1997 Code, § 900.02)



   MINING.  The extraction of sand, gravel, rock, soil, or other material
from the land and the removal thereof from the site.  MINING shall not
include the removal of materials associated with the construction of a
building, the removal of excess materials in accordance with approved plats,
or utility highway construction, minor agricultural, and sod removal.



   MODULAR OR PREFABRICATED HOME.  A non-mobile dwelling unit for
year-round occupancy constructed or fabricated at a central factory and
transported to a building site where final installations are made permanently
affixing the dwelling to the site.  The dwelling unit shall be equivalent to
a unit constructed on the site, meeting all requirements of the Minnesota
Building Code.



   MONOPOLE. A freestanding, self-supporting tower that uses a single
pole, does not use a lattice design and has no guy wires.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   MOTOR COURTS, MOTOR HOTEL, or MOTEL.  A building or group of buildings
other than a hotel used primarily as a temporary residence of a motorist.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL.  A building or area in which freight brought
by motor truck is transferred and/or stored for movement by motor truck.



   MOTORBOAT.  A watercraft propelled in any manner by machinery,
including watercraft temporarily equipped with detachable motors.



   MOTTLING.  A zone of chemical oxidation and reduction activity within
the soil, appearing as patches of red, brown, orange, or gray or combination
of these colors.



   MOUND SYSTEM.  An alternative sewage treatment system designed with
the soil treatment area built above existing grade to overcome the
limitations of water table, bedrock, or soil permeability. This definition
shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   MULTI-TENANT BUILDING.  A grouping of two or more business
establishments that either share common parking on the lot where they are
located, or that occupy a single structure or separate structures that are
physically or functionally related or attached.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).  The  system of
conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying
sewage.



   MUNICIPAL URBAN SERVICE AREA.  An area guided for municipal sanitary
sewer service.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT.  A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a water course, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or ground water.



   NATURAL SOIL.  Soil which exists undisturbed in its natural state;
fill shall be considered as natural soil after it has been in place for a
minimum of 12 months.



   NATURAL TERRAIN.  Areas other than roadways or driveways (private or
public), parking lots, and other areas the surface of which has been
intentionally modified for motor vehicle operation.



   NET DENSITY.  The number of housing units divided by the amount of net
developable land.  Net developable land does not include water bodies
(including wetlands and lakes, but not stormwater ponds), parks and open
space (only if owned by the city and available for public use), arterial
right-of-way, and other land reserved for future development or not
developable according to city ordinances (i.e., steep slopes or conservation
areas).



   NOISE; AMBIENT.  The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being either a composite of sounds transmitted by any means from
any sources near and far or a single predominate source.



   NON-AGRICULTURAL LOW IMPACT.  The outdoor storage of off-road mobile
construction equipment of any weight; the indoor storage of the
aforementioned items and other goods and materials which, in the
determination of the City Council, do not jeopardize the health, safety, or
welfare of the city; nature farms; agricultural museums; farmer’s markets;
small engine repair shops; contractor maintenance shops; or office space as
an accessory use to the aforementioned uses.



   NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH.  A sign that contains a non-commercial message.
Examples of non-commercial messages include, but are not limited to, messages
concerning political, religious, social, ideological, public service and
informational topics.



   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water discharged from uses such as air
conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, where the only pollutant added is
heat.



   NONCONFORMITY; NONCONFORMING USE.  Any legal use, structure, or parcel
of land already in existence, recorded, or authorized before the adoption of
zoning regulations or amendments to the zoning regulations that would not
have been permitted to become established under the terms of the zoning
regulations as now written, if the zoning regulations had been in effect
prior to the date it was established, recorded, or authorized.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the storm drain system
that is not composed entirely of storm water.



   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE WATER.  Wastes which are characterized
by a per capita discharge of 75 gallons per day at a loading not greater than
250 mg/l B.O.D. and 300 mg/l total suspended solids.



   NOXIOUS MATTER.  Material which is capable of causing injury or is in
any way harmful to living organisms or is capable of causing detrimental
effect upon the physical or mental health of human beings.



   NURSING HOME.  A building with facilities for the care of children,
the aged, infirm, or place of rest for those suffering bodily disorder.  The
nursing home shall be licensed by the state as provided by law.



   O.P. PERMIT(S).  Generally, all of the permits issued in connection
with the city’s review and approval of a development within an O.P.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All terms shall mean
a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by
state law.



   OBSTRUCTION (FLOOD PLAIN).  Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee,
dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert,
building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in,
along, across, or projecting into any channel, water course, or regulatory
flood plain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by the
water.



   OCCUPANT.  The person living in an individual home.



   OFF-SALE.  The sale of liquor in original packages in retail stores
for consumption off or away from the premises where sold.



   OFFICE USE.  Those commercial activities that take place in office
buildings, where goods are not produced, sold, or repaired, including, but
not limited to, banks, professional offices, governmental offices, insurance
offices, real estate offices, telephone exchanges, utility offices, radio
broadcasting, and similar uses.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   OFFICIAL CONTROL.  Legislatively defined and enacted policies,
standards, precise detailed maps, and other regulations and performance
standards all of which control the physical development of the city or any
part of the city, for the purpose of accomplishing the general objectives of
the comprehensive plan.  The official controls may include, but are not
limited to, ordinances establishing zoning, subdivision controls, site plan
regulations, sanitary codes, building codes, housing codes, and official maps.



   OFFICIAL MAP.  A map adopted in accordance with the provisions of M.S.
§ 462.359, as it may be amended from time to time.



   ON-SALE.  The sale of liquor by the glass for consumption on the
premises only.



   OPEN BOTTLE.  Any container, bottle, or other receptacle for liquor in
which the cork, bottle cap, lid, or other sealing device is not in place and
in a closed position.



   OPEN DOOR.  Anytime an officer or citizen discovers a door or window,
which is not properly secured, in a location which is protected by an alarm;
and/or, anytime an officer responds to an alarm and discovers a door or
window which is not properly secured.



   OPEN FIRE OR OPEN BURNING.  A fire burning in a manner, whether
concentrated or disbursed, which is not contained within a fully enclosed
firebox, structure, or vehicle and from which the products of combustion are
emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through stack, duct,
or chimney.



   OPEN SALES LOTS.  Lands devoted to the display of goods for sale,
rent, lease, or trade, where the goods are not enclosed within a building.



   OPEN SPACE.  A tract of land used for agricultural, natural habitat,
walkways (sidewalks) and pathways, and/or neighborhood recreational purposes.



   OPEN STORAGE.  Storage of any material outside of a building.



   OPERATE (SNOWMOBILE AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES).  To ride in or on and
control the operation of a snowmobile or A.T.V.



   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Expenditures for the
waste water treatment facilities to provide the performance for which the
facilities were constructed; the term operation and maintenance includes
replacement.



   OPERATOR (SNOWMOBILE AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES).  Every person who
operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile or A.T.V.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK OR ELEVATION (O.H.W.).  The boundary of
public waters and wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest
water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to
leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. 
For water courses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top
of the bank of the channel.  For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high
water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.



   OTHER ESTABLISHMENT (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Any public or private structure
other than a dwelling, which generates sewage.



   OUTLOT.  A lot remnant or irregular parcel of land included in a plat,
which may be used as open space; the outlot may be a large tract that could
be subdivided in the future or may be too small to comply with the minimum
size requirements of city zoning and subdivision ordinances and not usable as
a building site.



   OWNER.  Any person, firm, corporation, organization, or department
possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest in, or having care,
custody, or control of a dog.



   OWNER.  Includes all persons interested in the property as fee simple
owner, life estate holder, encumbrancer, or otherwise.



   PACKAGE OR ORIGINAL PACKAGE.  Includes any container or receptacle
holding liquor, which container or receptacle is corked or sealed.



   PADDLE BOAT.  A non-motorized watercraft 19 feet in length or less
that is propelled solely by a paddle wheel peddled by an operator or
passenger.



   PARK (MANUFACTURED HOME).  Any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon
which 2 or more occupied manufactured homes are located, either free of
charge or for compensation, and includes any building, structure, tent,
vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of
the manufactured home park.



   PARK AND RIDE.  Parking lots or structures located along public
transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass
transit or to encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting, or for access
to recreation areas.



   PARK CLOSING.  The conversion of all or a portion of the occupied lots
of a manufactured home park to another use or the termination of use of the
manufactured home park.



   PARK OPERATOR.  The person who owns, maintains, or operates a
manufactured home park properly licensed under state law.



   PARK OWNER.  The owner of a manufactured home park.



   PARK RESIDENT.  An owner of a manufactured home located on a lot in a
manufactured home park within the city who rents the lot and occupies the
manufactured home as a principal residence.



   PARKING SPACE.  A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on
privately owned property either within or outside of a building of sufficient
size, to store 1 standard automobile, 10 feet by 20 feet.



   PARKS and PLAYGROUNDS.  Public land and open spaces in the city
dedicated or reserved for recreation purposes.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public right-of-way or private easement across a
block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may be
used for the installation of utility lines.



   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE.  The slope of a surface, such as a vertical rise
or fall expressed as a percentage of the horizontal distance.



   PERCOLATION RATE.  The calculated time rate of drop of a water level
in a test hole as specified in the sewer regulations.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.  The minimum development standards as adopted
by the governing body and on file in the office of the Building Official.



   PERMANENT OUTDOOR LUMINAIRE.  Any luminaire or system of luminaries
that is outdoors and that is intended to be used for 7 days or longer.



   PERSON.  Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, or
corporation.  As applied to partnerships or associations, the term includes
the partners or members; as applied to corporations, the term includes the
officers, agents, or employees.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



   PERSON; FIRM; CORPORATION; ASSOCIATION.  Any person, firm,
corporation, or association which owns any coin-operated machine.  The
person, firm, corporation, or association in whose place of business any
coin-operated machine is placed for use by the public.  The person, firm,
corporation, or association having control over the machine.  The payment of
the fee by any person, firm, corporation, or association enumerated in §§
110.20 et seq. shall be deemed a compliance with §§ 110.20 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 1105.01)



   pH.  The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PLACE OF WORSHIP.  A building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which
building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.



   PLANNER.  The City Planner.



   PLANNING AGENCY.  A Planning Commission or department, however
created, or the office of a planning or zoning director or inspector or the
office of any official designated as the planning or zoning director or
inspector, together with any staff members, employees, or consultants of the
commission, department, director, inspector, or official, and the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals and its employees or staff.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The duly appointed Planning Commission of the
City.



   PLASTIC LIMIT.  A soil moisture content, below which the soil may be
manipulated for the purpose of installing a soil treatment system.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. 
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause
or contribute to pollution; floatables: pesticides, herbicides, and
fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and
residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious
or offensive matter of any kind.



   PORCH.  A covered but unenclosed projection from the main wall of a
building that may or may not use columns or other ground supports for
structural purposes.



   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.  Any dog that:



      (1)   When unprovoked, inflicts bites on a human or domestic
animal on public or private property;



      (2)   When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the
streets, sidewalks, or any public property in an apparent attitude of attack;
or



      (3)   Has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of
humans or domestic animals.



   PRACTICAL DIFFICULTIES.  As used in connection with the granting of a
variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a
reasonable manner not permitted by an official control.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A tentative drawing or map of a proposed
subdivision meeting requirements enumerated in the subdivision regulations.



   PRESCHOOL.  A licensed facility for the organized instruction of
children who have not reached the age for enrollment in kindergarten. Does
not include school-aged child care.



   PRIMARY CONSERVATION AREA.  Wetlands, hydric soils, restrictive soils,
shorelands, and steep slopes which shall be preserved.



   PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE OR USE.  Is 1 which determines the predominant use
as contrasted to accessory use or structure.



   PRIVATE OPEN SPACE.  Open space owned by a private legal entity.



   PROPER ENCLOSURE.  Securely confined indoors, or in a securely
enclosed and locked pen or structure suitable to prevent the animal from
escaping and providing protection from the elements for the dog.  A proper
enclosure does not include a porch, patio, or any part of a house, garage, or
other structure that would allow the dog to exit of its own volition, or any
house or structure in which windows are open or in which door or window
screens are the only obstacles that prevent the dog from exiting.



   PROTECTIVE OR RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.  Declarations made by an owner or
contracts made between owners as to the manner in which land may be used,
with the view to protecting and preserving the physical and economic
integrity of any given area.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT.  Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk,
pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvements, or
other improvements for which the city may ultimately assume the
responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an
improvement for which local government responsibility is established.



   PUBLIC LAND.  Land owned or operated by a municipality, school
district, county, state, or other governmental unit.



   PUBLIC PARKS or PARK.  Real property owned by the city devoted to
recreational use.



(1997 Code, § 1355.01)



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any park, street, sidewalk, athletic field, or building
which is maintained and controlled by the city and subject to use by the
public at large.



   PUBLIC WATERS.  Any waters as defined in M.S. § 105.37, Subd. 14 and
15, as they may be amended from time to time.



   RACE TRACK.  Any area where 2 or more power-driven vehicles or animals
are raced for profit or pleasure.



   REACH (FLOOD PLAIN).  A hydraulic engineering term to describe a
longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade
obstruction.  In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between 2
consecutive bridge crossing would most typically constitute a reach.



   RECORDING STUDIO.  The premises owned or leased by a production
organization for the purpose of recording sound and/or video.  Recording
shall mean capturing the original “live” performance of musicians and/or
actors onto disc, tape, solid state device, or whatever medium is dictated by
the state of the art.  The function of a recording studio shall also include
post-production in which sound and/or pictures are combined/edited and
processed into a final form for broadcast, compact disc, or whatever media is
currently in vogue.



   RECREATION EQUIPMENT.  Play apparatus such as swing sets and slides,
sandboxes, poles for nets, unoccupied boats and trailers not exceeding 25
feet in length, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands, and similar
equipment or structures, but not including tree houses, swimming pools, play
houses exceeding 25 square feet in floor area, or sheds utilized for storage
of equipment.



   RECREATION VEHICLE PARKS.  A park, court, camp site, lot, parcel, or
tract of land designed, maintained, or intended for the purpose of supplying
the location or accommodations for any recreation vehicles as defined in this
section, and upon which the recreation vehicles are parked.  The term
RECREATION VEHICLE PARK shall include all buildings used or intended for use
as part of the equipment of the park, whether a charge is made for the use of
the park and its facilities or not.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire set for cooking, warming, recreational, or
ceremonial purposes which does not exceed 3 feet "square" and 3 feet in
height, and has had the ground 5 feet from the base of the fire cleared of
all combustible material.



(1997 Code, § 810.02)



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  Fires which do not exceed 4 feet in diameter, and
3 feet in height.  Fires which exceed this size must have a permit.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection,
is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
For the purposes of the floodplain management regulations, the term
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be synonymous with the term travel trailer/travel
vehicle.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Items of refuse which are part of any
authorized recycling program and which are intended for transportation,
processing, and manufacturing or reuse, including, but not limited to: paper,
glass, aluminum and other metal cans and containers, corrugated cardboard,
magazines, and certain types of plastics.



   REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE.  A private operation engaged in solid waste
collection and solid waste transportation.



   REFUSE.  Putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator ash, and incinerator residue.



   REGIONAL FLOOD.  A flood which is representative of large floods known
to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic or what
can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the
100-year recurrence interval.  REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term
“base flood” used in the flood insurance study.



   REGISTERED OWNER OF MOTOR VEHICLE.  The owner and address as shown on
the records of the office of motor vehicle registration of the Minnesota
Highway Department.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  An elevation no lower than 1
foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood
elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from
designation of a floodway.



   RELOCATION COSTS.  The reasonable cost of relocating a manufactured
home from a manufactured home park in the city to another manufactured home
park within a 25 mile radius; the cost includes expenses incurred in the
following categories.



      (1)   Preparation for move.  Reasonable costs incurred to
prepare the manufactured home for transportation to another site.  This
category does include crane services but not the cost of wheel axles, tires,
frame welding, or trailer hitches.



      (2)   Transportation to another site.  Reasonable costs
incurred to transport the manufactured home to another manufactured home park
within a 25 mile radius.  This category includes the cost of insuring the
manufactured home for its replacement value while the manufactured home is in
the process of being relocated and the cost of obtaining moving permits
provided that the park owner shall not be required to pay delinquent taxes on
a manufactured home if necessary in order to obtain a moving permit.  This
category does not include the cost of moving personal property.



      (3)   Hookup at new location.  The reasonable cost of
connecting the manufactured home to utilities at the relocation site provided
that this category does include crane services.  The park owner shall not be
required to upgrade the electrical or plumbing systems of the manufactured
home.



(1997 Code, § 550.02)



   REPLACEMENT COSTS (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Expenditures for obtaining and
installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary
during the design or useful life, whichever is longer, of the waste water
treatment facilities to maintain the capacity and performance for which the
facilities were designed and constructed.



   RESEARCH.  Medical, chemical, electrical, metallurgical, or other
scientific research and quality control, conducted in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



   RESIDENTIAL USER (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Those users which are connected to
the public waste water collection system as distinct from industrial,
commercial, institutional, and governmental users.



   RESORT.  Any structure or group of structures containing more than 2
dwelling units or separate living quarters designed or intended to serve as
seasonal or temporary dwellings on a rental or lease basis for profit with
the primary purpose of the structure or structures being recreational in
nature.  Uses may include a grocery for guests only, fish cleaning house,
marine service, boat landing and rental, recreational area and equipment, and
similar uses normally associated with a resort operation.



   RESTAURANTS.



      (1)   Any establishment, other than a hotel, having
appropriate facilities for the serving of meals to not less than 30 guests at
1 time.



      (2)   To qualify as a RESTAURANT, the establishment shall meet
all of the following conditions.



         (a)   Meals shall be regularly furnished at tables to
the general public, in consideration of payment.



         (b)   An adequate staff shall be employed to provide the
usual and suitable services to its guests.



         (c)   The principal part of its business shall be the
serving of food.



         (d)   It shall be under the control of a single
proprietor or manager.



         (e)   The ground floor of the establishment must
comprise an area of not less than 2,000 square feet of usable floor space,
which area may include the back bar area in addition to the area used for
dining and drinking, but shall exclude the kitchen and storage areas.



   RUBBISH.  Non-putrescible solid wastes, including ashes, consisting of
both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, fallen leaves, tree trimmings, parts of dead trees,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.



   RUNWAY INSTRUMENT.  A runway equipped with an navigation facilities
suitable to permit the landing of aircraft by an instrument approach under
restricted visibility conditions.



   RUNWAY.  A surface of an airport landing strip.



   RURAL HAMLET.  A group of 5 to 25 housing units located in a
contiguous group, with adjacent and fronting lots oriented towards each other
in some geometric way as on a street or a village green or square, and
forming a distinct boundary with the countryside.



   SAFETY THROTTLE (DEADMAN THROTTLE).  A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.



   SAILBOARD.  A single passenger, non-motorized watercraft using a
surfboard-type hull and a free sail system which, without capsizing, allows
the sail to lie flat in the water when not supported by the operator.



   SALE or SELL (INTOXICATING LIQUOR).  To directly or indirectly, by any
pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise dispose
of alcoholic beverages as part of a commercial transaction.



   SALOON.  An establishment, such as a bar or a lounge, which sells 3.2%
malt liquor on sale at retail and which may also sell cigars, cigarettes, all
forms of tobacco, beverages, and soft drinks.



   SAND.  A soil texture composed by weight of at least 85% of soil
particles ranging in size between 0.05 and 2.0 mm.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and ground water are not intentionally discharged.



   SANITARY WASTE.  The liquid and water-carried wastes discharged from
sanitary plumbing facilities.



   SATELLITE DISH OR SATELLITE EARTH STATION ANTENNA. A round, conical, or
cone-shaped device more than 18 inches in diameter and placed outdoors on the
ground or on a structure and used to transmit and/or receive radio or
electromagnetic waves.



   SCAVENGING.  The unauthorized collection of recyclable materials that
have been specifically set out by residents of the city for the purpose of
participating in curbside recycling programs.



   SCHOOLS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE.  Establishments at the primary,
elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that provide state
mandated basic education. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias,
recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before or after school
day care. Examples include public and private daytime schools, boarding
schools, and military academies. Exemptions:



      (1)   Preschools are classified as day care facilities; and



      (2)   Business schools and professional private trade schools.



   SCREENING.  Fences at least 5 feet high or earthen berms at least 3
feet high with compact evergreen or deciduous hedges which extend at least 3
feet beyond the object to be screened, or vegetative or landscaping materials
sufficient to provide a complete screen to the same height, to block direct
visual access.



(1997 Code, § 1345.02)



   SCREENING.  Includes earth mounds, berms, or ground forms, fences, and
walls; landscaping (plant materials) or landscaped fixtures (such as
timbers); used in combination or singularly, so as to block direct visual
access to an object.



   SECOND CONSERVATION AREA.  Woodlands, meadows, viewsheds/corridors,
and historic structures.



   SEEPAGE PIT (LEACHING PIT OR DRY WELL).  A lined underground pit into
which sewage tank effluent or other liquid waste is discharged and from which
seepage into the soil occurs through the bottom and sidewall openings. This
definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   SENIOR HOUSING.  See ELDERLY HOUSING.



   SEPTAGE.  Those accumulated solids and liquids removed from a sewage
tank or holding tank during regular periods of maintenance. This definition
shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   SEPTIC TANK.  A sound, durable, watertight sewage tank designed and
constructed to receive the discharge of sewage from a building sewer,
separate solids from liquids, digest organic matter, and store liquids
through a period of detention. This definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001
through 51.005 of this code.



   SETBACK.  The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage
treatment system, or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage
treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other
facility.  Distances are to be measured perpendicularly from the property
line to the most outwardly extended portion of the structure at ground level.
This definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   SEWAGE.  Any water carrying domestic water, exclusive of footing and
roof drainage, from any dwelling, industrial, agricultural, commercial
establishment, or other structure.  Domestic waste includes but is not
limited to liquid waste produced by bathing, laundry, and culinary
operations, and liquid waste from toilets and floor drains, and specifically
excludes animal waste and commercial process waste. This definition shall not
apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   SEWAGE TANK.  A watertight tank used for the retention of sewage. 
Includes, but is not limited to, septic tanks, holding tanks, and dumping
chambers. This definition shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of
this code.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  A septic tank and soil absorption system or
other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system. This definition
shall not apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   SEWER SYSTEM.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SHOPPING CENTER.  Any grouping of 2 or more principal retail uses
whether on a single lot or on abutting lots under multiple or single
ownership.



   SHORE IMPACT ZONE.  Land located between the ordinary high water level
of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the
structure setback.



   SHORELAND.  Land located within the following distances from public
waters:  1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or
foliage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extend of a
flood plain designated by ordinance on a river or stream; whichever is
greater.  The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters
involved are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the
waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   SITE, PREVIOUSLY DEVELOPED.  A lot or parcel upon which a dwelling or
other establishment is in existence as of the enactment of the ordinance.



   SITE, SOIL TREATMENT.  The area bounded by the dimension required for
the proper location of a soil treatment system.



   SLOPE.  The ratio of vertical rise or fall to horizontal distance.



   SLOW NO-WAKE.  Operation of a watercraft at the slowest possible speed
necessary to maintain steerage and in no case greater than 5 mph.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, waste water, or industrial waste which
in concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than 5 times the
average 24-hour concentration of flow during normal operation.



   SMALL ENGINE REPAIR.  The tune-up, winterizing, rebuilding, and
general repair of internal combustion engines of 24 rated horsepower or less;
together with repairs and replacement of mechanical components of the
machines or tools powered by the engines.  Including, but not limited to
lawn mowers, snow blowers, garden tillers, chain saws, and pumps. 
Specifically excluding snowmobiles, A.T.V.s, motorcycles, and personal
watercraft.  Retail or wholesale sales of any product are specifically
excluded.



   SNOWFALL.



      (1)   A ground accumulation of snow 2 inches or more within a
24-hour period.



      (2)   The 24-hour period shall be counted back from 8:00 a.m.
of the day in determining whether there is an accumulation of 2 inches.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners.



   SOIL CHARACTERISTICS, LIMITING.  Those soil characteristics which
preclude the installation of a standard system, including but not limited to
proximity to bedrock or water table, and percolation rates which are
excessively fast or excessively slow.



   SOIL MODIFICATION.  The alteration of natural soil conditions by means
including but not limited to placement of fill, removal of soil, or
alteration of topography.



   SOIL SURVEY.  The U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, Soil Survey of Washington County, 1977.



   SOIL TEXTURAL CLASSIFICATION.  Where soil particle sizes or textures
are specified in this code, they refer to the soil textural classification
found in the Soil Survey Manual, Handbook No. 18, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, 1951.



   SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, refuse, and other discarded solid materials,
except animal waste used as fertilizer, including solid waste materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations; solid
waste does not include earthen fill, boulders, rock, and other materials
normally handled in construction operations.



   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.  The gathering of solid waste from public or
private places.



   SOLID WASTE TRANSPORTATION.  Conveyance of solid waste from 1 place to
another, by means of vehicle, rail car, water vessel, conveyor, or other
means.



   STABLE, PRIVATE.  The keeping, breeding, raising, and uses of horses
or ponies on open space owned and maintained by an association of adjacent
property owners for the exclusive personal use and enjoyment of association
members and for which commercial gain is not the primary objective.



   STANDARD SYSTEM.  An individual sewage treatment system employing a
building sewer, sewage tank, and the soil treatment system commonly known as
a dram field or leach field.



   STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM (S.D.S.) PERMIT.  Any permit including any
terms, conditions, and requirements of the permit issued by the M.P.C.A.
pursuant to M.S. § 115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a
disposal system as defined by M.S. § 115.01, Subd. 5, as it may be amended
from time to time.



   STATE FUNDS.  Any bond revenues or any money appropriated or allocated
by the legislature.



   STEEP SLOPE.



      (1)   Land where agricultural activity or development is
either not recommended or described as poorly suited, due to slope steepness
and the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available
county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and
construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the
provisions of this section.



      (2)   Where specific information is not available, steep
slopes are lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over horizontal
distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.



   STOCK IN TRADE. Any equipment, merchandise, or materials necessary to
or used in a trade or business.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water
is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A drain or sewer intended to carry storm
waters, surface runoff, ground water, subsurface water, street wash water,
drainage, and unpolluted water from any source.



   STORM WATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. A document which describes the Best
Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions
to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water
conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.



   STORY.  The portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.  If the finished
floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused under-floor space is
more than 6 feet above grade as defined in this section for more than 50% of
the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined in this
section at any point, the basement, cellar, or unused under-floor space shall
be considered as a story.



   STREET.  A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrian
or vehicles or both, to abutting properties, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard.  “Public” in
the subdivision regulations means that the right-of-way has been dedicated to
public use for street purpose and has been accepted for maintenance by the
city.  Whenever the word STREET is used, it shall mean a public street
unless the context indicates a different meaning.



   STREET, ARTERIAL.  Those streets carrying larger volumes of traffic
and serving as links between various communities of the area.  ARTERIAL
STREETS are intended to provide for collection and distribution of traffic
between highways and collector streets.



   STREET, COLLECTOR.  Those streets which carry traffic from local
streets to the major system or arterials and highways.  COLLECTOR STREETS
primarily provide principal access to residential neighborhoods, including,
to a lesser degree, direct land access.



   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC.  A local street with only 1 outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.



   STREET, LOCAL.  Those streets which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties and for local traffic movement.



   STREET, MAJOR OR THOROUGHFARE.  A street which serves or is designed
to serve heavy flows of traffic and which is used primarily as a route for
traffic between communities and/or other heavy traffic generating areas.



   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS.  Those local streets which are parallel and
adjacent to thoroughfares and highways, which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.



   STREET, MINOR.  A street intended to serve primarily as an access to
abutting properties.



   STREET, PAVEMENT.  The wearing or exposed surface of the roadway used
by vehicular traffic.



   STREET, WIDTH.  The width of the right-of-way, measured at right
angles to the centerline of the street.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION.  Any change, other than incidental repairs,
which would affect the supporting member of a building, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, girders, or foundations.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, signs,
recreation vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in §
152.09(C)(1) of the floodplain management regulations, and other similar
items.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   SUBDIVISION.  A described tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into 2 or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of
ownership, building development, or for tax assessment purposes.  The term
includes resubdivision and, where it is appropriate to the context, relates
either to the process of subdividing, to the land subdivided, or to the
development for which it is being subdivided.



   SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.  Any building or structure lawfully existing on
the effective date of this code or any amendment to this code which building
or structure does not conform with the regulations, including dimensional
standards, for the district in which it is located after the effective date
of this code or the amendment.



   SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURE.  See SUBSTANDARD BUILDING above.



   SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM.  Bodily injury which involves a temporary but
substantial disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ, or which causes
a fracture of any bodily member.



(1997 Code, § 1320.23)



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Within any consecutive 365-day period, any
reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.



      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. For the purpose of the floodplain management regulations,
historic structure shall be as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations,
Part 59.1.



   SUPPER CLUB.  A building with facilities for the serving of meals and
where meals are regularly served at tables to the general public.  The
building must be of sufficient size and design to permit the serving of meals
to not less than 50 guests at 1 time.  Intoxicating liquors may be sold
on-sale and live entertainment and/or dancing shall be permitted.



   SURFACE WATER FLOODING.  The 100-year flood plain along rivers and
streams as defined by the D.N.R., or in the absence of the data, as
determined by the largest flood or record; on lakes, high water levels as
determined or recorded by the D.N.R., or, in the case of no D.N.R. record, by
local records of information.



   SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT FEE.  The yearly charge developed for each
parcel of land.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (S.S.).  Solids that either float on the surface of
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Elimination of Water and Waste Water.



   SWIMMING POOL.  Any permanently located pool, used for swimming and/or
bathing which is over 24 inches in depth, or which as a surface area
exceeding 150 square feet.



   SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE OR RESIDENTIAL.  Any pool which is used, or
intended to be used, as a swimming pool in connection with a single-family
residence, and which is available only to the family of the household and
private guests.



   SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC OR SEMI-PUBLIC.  Any swimming pool other than a
private swimming pool.



   TAVERN.  An establishment for the retail on-sale of 3.2% malt liquors,
and which in addition, provides dancing, singing, or vaudeville performances
or entertainment for its guests, or provides for them the privilege of
dancing.



   TERMINAL, BUS/TRUCK.  An area and building were buses, trucks, and
cargo are stored, where loading and unloading is carried on regularly, and
where minor maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed.



   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE.  The process by which a practitioner applies
massage therapy techniques, and may apply adjunctive therapies, with the
intention of positively affecting the health, and well being of the client. 
The rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, positioning, causing movement and
applying touch and pressure to the body.  Adjunctive therapies may
include:  application of heat, cold, water, mild abrasives, heliotherapy,
topical preparations not classified as prescription drugs; the use of
mechanical devices and tools which mimic or enhance manual actions; and
instructed self-care and management.  Massage therapy shall not include
techniques traditionally practiced by chiropractors.  THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE
shall be performed only by a person who has provided the city with proof of
professional liability insurance and/or national certification.



   TOE OF THE BLUFF.  The point on a bluff where there is, as visually
observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from gentler to steeper
slope above.  If no break in the slope is apparent, the toe of the bluff
shall be determined to be the lower end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the
ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.



   TOILET WASTE.  Fecal matter, urine, toilet paper, and any water used
for flushing.



   TOP OF THE BLUFF.  The point on a bluff where there is, as visually
observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope, from steeper to gentler
slope above.  If no break in the slope is apparent, the top of the bluff
shall be determined to be the upper end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the
ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.



   TOWER ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT.  A structure located at the base of a tower
housing radio receiving/transmitting equipment and other associated
electronic equipment necessary for a communications facility.



   TOWER HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the average grade at the base
of a tower to the highest point of a tower or to the highest point of the
highest wireless communications facilities on a tower, whichever is higher.



   TOWNHOUSE.  A grouping of 3 or more attached, single-family dwellings
in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outsides; no unit
is located over any other unit; and each unit is separated from any other
unit by 1 or more common walls.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  The concentration of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants which, upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism, will
cause adverse effects as defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of
the Clean Water Act of 1977, as it may be amended from time to time.



   TRAILS.  Areas constructed within the city for a designated use, such
as walking, non-motorized biking, rollerblading, skateboarding, equestrian
trails, if appropriate.



   TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL.  Truck, taxi, air, bus, train, and mass
transit terminal and storage area, including motor freight (solid and liquid)
terminal.



   TREE.  A wood plant reaching 30 feet or more in height at maturity.



   TRUCK STOP.  A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of
tractor-trailer units and trucks, and which may include eating and/or
sleeping facilities.



   UNIFIED RESIDENTIAL AREA.  A residential grouping of lots that share a
plat name over one or more additions.



   USE, ACCESSORY.  A use subordinate to and serving the principal use or
structure on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.



   USE, NONCONFORMING.  See zoning code.



   USE, OPEN.  The use of land without a building or including a building
incidental to open use.



   USE, PRINCIPAL.  See “principal.”



   USE, SUBSTANDARD.  See zoning code.



   USER CHARGE (SEWER SYSTEMS).  A charge levied on users of a treatment
works, for the user’s proportionate share of the cost of operation and
maintenance (including replacement) of the treatment works.



   USER CHARGE SYSTEM (SEWER SYSTEMS).  A system based on estimated use
of waste water treatment services where each user (or user class) pays its
proportionate share of operation and maintenance (including replacement)
costs of treatment works within the grantee’s service area, based on the
user’s proportionate contribution to the total waste water loading from all
user’s (or user class), the user’s contribution shall be based on factors
such as strength, volume, and delivery flow rate characteristics.



   USERS (SEWER SYSTEMS).  Those residential, commercial, institutional,
industrial, and governmental establishments which are connected to the public
sewer collection system.



   UTILITY FACTOR.  The amount of runoff per acre of land, per parcel for
a particular land use divided by the amount of runoff from a 1.5 acre
residential lot.



   UTILITY POLE. A structure which is owned by a governmental agency or
utility company and which is used to support illumination devices or lines
and other equipment carrying electricity or communications.



   VALVE BOX.  Any device which can stop sewage tank effluent from
flowing to a portion of the soil treatment system. This definition shall not
apply to §§ 51.001 through 51.005 of this code.



   VARDA.  A portable self-contained alarm system which is installed by
Washington County Sheriffs Office with the sole purpose of detecting a
possible break-in.



   VARIANCE.  A modification of a specific permitted development standard
required to allow an alternative development standard not stated as
acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a particular
property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship as defined in the zoning
code.  Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a hardship.



   VEHICLE REPAIR.  General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of
engines, motor vehicles, or trailers, including body work, framework,
welding, and major painting service.



   VETERINARY.  Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment, and
medical care of animals, including animal or pet hospitals.



   VILLAGE GREEN.  An open space area surrounded by homes and designed as
a central gathering area or park for residents of the neighborhood and/or
residents of the community.



   VISIBLE TRIANGLE.  The area created by drawing an imaginary line
between points 30 feet back from where the curb lines of the intersection
quadrant meet.



   WAREHOUSING.  The storage, packing, and crating of materials or
equipment within an enclosed building or structure.



   WARNING NOTICE.  A notification provided to the owner or person in
charge of an alarm site by the Washington County Sheriffs Office for false
alarms due to system malfunction or when no reason can be determined for the
false alarm.  The warning notice will require that the alarm system be
inspected and/or serviced within 5 working days with written documentation
submitted to the City of Lake Elmo that the system is in working order.



(1997 Code, § 1395.02)



   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.



   WASTE WATER SERVICE CHARGE (SEWER SYSTEMS).  The total of the charges
for operation and maintenance, and replacement.



   WASTE WATER TREATMENT FACILITIES.  An arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating waste waters which have been constructed with
state and federal grants.



   WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY.  A small, above-ground
building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining
walls which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water
feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the
normal structure setback.  Examples of the structures and facilities include
boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached
decks.



   WATER TABLE.  The highest elevation in the soil where all voids are
filled with water, as evidenced by soil mottling, the presence of water, or
other information.



   WATERCRAFT.  Any motorboat, paddle boat, personal watercraft,
sailboard, or any other contrivance used or designed for navigation on water
except:



      (1)   Duck boats during the hunting season;



      (2)   A rice boat during the harvest season; and/or



      (3)   A seaplane.



   WATERCRAFT, PERSONAL.  A boat that:



      (1)   Is powered by an inboard motor powering a water jet pump
or by an outboard or propeller-driver motor; and/or



      (2)   Is designed to be operated by a person or persons
sitting, standing, or kneeling on the craft, rather than in the conventional
manner of sitting or standing inside a motorboat.



   WATERFRONT USE (RESIDENTIAL).  Boat docks and storage, fish house,
fish cleaning, water recreation, equipment, and other uses normally
incidental to a lakeshore residence provided the uses are for the exclusive
use of the occupants and nonpaying guest.



   WATERTIGHT.  Constructed and maintained to prevent inflow of water or
outflow of effluent.



   WAYSIDE STAND.  A temporary structure or vehicle used for the seasonal
retail sale of agricultural goods, floriculture, and horticulture produced by
the operator of the WAYSIDE STAND, which is clearly a secondary use of the
premises and does not change the character thereof.



   WEAPON.  Any gun, pistol, revolver, sling shot, shotgun, sand club,
metal knuckles, daggers, dirk, bowie knife, razor, air rifle, air gun, B-B
gun, spring gun, bow and arrow, switch blade, firearm, or any similar device
for the propulsion of shot or other metal pellet by whatever means, and any
other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument.



   WEDDING CEREMONY. The formal activities and observations during which
people are united in marriage. A wedding ceremony typically involves an
exchange of vows, presentation of a gift, and a public proclamation of
marriage by an authority figure or leader. Music, poetry, or readings from
religious texts or literature are also commonly incorporated into the
ceremony.



   WEDDING RECEPTION. A wedding reception is a party held after the
completion of a marriage ceremony. It is held usually as hospitality for
those who have attended the wedding and typically occurs in a different venue
than the wedding itself.



   WETLAND.  A surface water feature classified as a wetland under
current state and federal law.  Wetlands are low areas permanently or
seasonally covered with shallow water, referred to generally as marshes,
swamps, bogs, wet meadows, sloughs or intermittent lakes.



   WHOLESALING.  The selling of goods, equipment, and materials by bulk
to another person who in turn sells the same to customers.



   WIND GENERATOR.  A machine which generates power from the wind and is
extended from a horizontal shaft.



   WINE.  The beverage made from condensed grape must or from other
agricultural products other than sound, ripe grapes; imitation wine;
compounds sold as wine; vermouth; cider; perry and sake; in each instance
containing not less than 7% nor more than 24% alcohol by volume.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY.  Cables, wires, lines, wave guides,
antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the
transmission or reception of communications located or installed on or near a
tower or antenna support structure but not including a satellite earth
station antenna (satellite dish) 7 feet or less in diameter.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A self-supporting monopole, poles, or
lattice structure constructed at normal grade and extending into the air at
least 20 feet and used to support wireless communications facilities.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YARD.  The open space on an occupied lot which is not covered by any
structure.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending across the front of the lot between the
inner side yard lines and lying between the front line of the lot and the
nearest building line.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the
inner side yard lines and lying between the rear line of the lot and the
nearest building line.



   YARD, REQUIRED.  A yard area which may not be built on or covered by
structures because of the dimensional setbacks for the structures within the
zoning district.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard between the sideline of the lot and the nearest
building line.



   YARD WASTE.  Uncontaminated leaves and grass clippings uncontaminated
with foreign objects, such as tree trimmings or brush.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



   YEARLY SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT REVENUE.  The estimated yearly
expenditures for planning and inventories, capital expenditures, personnel
and equipment, and operation of the surface water utility, in accordance with
established city policy.  The surface water management revenue and resulting
surface water management fees shall be reviewed yearly by the City Council.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  An area or areas within the city in which the
regulations and requirements of this section are uniform.



(1997 Code, § 150)  (Am. Ord. 97-17, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 97-24,
passed 1-21-1998; Am. Ord. 97-30, passed 5-20-1998; Am. Ord. passed
2-15-2000; Am. Ord. 9757, passed 7-18-2000; Am. Ord. 9759, passed 8-15-2000;
Am. Ord. 9761, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord. 97-72, passed - -; Am. Ord. 97-80,
passed 5-5-2001; Am. Ord. 97-87, passed 10-2-2001; Am. Ord. 97-89, passed
11-20-2001; Am. Ord. 97-90, passed 10-2-2001; Am. Ord. 97-103, passed
3-19-2002; Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002; Am. Ord. 97-116, passed
4-1-2003; Am. Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 97-134, passed
7-6-2004; Am. Ord. 91-137, passed 8-4-2004; Am. Ord. 97-139, passed 9-7-2004;
Am. Ord. 97-140, passed 9-7-2004; Am. Ord. 97-164, passed 12-20-2006; Am.
Ord. 97-169, passed 5-2-2006; Am. Ord. 97-186, passed 11-8-2006; Am. Ord.
97-199, passed 11-5-2007; Am. Ord. 08-006, passed 6-17-2008; Am. Ord. 08-007,
passed 6-17-2008; Am. Ord. 08-007.1, passed 6-17-2008; Am. Ord. 08-008,
passed 8-19-2008; Am. Ord. 08-010, passed 11-18-2008; Am. Ord. 08-015, passed
7-21-2009; Am. Ord. 08-017, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. 08-019,  passed
11-4-2009; Am. Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010; Am. Ord. 08-025, passed
6-1-2010; Am. Ord. 08-026, passed 7-6-2010; Am. Ord. 08-031-A, passed
10-5-2010; Am. Ord. 08-032, passed 10-19-2010; Am. Ord. 08-040, passed
4-19-2011; Am. Ord. 08-042, passed 5-3-2011; Am. Ord. 08-047, passed
7-5-2011; Am. Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012; Am. Ord. 08-082, passed
6-18-2013; Am. Ord. 08-107, passed 5-6-2014; Am. Ord. 08-108, passed
6-17-2014; Am. Ord. 08-110, passed 5-20-2014; Am. Ord. 08-135, passed
4-27-2016; Am. Ord. 08-138, passed 6-21-2016; Am. Ord. 08-168, passed
3-21-2017)



§ 11.02  FEES.



   (A)   Fees; generally.  The fee for any license, permit, or
application required under this code will be set from time to time by
ordinance of the City Council and will be attached hereto as Appendix A. 
This amount will be paid by the applicant at the time the application is
submitted to the Clerk.  All fees paid are non-refundable.  Rejection of
the application by the City Council will not entitle the applicant to a
refund of all or any part of the fee.



(1997 Code, § 105.01)



   (B)   Surcharge.  In addition to the permit fees required, the
applicant shall pay a surcharge to the Minnesota Department of Administration
as prescribed by M.S. § 16B.70, as it may be amended from time to time.



(1997 Code, § 105.03)



   (C)   Animal license fees.



      (1)   Dog license;



      (2)   Dog impound;



      (3)   Cat impound;



      (4)   Additional fee for each repeated impounding within 1
year; and



      (5)   Duplicate license certificate or tag.



(1997 Code, § 105.04)



   (D)   Liquor license; intoxicating and 3.2% malt liquor.  Any
application to the city for an intoxicating liquor license or 3.2% malt
liquor license must be accompanied by an application fee.  The amount of the
fee will be set from time to time by resolution of the Council.  Fees will
be reviewed by the Council on a yearly basis and may be revised.  Rejection
of the application by the Council will not entitle the applicant to a refund
of all or any part of the fee.



      (1)   Club on-sale intoxicating;



      (2)   Off-sale intoxicating;



      (3)   Off-sale 3.2% malt liquor;



      (4)   On-sale intoxicating;



      (5)   On-sale investigation;



      (6)   On-sale 3.2% malt liquor;



      (7)   On-sale Sunday intoxicating;



      (8)   Temporary 3.2% malt liquor; and



      (9)   Wine license.



(1997 Code, § 105.05)



   (E)   Zoning and platting.  Any application to the city for the
subdivision or platting of land must be accompanied by an application fee.
The fee will be set from time to time by resolution of the Council.  Fees
will be reviewed by the Council on a yearly basis and may be revised. 
Rejection of the application by the Council will not entitle the applicant to
a refund of all or any part of the fee.



      (1)   Comprehensive Plan amendments;



      (2)   Conditional use permit (new or amended);



      (3)   Manufactured home parks;



      (4)   Mining permit:



         (a)   Bond; and



         (b)   Inspection fee.



      (5)   Minor subdivision - park dedication fee;



      (6)   Platting - park dedication fee;



      (7)   Restrictive soils and wetland protection and
preservation overlay districts; flood plain management permits;



      (8)   Shoreland permits;



      (9)   Variances and appeals; and



      (10)   Zoning district amendments (rezonings).



(1997 Code, § 105.06)



   (F)   Other fees.  Any application to the city for a culvert,
private road permit, private use of city-owned facility permit, or for the
vacation of a street, alley, or public easement must be accompanied by an
application fee.  The amount of the fee will be set from time to time by
resolution of the Council.  Fees will be reviewed by the Council on a yearly
basis and may be revised.  Rejection of the application by the Council will
not entitle the applicant to a refund of all or any part of the fee.



      (1)   Culverts;



      (2)   Private road permits;



      (3)   Private use of city-owned facilities; and



      (4)   Vacation of street, alley, or public easement.



(1997 Code, § 105.07)



   (G)   Escrow fee.  Any application to the city may require an
escrow of funds to cover the cost of the City Engineer, City Planner, or City
Attorney in reviewing the application.  The amount of escrow will be set
from time to time by resolution of the Council.  Escrow fees will be
reviewed by the Council on a yearly basis and may be revised.  Rejection of
the application by the Council will not entitle the applicant to a refund,
except for the amount that may exceed the cost to review the application.



(1997 Code, § 105.08)



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Ch. 111



   Animals, see Ch. 95



   Building Regulations, see Ch. 151



   Sewers, see Ch. 51



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Ch. 93



   Subdivision Regulations, see Ch. 153



   Traffic Code, see Title VII



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



   30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   31.   CITY OFFICIALS



   32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS



   33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Hearings



   30.02   General Fund



   30.03   Other funds



   30.04   Code of ethics




Elections




   30.15   Registration system



   30.16   Voters must be registered



   30.17   Date of election



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 30.01  HEARINGS.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided in this code, or by
law, every public hearing required by law, ordinance, or resolution to be
held on any legislative or administrative matter shall be conducted in
accordance with this section.



   (B)   Notice.  Every hearing shall be preceded by a minimum 10-days
mailed notice to all persons entitled by law, ordinance, or regulation.  The
notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing.  Failure to
give the notice of defects in it shall not invalidate the proceedings if a
good faith effort has been made to comply with this division (B).  Every
hearing shall be preceded by a minimum of 10-days published notice in the
designated legal newspaper.



   (C)   Conduct of hearing.



      (1)   At the hearing, each party in interest shall be an
opportunity to be heard and to present the evidence as is relevant to the
proceeding.



      (2)   The Council may adopt rules governing the conduct of
hearings, records to be made, and the other matters as it deems necessary.



   (D)   Record.  Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing,
the Council shall have prepared a written summary of its findings and
decisions and enter the summary in the official Council minutes.



(1997 Code, § 100.05)



§ 30.02  GENERAL FUND.



   A general fund shall be maintained into which shall be placed or
credited all monies received not otherwise appropriated and from which shall
be paid all expenses and disbursements not otherwise provided for.



(1997 Code, § 200.04)



§ 30.03  OTHER FUNDS.



   The City Council may create by resolution and maintain the other funds
as they desire.



(1997 Code, § 200.05)



§ 30.04  CODE OF ETHICS.



   Any member of the Council, city employee, or members of duly appointed
boards and commissions who through employment, family relationship up to and
including the fourth degree of relationship pursuant to the civil law system,
or direct property ownership, or otherwise will be directly or indirectly
benefitted by a city action, shall make known that interest to the Council
and shall refrain from voting upon and otherwise participating in the
decision-making process. Any Council member, board, or commission member who
willfully conceals their interest as described in this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1997 Code, § 200.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ELECTIONS



§ 30.15  REGISTRATION SYSTEM.



   The system for the permanent registration of voters provided by M.S.
Ch. 201, as it may be amended from time to time, is, by this section, adopted
and made part of this section by reference as if fully set forth in this
section.



(1997 Code, § 205.01)



§ 30.16  VOTERS MUST BE REGISTERED.



   No person shall be permitted to vote at any election in the city unless
that person is registered as provided by Minnesota Statutes.



(1997 Code, § 205.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 30.17  DATE OF ELECTION.



   The regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in each even numbered year.



(1997 Code, § 205.03)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section




City Council




   31.01   Meetings



   31.02   Presiding officer



   31.03   Minutes



   31.04   Order of business at regular meetings



   31.05   Voting



   31.06   Ordinances, resolutions, motions, petitions, proclamations
and communications



   31.07   Suspension or amendment of rules



   31.08   Salaries of Mayor and Council Members



   31.09   Payment of salaries



   31.10   Council to act as Board of Adjustment and Appeals



   31.11   Terms of office




City Administrator




   31.25   Appointment



   31.26   Contract



   31.27   Primary objective of position



   31.28   Major areas of accountability and responsibility



   31.29   Personnel



   31.30   Budget



   31.31   Meetings



   31.32   Purchasing



   31.33   Usual and unusual working conditions



   31.34   Examples of performance criteria



CITY COUNCIL



§ 31.01  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Authority. City Councils are authorized to adopt rules of
procedure and provide for order at their meetings.



      (1)   Parliamentary procedure. Except as specifically provided
under statute or these parts, the most current version of the Robert's Rules
of Order Revised governs any question of parliamentary procedure that arises
at a city meeting.



   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this policy on City Council meetings
is to set the groundwork for orderly and respectful communications between
and among Council Members, city staff, and citizens to promote the efficient
working of the public's business at City Council meetings.



   (C)   Regular meetings. Except as provided herein, regular meetings
shall be held at City Hall beginning at 7:00 p.m. on the first and third
Tuesdays of each month. The City Council may cancel regular Council meetings
by adopting the appropriate motion at any duly called Council meeting. The
City Council may change the date, time, and/or place of a regular meeting by
adopting the appropriate motion at any duly called Council meeting and by
posting a written notice of the date, time, and place of the rescheduled
meeting on the city bulletin board and at the main entrance to the City Hall
at least 3 days before the date of the rescheduled regular meeting.



      (1)   Quorum. A simple majority (3) of the Council shall
constitute a quorum for the valid transaction of any scheduled business to
come before the Council.



      (2)   Location. All meetings, including special, recessed,
closed, and continued meetings, shall be held in the City Council chambers,
located at City Hall, unless otherwise designated, pursuant to M.S. §
13D.04, Subd. 2.



      (3)   Schedule. A schedule of regular meetings shall be kept
on file with the City Clerk.



      (4)   Recessed or continued meetings. When a meeting is
recessed or continued, the presiding officer shall state the time and place
for the next meeting to occur pursuant to M.S. § 13D.04, Subd. 4. The time
and place shall also be noted in the minutes. If the time and place is stated
and noted in the minutes, no additional notice of the meeting is required,
unless otherwise required by law. However, if the time and place is not
stated and noted as required herein, compliance with the notice procedures
for a special meeting, as defined in this section, shall be required.



   (D)   Open Meeting Law. The Minnesota Open Meeting Law ("OML"), M.S.
Ch. 13D, generally requires that all meetings of public bodies be open to the
public.



      (1)   Principles. The presumption of openness in the OML
serves 3 basic principles:



         (a)   To prohibit actions from being taken at a secret
meeting, where it is impossible for the interested public to become fully
informed concerning the decisions of public bodies, or to detect improper
influences;



         (b)   To ensure the public's right to be informed; and



         (c)   To afford the interested public an opportunity to
present its views to the public body on matters of public interest.



      (2)   The City Council views providing and encouraging citizen
access to city meetings as one of its most important duties. As a result of
this principle, all Council and committee meetings, including special
meetings, with the exception of closed meeting, as required by M.S. Ch. 13,
shall be open to the public.



      (3)   In calculating the number of days for providing notice
under the OML, the first day that the notice is given is not counted, but the
last day is counted. If the last day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday,
that day is omitted from the calculation and the day following the Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday is considered the last day.



      (4)   In keeping with the intent of the OML, Council Members
shall not use any form of communications technology, such as text messaging
or email, to communicate with another person during a public meeting in a
manner that is hidden or shielded from public view.



      (5)   Pursuant to M.S. § l3D.01, Subd. 6, at least 1 copy of
the written materials made available to the Council at or before the meeting
shall also be made available for inspection by the public, excluding any
non-public data, attorney-client privileged data, or materials related to
agenda items of closed meetings, or anything else otherwise deemed not public
by any applicable law.



   (E)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor
or by any 2 Council Members filing a written notice with the City
Administrator. At least 3 days prior to the date of the special meeting, the
City Administrator shall provide notice to all Members of the Council and to
each person who has filed a written request for notice of special meetings,
and shall post the notice on the city bulletin board and at the main entrance
to City Hall. The notice shall indicate the date, time, place, and purpose of
the special meeting. If matters not directly related to the purpose of the
special meeting are discussed or acted upon at the special meeting, the
minutes of the special meeting shall include a specific description of the
matters. Days shall be counted as provided in division (D)(3) above. Notice
to the public of special meetings must be given pursuant to M.S. 13D.04,
Subd. 2.



      (1)   Closed meetings. The OML allows or requires some
meetings to be closed to the public for certain defined purposes. When a
meeting is closed, the presiding officer at the meeting shall state for the
record the reason for closing the meeting and cite the specific provision
oflaw allowing or requiring the meeting to be closed. The presiding officer
shall also ensure that meetings are recorded, if required by law.



   (F)   Emergency meetings. An emergency meeting is a special meeting
called by the Mayor or any 2 Council Members because of circumstances that in
the judgment of the Mayor or any 2 Council Members require immediate
consideration by the Council. The person or persons who call the emergency
meeting shall make a good faith effort to contact all Council Members and, as
soon as reasonably practicable after notice has been given to Council
Members, all members of the news media who have filed a written request for
notice of emergency meetings if the request includes the news media's
telephone number. The notice shall include the date, time, place, and purpose
of the emergency meeting. If matters not directly related to the emergency
meeting are discussed at an emergency meeting, the minutes of the emergency
meeting shall include a specific description of the matters.



   (G)   Business conducted at special or emergency meetings. No
business shall be transacted at special or emergency meetings unless the
business shall have been specified, in the notice, without the consent of all
of the Members of the Council present. Any Member present at any special or
emergency meeting who fails to object and have their objections entered in
the minutes of the special or emergency meeting will be conclusively presumed
to have consented to the transaction of all business transacted at the
special or emergency meeting and no objection may thereafter be raised by a
Council Member that the notice of the special or emergency meeting was
defective.



   (H)   Initial meeting. At the first regular Council meeting in
January of each year, the Council shall:



      (1)   Appoint an Acting Mayor, who shall act as Mayor in the
Mayor's absence, pursuant to M.S. § 412.121;



      (2)   Select 1 official newspaper pursuant to M.S. § 412.831;



      (3)   Select an official depository for city funds. This must
be done within 30 days of the state of the city's fiscal year pursuant to
M.S. §§ 427.01; 427.02; 118A.02, Subd. 1; and 427.09;



      (4)   Review the Council's bylaws and make any needed changes;



      (5)   Assign committee duties to Members. All assignments of
Council Members to serve on city boards, commissions, and committees shall be
by a majority vote of a quorum of a duly called meeting, unless otherwise
provided by law;



      (6)   Approve official bonds that have been filed with the
Clerk;



      (7)   Appoint a City Attorney; and



      (8)   Appoint a City Engineer.



   (I)   Public meetings. All Council meetings, including special and
adjourned meetings and meetings of Council committees, shall be conducted in
accordance with the Minnesota Open Meeting Law.



(1997 Code, § 200.01)



   (J)   Ground rules. Each Council Member shall abide by the following
ground rules for interaction with each other and with members of the public
at Council meetings. All Council Members shall assist the presiding officer
in preserving order and decorum and in providing for the efficient operation
of the meeting. Council meetings shall be conducted in a courteous manner
that recognizes the validity of differing viewpoints and promotes the ideal
of respectful democratic discussion and debate that is free of insult,
slander, and personal attacks or threats.



      (1)   Respect others. Council Members should:



         (a)   Respect each other and the process;



         (b)   Assume each Council Member is being honest and
genuine in the expression of his or her views;



         (c)   Not shame or blame others;



         (d)   Not talk about people who are not present; and



         (e)   Respect residents of the city and city staff.



      (2)   Listen. Council Members should:



         (a)   Not interrupt while others are speaking;



         (b)   Ask clarifying not interrogating questions;



         (c)   Use “I” statements not “You” statements;



         (d)   Discuss and debate ideas in a civil manner;



         (e)   Be respectful of the ideas of others even if they
don't agree with your ideas; and



         (f)   Keep side conversations to a minimum.



      (3)   Accountability. Council Members should:



         (a)   Participate to the best of their ability;



         (b)   Be responsible for making sure all voices are
heard;



         (c)   Be accountable for what they do and say;



         (d)   Hold each other accountable in a civil way;



         (e)   Be responsible for their part of a problem or
issue;



         (f)   Be accountable for the use of information by not
misusing information or by providing incorrect information; and



         (g)   Be responsible for reviewing agenda items and
support information.



      (4)   Take risks. Council Members should:



         (a)   Take risks, be authentic and speak truthfully; and



         (b)   Not be hostile or harassing toward others for
taking risks.



      (5)   Be open. Council Members should:



         (a)   Be open to other's stories and realities;



         (b)   Be open to partially-formed ideas;



         (c)   Learn from mistakes;



         (d)   Be open to a change of heart and mind; and



         (e)   Not operate from fear.



      (6)   Personal reaction. Council Members should not take
things personally, and focus on the ideas being expressed, not the person
expressing the ideas.



      (7)   General rules of decorum. To effectuate the following
ground rules, all Council Members shall conduct themselves at all times in a
manner consistent with the following:



         (a)   No Council Member shall engage in private
conversation or pass private messages while in the chamber in a manner so as
to interrupt the proceedings of the Council;



         (b)   No Council Member shall leave his or her seat or
make any noise or disturbance while a vote is being taken and until the
result of the vote is announced;



         (c)   No Council Member shall use profane or obscene
words or gestures, or unparliamentary language, or use language that
threatens harm or violence toward another person at any time;



         (d)   No Council Member shall speak on any subject other
than the subject in debate;



         (e)   No Council Member shall speak without being
recognized by the presiding officer, nor shall any Council Member interrupt
the speech of another Council Member;



         (f)   No Council Member shall disobey the Council's
Rules of Order and Procedure as adopted or a decision of the presiding
officer on questions of order or practice or upon the interpretation of the
rules of Council;



         (g)   No Council Member shall engage in disorderly
conduct that disturbs or disrupts the orderly conduct of any meeting; and



         (h)   No Council Member shall engage in conduct which
delays or interrupts the proceedings or which hinders honest, respectful
discussion and debate.



(Ord. 97-201, passed 11-20-2007; Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord.
08-150, passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.02  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   Presiding officer. The Mayor, or in the Mayor's absence the Acting
Mayor, shall preside at all meetings of the Council.



   (A)   Role of the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall
preserve order, enforce the Council Rules of Order and Procedure as adopted,
and determine, without debate, all questions of procedure and order, subject
to the final decision of the Council on appeal as provided in this section.
The presiding officer shall determine which Member has the right to speak and
may move matters to a vote once the officer has determined that all Members
have spoken. The presiding officer may determine whether a motion or proposed
amendment is in order and may call Members to order. Except as otherwise
provided by statute or by the provisions of this chapter, the proceedings of
the Council shall be conducted in accordance with the latest edition of
Roberts Rules of Order.



   (B)   Adjourning a meeting. If considered necessary, because of
grave disorder as determined by the presiding officer, the presiding officer
may adjourn or continue any meeting to another time or suspend the meeting
for a specified period of time.



   (C)   Designation of a sergeant-at-arms. The presiding officer may
request that local law enforcement designate a member to serve as a
sergeant-at-arms at Council meetings. The sergeant-at-arms shall carry out
all orders or instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of
maintaining order and decorum at meetings.



   (D)   Motions and voting. The presiding officer may make motions,
second motion, speak on any questions, and vote on any matter properly before
the Council.



   (E)   Absences of presiding officer. In the absence of the Mayor,
the Acting Mayor shall preside. In the absence of both the Mayor and the
Acting Mayor, the City Clerk/Administrator shall call the meeting to order.
The first order of business shall be to select a presiding officer for the
meeting from the Members present. The City Clerk/Administrator shall preside
until the Council Members present choose a Member to act as presiding officer.



   (F)   Appeals and ruling of the presiding officer. Any Member of the
Council may appeal to the full Council a ruling on order or procedure made by
the presiding officer.



   (G)   Procedure for appeals. An appeal is made by motion. No second
is needed for the motion of appeal. The Member making the motion may speak
once solely on the question involved, and the presiding officer may speak
once solely to explain their ruling, but no other Council Member may
participate in the discussion.



   (H)   Once both the maker of the motion and the presiding officer
has spoken, the matter must be voted upon by the Council as a whole.



   (I)   The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority
of the Members present, exclusive of the presiding officer.



   (J)   Temporary designation of a presiding officer. The presiding
officer may choose to designate a temporary presiding officer before
participating in debate on a given matter. The presiding officer shall resume
presiding as soon as action on the matter is concluded.



(1997 Code, § 200.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-201, passed 11-20-2007; Am. Ord.
08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-143, passed 7-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150,
passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.03  MINUTES.



   (A)   Minutes constitute a vital record of the city and are the best
means of preserving Council intent, findings of fact, and action. Pursuant to
M.S. § 412.151, the City Clerk must keep a minute book. The minute book
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The Council Members who are present;



      (2)   The type of meeting (regular, special, continued,
closed);



      (3)   Date and place of the meeting;



      (4)   Time the meeting was called to order;



      (5)   Approval of minutes of the previous meeting, with any
corrections;



      (6)   The Members who make or second any motions;



      (7)   A record of all Members and their vote for any roll call
votes;



      (8)   The subject matter of all proposed resolutions or
ordinances;



      (9)   Whether any resolution or ordinance is approved or
disapproved by vote of the Council;



      (10)   The votes of each Member voting, including the Mayor,
and the votes of any Member not voting (e.g., abstentions, including reason
for abstention if given, not present);



      (11)   A statement of the findings of fact and an explanation
of Council action, including specific reasons for approval and disapproval of
specific resolutions or ordinances, on all land use and licensing matters;



      (12)   Listing of all bills allowed or approved for payment,
noting the recipient, purpose, and amount;



      (13)   Approval of hourly rates paid for services provided,
mileage rates, meal reimbursement amounts, and per diem amounts;



      (14)   A list of all transfers of funds;



      (15)   Authorizations and directions to invest excess funds,
and information on investment redemptions and maturities;



      (16)   The identity of any party to whom a contract was
awarded;



      (17)   Appointments of representatives to committees or
outside organizations; and



      (18)   The name of all citizens appearing before the Council
during the public comment period along with a brief summary of the subject
matter of their comments.



   (B)   The minutes of each meeting shall be typed and signed by the
Clerk/Administrator. Copies of the minutes shall be included in the agendas
for the Council meeting.



   (C)   Meeting minutes shall be considered and approved at a future
meeting.



      (1)   Meeting minutes do not need to be read aloud;



      (2)   The presiding officer shall call for any corrections;



      (3)   If there is no objection to a correction, it will be
made without a vote of the Council;



      (4)   If there is an objection, the Council shall vote upon
the addition or correction;



      (5)   Council shall take formal action by vote to approve the
minutes as distributed, with any corrections or amendments made as described
herein; and



      (6)   Minutes shall be published as required by M.S. §§
412.191, 331A.08, Subd. 3, 331A.01, Subd. 10.



(1997 Code, § 200.01) (Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150,
passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.04  ORDER OF BUSINESS AT REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   Order established. Each meeting of the Council shall convene
at the time and place appointed for the meeting. Council business shall be
conducted in the order determined by the Council at its first annual meeting
or as thereafter amended by the majority vote of the Council.



      (1)   Order of business. The standard order of business for
Council meetings shall be the following:



         (a)   Call to Order/Pledge of Allegiance;



         (b)   Approval of agenda;



         (c)   Approval of minutes from past meeting(s);



         (d)   Public comment;



         (e)   Presentations;



         (f)   Consent agenda;



         (g)   Regular agenda;



         (h)   Report of the Council. Council reports will not be
part of the order of business for meetings falling 3 months before a local
election;



         (i)   Reports from city staff; and



         (j)   Adjourn.



   (B)   Agenda. An agenda will be prepared for all regular Council
meetings by the staff or recommendation of the Council at a work session.
Members of the public wishing to place an item on the agenda must do so by
contacting city staff or Council Members, or by speaking during the public
comment period. No member of the general public may add any items to the
agenda.



      (1)   Special meetings. When a special meeting is called
pursuant to applicable law, the agenda for the special meeting must be
included in the request for the meeting and in the publication of the notice
of the meeting pursuant to M.S. § 13D.04, Subd. 2.



      (2)   Agenda procedures. Any staff member, the Mayor or 2
Council Members wishing to add an item to any agenda pursuant to this section
shall do so by complying with the following:



         (a)   All requests from Council to place an item on the
posted agenda must be received by the City Clerk/Administrator by 10:00 a.m.
11 days prior to the next Council work session meeting. For a regularly
scheduled Tuesday work session, the deadline for agenda items would be 10:00
a.m. on the Friday preceding packet completion. All requests from the Mayor
or Council must first be reviewed at a Council work session before being
placed on the agenda of a regular meeting.



         (b)   All requests to place an item on the posted agenda
must be on the form prescribed by the City Clerk/Administrator. The form
shall be completed with the goal of clearly describing the subject matter to
be considered by the Council and any action requested or required. Supporting
information may be attached to the form as necessary.



         (c)   All requests to place an item on the posted agenda
by city staff or Council Members must be reviewed by the City
Clerk/Administrator or their designee prior to being included in the agenda.



         (d)   The agenda, along with all related information
materials, will be provided to all City Council Members and the City Attorney
at least 4 days prior to the Council meeting for which it applies. For a
regularly scheduled Tuesday meeting, the packet will be provided by 5:00 p.m.
the Thursday preceding.



   (C)   Consent agenda. A consent agenda may be used to improve the
efficiency of meetings. The consent agenda allows the Council to consider
several items at 1 time. Only 1 motion is necessary to approve all items on
the consent agenda.



      (1)   Items that require findings of fact or an explanation of
Council actions, such as land use matters and the consideration of licensing
requests, should not be placed on the consent agenda.



      (2)   An item on the consent agenda may be removed from such
agenda for full consideration by the Council upon request made by any Member
of the Council. Items removed from the consent agenda will be placed on the
regular agenda for discussion and consideration.



   (D)   Presentation, discussion and agenda item decisions. The
following is the order of business for presenting and discussing items on
Council agendas:



      (1)   Introduction of item;



      (2)   Report by staff or other presenter;



      (3)   Questions from Council Members to the presenter in a
round robin manner. The presiding officer will facilitate the round robin
process by asking each individual Council Member for 1 question and allowing
for a response to the individual question. Then the presiding officer will
ask the next Council Member, in sequence, until all Council Members have
asked and received responses to a question. No Council Member shall take more
than 3 minutes to ask a question or comment on an item which is being
presented before another Council Member has a turn to question and comment on
the same item;



      (4)   Receive questions/comments from the applicant/requesting
party to the Council, and allow each Council Member to respond in the round
robin process;



      (5)   Allow questions from Council Members to the
applicant/requesting party, if applicable, using the round robin process;



      (6)   Allow questions/comments from the public to Council
Members. Each member of the public shall state his or her comments in 6
minutes. Council shall not interrupt or interact until all public comments
are completed;



      (7)   At the conclusion of the round robin process, the
presiding officer calls for a motion or discussion among the Council.
Discussion on any presentation shall be kept to a minimum, and each Council
Member shall only speak twice on the issue. This action is not an indication
that the motion on the table is the motion that will be approved in its
current form. It is purely for discussion purposes;



      (8)   Discussion among Council Members using the round robin
process with each Member speaking no more than twice on a motion;



      (9)   Action by the Council on the motion.



   (E)   Meeting schedule.



      (1)   Each meeting of the Council shall convene at the time
and place appointed. All public hearings shall commence at the advertised
time.



      (2)   Council business shall be conducted in the order of the
prepared agenda, unless an alteration is approved by a majority of the
Council.



      (3)   The last item on the agenda will be commenced no later
than 12:00 a.m.



      (4)   If all business has not been completed by 12:00 a.m.,
the meeting shall be continued to another date and time following the notice
provisions contained herein.



   (F)   Public participation and comment at Council meetings. Council
meetings are the forum for the Council to conduct the city's business. While
Council meetings are open to the public pursuant to the Minnesota Open
Meeting Law, they are not a forum for public expression. As such, members of
the public are not allowed to participate in Council discussion and debate
without a specific invitation and/or formal recognition by the presiding
officer. Members of the public shall not applaud, engage in conversation, or
engage in other behavior through words or actions that may disrupt the
proceedings of the Council.



   (G)   Members of the public shall follow the direction of the
presiding officer. Members of the public who do not follow the direction of
the presiding officer will be warned that further disruptive conduct will
result in removal from the meeting. After such warning, if the conduct
continues, the presiding officer may ask the member of the public to leave
the meeting room. If the member of the public refuses to follow the direction
of the presiding officer, the presiding officer may direct the
sergeant-at-arms to remove the person through any lawful means. In emergency
situations, or where the conduct is an egregious threat to the safety of the
public or the Council, a warning is not necessary before the sergeant-at-arms
is directed to remove the person.



   (H)   Public comment period. A limited forum for members of the
public to speak with the Council is provided on each agenda. Public comments
during the public comment period are subject to the following limitations:



      (1)   Speakers must be recognized by the presiding officer
before speaking and are limited to 6 minutes for comment;



      (2)   When multiple speakers appear to speak on the same
topic, comments should not be repetitive. The presiding officer may request
speakers to appoint a spokesperson;



      (3)   The presiding officer may place a time limit on the
public comment period if necessary to allow for the conduct of city business.
If there is not sufficient time at the meeting to hear all public comments,
the comment period may be deferred to the next regular Council meeting or at
a continued meeting;



      (4)   Speakers must sign up prior to speaking and provide
their name, address, and a brief summary of the subject matter which they
wish to address. The sign-up sheet will be available at the start of the City
Council meeting;



      (5)   Speakers must direct their remarks toward the presiding
officer;



      (6)   Speakers shall not use obscene, profane, insulting, or
threatening language, nor conduct themselves in a threatening, loud, or
boisterous manner that disrupts the conduct of the meeting or the security of
the public;



      (7)   Speakers are required to follow the direction of the
presiding officer; and



      (8)   The Council will generally not respond at the same
meeting where an issue is initially raised by a member of the public.
Generally, the matter will be referred to staff for further research and
possible report or action at a future Council meeting. If Council responds,
Council shall not interrupt or interact until all public comments are
completed.



   (I)   Public hearings. Public hearings are sometimes required by law
to allow the public to offer input on Council decisions. Unlike public
comment periods, public hearings allow the public to speak on a matter
currently before the Council. When public hearings are required by law,
notice shall be provided as required by state statute. Public hearings shall
be commenced at the time advertised in any notice required by law.



      (1)   General procedure/or public hearings. The order of
business for all public hearings conducted by the Council shall be:



         (a)   Opening comments by the presiding officer
announcing the purpose of the public hearing;



         (b)   The presiding officer opens the public hearing
portion of the meeting;



         (c)   Staff presentation, if any (i.e.,
Administrator/Clerk, Attorney, Engineer, etc.);



         (d)   Developer/other presentation, if any;



         (e)   Public comment (all individual comments limited to
6-minute maximum);



         (f)   The Clerk/Administrator shall make note of any
submitted written testimony; and



         (g)   The presiding officer formally closes the public
hearing portion of the meeting.



      (2)   Speakers who wish to address the Council at a public
hearing must follow the same rules as contained herein for public comment
periods. The presiding officer may allow more time, where appropriate.



      (3)   Speakers may also provide written comments to the
Council before or at the meeting. Written comments shall be noted and
provided to the Council and to anyone else as required by law.



      (4)   The presiding officer may continue the hearing, if
necessary, following the procedures for continuing a meeting contained in
this section.



      (5)   Council shall not interrupt or interact until all public
comments are completed.



(1997 Code, § 200.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-201, passed 11-20-2007; Am. Ord.
08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-143, passed 7-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150,
passed 8-16-2016; Am. Ord. 08-164, passed 1-3-2017)



§ 31.05  VOTING.



   (A)   The votes of the Council will be taken by voice or hand vote.
The presiding officer shall announce the results of all votes of the Council.



   (B)   A clear statement of the matter being voted upon and the names
of those voting for and against the matter shall be recorded in the official
minutes.



   (C)   The presiding officer may ask for a roll call vote to be
conducted by the Clerk/Administrator on any motion of resolution.



   (D)   The Clerk/Administrator may ask for a verification roll call
if the vote of a Council Member is not clear on the voice vote.



   (E)   A majority vote of the quorum present shall be sufficient for
all matters before the Council, unless otherwise provided by law.



   (F)   Any Council Member may abstain from voting for any reason.



   (G)   If any Council Member is present but does not vote, the
minutes, as to his or her name, shall be marked “Present-Not Voting.”



(1997 Code, § 200.01) (Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150,
passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.06  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS, PETITIONS, PROCLAMATIONS AND
COMMUNICATIONS.



   (A)   Signing and publication proof. Every ordinance and resolution
passed by the Council shall be in writing and signed by the Mayor, attested
by the Clerk, and filed by the Clerk in the ordinance or resolution book.
Unless otherwise provided by law, no ordinance shall require more than 1
reading and all ordinances shall be adopted by a majority vote of Council
Members present at the Council meeting. Proof of publication of every
ordinance shall be attached and filed with the ordinance.



   (B)   Repeals and amendments. Every ordinance or resolution
repealing a previous ordinance or resolution or a section or subdivision
shall give the number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or code number
of the ordinance or resolution to be repealed in whole or in part. Each
ordinance or resolution amending an existing ordinance or resolution or part
shall set forth in full each amended section or subdivision as it will read
with the amendment.



   (C)   Mayoral and city proclamations. Except as otherwise provided
by law, all mayoral and city proclamations recognizing events, persons, and
official observances shall be adopted by a majority of the Council Members
present and voting at the meeting where such proclamation is presented for
adoption.



   (D)   Seating assignments. Council Members shall occupy the chairs
assigned to them by the presiding officer, but 2 Council members may exchange
seats by joining in a formal request to the presiding officer to do so.



(1997 Code, § 200.01) (Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150,
passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.07  SUSPENSION OR AMENDMENT OF RULES.



   The rules of procedure applicable to Council meetings may be suspended
or amended by 2/3 vote of the Council Members present and voting, provided
that such action is not in violation of state statutes.



(1997 Code, § 200.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-201, passed 11-20-2007; Am. Ord.
08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150, passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.08  SALARIES OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   The Mayor and Council Members shall be paid salaries as determined from
time to time by the Council and set by ordinance. An ordinance establishing
Council salaries shall be adopted before a regular city election and shall
not be effective until January 1 following such election.



(1997 Code, § 200.01) (Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150,
passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.09  PAYMENT OF SALARIES.



   The salaries provided by §§ 31.01et seq. shall be paid semi-annually,
or more frequently, as directed by the Council.



(1997 Code, § 200.01) (Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-150,
passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.10  COUNCIL TO ACT AS BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Establishment of Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Council
is established as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Board of
Adjustment and Appeals shall have the following powers with respect to this
section:



      (1)   The exclusive power to hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged that there is an error in any decision, order, requirement, or
determination made by an administrative officer in the enforcement of the
zoning code; and



      (2)   The appeal shall be filed within 5 business days from
the date that the decision, order, requirement, or determination is made and
shall state:



         (a)   The particular decision, order, requirement, or
determination from which the appeal is taken;



         (b)   The name and address of the appellant;



         (c)   The grounds for the appeal; and



         (d)   The relief requested by the appellant.



   (B)   Effect of appeal. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Board of Adjustment and
Appeals, to whom the appeal is taken, certifies that by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property.



   (C)   Authority of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. The Board of
Adjustment and Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and to that
extent shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal was
taken, and may direct the issuance of a permit.



   (D)   Hearing procedures.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall, upon the filing of a
notice of appeal, refer the matter to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals and
establish a time for the hearing of the matter by the Board.



      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the appellant or
applicant, the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, the Building Official,
the abutting property owners, and in the case of an appeal the officer from
whom the appeal is taken, of the time and place of the hearing. The notice
shall be in writing and shall be served on the person by mail, provided the
notice shall be mailed at least 10 days preceding the date of the hearing.



   (E)   Record of findings.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall make written
findings in any case of an appeal and shall state in the findings the reasons
for its decision. The order issued by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals
shall include the legal description of the land involved. Any order shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator who shall immediately mail a copy of the
order, bearing the notation of the filing date, to the appellant or applicant.



      (2)   A certified copy of any order issued by the Board of
Adjustment and Appeals acting upon any appeal from an decision, order,
requirement, or determination of an administrative officer, may be filed with
the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles for recording. The filing may be
made by the Zoning Administrator as soon as is reasonably possible after the
filing of the order with the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Decision; appeals. All decisions of the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals acting upon an appeal from an order, requirement, decision, or
determination by an administrative officer or upon an application for a
variance shall be final, except that any aggrieved person may have any
decision or order of the Board reviewed for an appropriate remedy in district
court as provided by law.



(Ord. 97-94, passed 11-7-2001; Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord.
08-150, passed 8-16-2016)



§ 31.11  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Council Members. Two Council Members shall be elected for
4-year terms at each biannual election.



   (B)   Mayor. The Mayor shall be elected for a 4-year term commencing
with the regular municipal elections to be held in 2008. The first 4-year
mayoral term shall commence on January 1, 2009.



(Ord. 97-194, passed 6-19-2007; Am. Ord. 08-133, passed 4-5-2016; Am. Ord.
08-150, passed 8-16-2016)



CITY ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.25  APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The office and position of City Administrator is continued
within the city.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Council and
shall serve for an indefinite term.  The City Administrator shall be chosen
on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications, and shall have
experience and knowledge in the area of government or business administration.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.26  CONTRACT.



   The city may enter into an employment agreement as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this section.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.27  PRIMARY OBJECTIVE OF POSITION.



   The Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer for the
city and shall:



   (A)   Plan and direct the administration of city functions as
delegated by the Council to ensure efficient municipal services and
development in line with Council objectives, city ordinances, and state law;



   (B)   Advise the Council regarding the impact of policy decisions
and to represent the interest of the city in manners before other
governmental agencies as delegated by the Council;



   (C)   Supervise and manage the administration of all departments
within the city.  Operate with considerable discretion in normal
administration functions and in implementing policies of the Council. 
Responsible for effectively recommending policies, employee staffing,
budgets, code modifications, and public communications where Council action
is required; and



   (D)   Advise Council in matters concerning planning, including but
not limited to zoning, platting, variances, shoreline permitting, conditional
use permits, and subdivisions.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.28  MAJOR AREAS OF ACCOUNTABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Serves as chief administrative officer of the city, and is
responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all the policies
of the city;



   (B)   Knows and understands the code and its proper application to
specific issues and sees that all laws and ordinances are fully and properly
enforced;



   (C)   Supervises and manages the administration of all departments,
offices, and divisions of the city except as otherwise provided by law and
carried out any other responsibilities placed under Administrator's
jurisdiction by ordinance or by subsequent Council action;



   (D)   Recommends from time to time the adoption of the measures as
may be deemed necessary or expedient for health, safety, and welfare of the
community or for the improvement of the administration;



   (E)   Works with city commissions coordinating their activities with
elected city officials and presenting commission recommendations to the
Council;



   (F)   Stays abreast of developments in the public administrative
field and cooperates with governmental units and on matters of mutual
interest;



   (G)   Supervises and manages the conduct of local elections in
accordance with the prescribed laws and regulations;



   (H)   Relieves the Council members of as much administrative detail,
inquiry, and the like as possible so they may devote more of their time to
the policy-making responsibilities of their position;



   (I)   Coordinates the work of the city's appointed attorney and
consulting engineer; and



   (J)   Performs the other duties as may be required by the Council.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.29  PERSONNEL.



   (A)   Acts as personnel officer, and is responsible for
implementation of city personnel policies with the authority to effectively
recommend employment, discipline, or removal of city employees for Council
action;



   (B)   Develops and issues all administrative rules, regulations, and
procedures necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all city
departments, offices, and divisions as permitted by law and Council approval;
and



   (C)   Prepares and updates job descriptions for all city employees
and conducts job performance reviews with employees every 6 months.  Reviews
all department requests for overtime hours and accepts or rejects them based
on needs and budget constraints.  Reviews employee time cards on a regular
basis.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.30  BUDGET.



   (A)   Supervises and manages the preparation of, and submits, an
annual budget to the Council prior to September 1, and keeps the Council
advised of the financial condition of the individual departments making
recommendations as may, from time to time, be determined desirable and
necessary;



   (B)   Supervises and manages the effective utilization of city
assets and recommends additions or changes to the Council;



   (C)   Ensures effective management of financial assets.  Works with
the City Finance Director to ensure favorable investment of available funds,
effective and proper accounting practices, appropriate insurance coverage,
and effective financial planning;



   (D)   Keeps the Council advised as to the future needs of the city
and makes recommendations to the Council in a 5-year Capital Improvement
Program reviewed and updated annual; and



   (E)   Maintains familiarity with alternate and supplemental sources
of revenue, including federal and state aids, loans, grants, and other
sources of revenue, and submits recommendations to the Council for actions
necessary to take advantage of the sources.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.31  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Administrator attends and participates in discussion at
all meetings of the Council and other official city bodies; also represents
the city at all official or semi-official functions as may be directed by the
Council; coordinates meetings and represents the Council as directed with
other governmental agencies and associations.  The Administrator is
responsible for public notification of all regular and special meetings of
the Council and is responsible for agenda preparation and Council meeting
procedures.  The Administrator is responsible for notification of public
hearings.



   (B)   The Administrator works closely with the Council, including
performing research on agenda items and other Council requests, attending
meetings to report on city affairs and problems, presenting recommendations
concerning policies and objectives as well as specific actions, participating
in discussions as appropriate of all significant matters.  Presents all
items which required Council action or approval.



   (C)   The Administrator prepares agendas for Council meetings and
provides supporting data.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.32  PURCHASING.



   The Administrator supervises all purchases made by the city in
accordance with a Council-approved purchasing policy and shall enter into
contracts for previously budgeted and Council-approved purchases.  The
Administrator shall supervise the solicitation of sealed bids, including
public notices, on all purchases when required to do so by state law or the
city's purchasing policy.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.33  USUAL AND UNUSUAL WORKING CONDITIONS.



   The Administrator shall:



   (A)   Work a 40-hour week or equivalent;



   (B)   Attend Council meetings in evenings; and



   (C)   Attend any other evening meetings as needed.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



§ 31.34  EXAMPLES OF PERFORMANCE CRITERIA.



   The performance criteria of the City Administrator shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Policies and programs of the city are readily understood and
administered by city personnel;



   (B)   Department heads reporting are consistently performing at a
maximum level of productivity in carrying out the policies of the Council and
the City Administrator;



   (C)   Clear and effective communication lines are consistently
maintained throughout city organization; and/or



   (D)   The city consistently maintains a positive and high reputation
for service among the citizens.



(1997 Code, § 200.02)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Building Department




   32.001   Generally



   32.002   Powers and duties of Building Official



   32.003   Inspectors



   32.004   Conflict of interest



   32.005   Reports and records



   32.006   Right of entry



   32.007   Stop orders; red tags



   32.008   Occupancy violations



   32.009   Liability



   32.010   Cooperation of other officials




Planning Commission




   32.025   Establishment



   32.026   Purpose



   32.027   Composition



   32.028   Qualifications



   32.029   Removal



   32.030   Officers



   32.031   Annual meetings



   32.032   Annual work plan



   32.033   Regular meetings



   32.034   Special meetings



   32.035   Quorum



   32.036   Voting



   32.037   Proceedings



   32.038   Rules of procedure



   32.039   Agenda



   32.040   Records



   32.041   Training



   32.042   Duties and powers of the Commission; Comprehensive Plan




Fire Department




   32.055   Organization



   32.056   Membership



   32.057   Duties



   32.058   Records



   32.059   Removal of obstructions



   32.060   Maintenance



   32.061   Unauthorized use of equipment



   32.062   Right-of-way



   32.063   Obstructions



   32.064   False alarm



   32.065   Pursuit



   32.066   Obstruction of Fire Department



   32.067   Composition, appointment and the like




Parks Commission




   32.080   Establishment



   32.081   Purpose



   32.082   Composition



   32.083   Qualifications



   32.084   Removal



   32.085   Officers



   32.086   Annual meeting



   32.087   Annual work plan



   32.088   Regular meetings



   32.089   Special meetings



   32.090   Required number of members present to conduct meetings



   32.091   Voting



   32.092   Proceedings



   32.093   Rules of procedure



   32.094   Agenda



   32.095   Records



   32.096   Training



   32.097   Powers and duties




Heritage Preservation Commission




   32.110   Establishment



   32.111   Purpose



   32.112   Composition



   32.113   Qualifications



   32.114   Removal



   32.115   Officers



   32.116   Annual meeting



   32.117   Annual work plan



   32.118   Regular meetings



   32.119   Special meetings



   32.120   Quorum



   32.121   Voting



   32.122   Proceedings



   32.123   Rules of procedures



   32.124   Agenda



   32.125   Records



   32.126   Training



   32.127   Powers



   32.128   Communication with the state historic preservation officer




Human Rights Commission




   32.140   Establishment



   32.141   Intent, purpose, and mission



   32.142   Composition



   32.143   Removal



   32.144   Officers



   32.145   Annual meeting



   32.146   Regular meetings



   32.147   Special meetings



   32.148   Quorum



   32.149   Voting



   32.150   Proceedings



   32.151   Rules of procedures



   32.152   Agenda



   32.153   Records



   32.154   Training



   32.155   Duties of the Commission



BUILDING DEPARTMENT



§ 32.001  GENERALLY.



   There is continued in the city a Building Department which shall be
under the jurisdiction of the Building Official designated by the Council;
the Building Official shall report to the City Administrator.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)



§ 32.002  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   The Building Official shall be authorized and directed to enforce all
the provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code and the Lake Elmo
Municipal Code.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)



§ 32.003  INSPECTORS.



   In accordance with adopted personnel procedures, the City Administrator
and Building Official may recommend for approval by the City Council any
number of inspectors and other employees as shall be needed from time to time
in the Building Department.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)



§ 32.004  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   Neither the Building Official nor any inspectors shall have any
financial interest in any concern engaged in a business relationship within
the city nor engage in any business relationship with the city within the
inspector's respective field.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.005  REPORTS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The Building Official shall submit a report to the
Administrator and Council, not less than once a year, covering the work of
the Department during the preceding period.



   (B)   The Building Official shall keep a permanent, accurate account
of all fees and other monies collected and received, the names of the persons
upon whose account the fees were paid, the date and the amount of monies
received, together with the location of the building or premises to which
they relate.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)



§ 32.006  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   (A)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Building Official
or a duly authorized representative may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon
Building Official by the code.



   (B)   No person shall interfere with the Building Official or a duly
authorized representative in the execution of the Building Official's duties.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.007  STOP ORDERS; RED TAGS.



   (A)   Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the
provisions of the code, the Building Official may order the work stopped by
notice, in writing, served on any persons engaged in the doing, or causing
the work to be done or if no such party can be found on the property, a
notice shall be posted on the property in a conspicuous place.



   (B)   The persons shall immediately stop work until authorized by
the Building Official to proceed with the work.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.008  OCCUPANCY VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the
provisions of the code, the Building Official may order the use discontinued
and the structure or portion of the structure vacated by notice served on any
person causing the use to be discontinued.



   (B)   The person shall discontinue the use within 10 days after
receipt of the notice or make the structure or portion of structure comply
with the requirements of the code.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.009  LIABILITY.



   (A)   The Building Official or any employee charged with the
enforcement of the code, acting in good faith and without malice for the city
in the discharge of the employee's duties, shall not render the Building
Official liable personally.



   (B)   The Building Official is relieved from all personal liability
for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of Building
Official's duties.



   (C)   Any suit brought against the Building Official or employer,
because of the act or omission performed by the Building Official in the
enforcement of any provisions of the code, shall be defended by the city
until final termination of the proceedings.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)



§ 32.010  COOPERATION OF OTHER OFFICIALS.



   The Building Official may request, and shall receive as may be
necessary in the discharge of official duties, the assistance and cooperation
of the other officials of the city.



(1997 Code, § 200.03)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 32.025  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Planning Commission is continued in the city.



(1997 Code, § 210.01)



§ 32.026  PURPOSE.



   The Planning Commission is established to meet the requirements of
state statute; to develop and enforce the Comprehensive Plan and amendments
to the plan, subject to Council approval and the requirements of the
Municipal Planning Act; and to review and make recommendations on
subdivisions, zoning applications, planned unit developments, and site and
building plans as provided by ordinance. No expenditures by the Commission
shall be made unless and until authorized for the purpose by the Council.



(1997 Code, § 210.02)



§ 32.027  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   Generally.  The Planning Commission shall consist of 7 voting
members and 2 non-voting alternate members.  The voting members shall be
appointed for a 3-year term so that only 1/3 of the appointments will expire
on December 31 of each year.  Voting members may not serve more than 2
consecutive terms.  Appointment to an additional term(s) will be considered
with the available applicant pool.  Alternate members shall be appointed to
serve until there is a vacancy on the Planning Commission.  The City Council
shall appoint a first alternate and a second alternate who shall become
voting members in the order of their appointment upon a vacancy on the
Commission.



(1997 Code, § 210.03)  (Am. Ord. 97-96, passed 1-15-2002; Am. Ord. 97-147,
passed 2-15-2005; Am. Ord. 97-200, passed 11-5-2007; Am. Ord. 08-046, passed
6-21-2011)



   (B)   Special appointments.



      (1)   At the discretion of the City Council, up to 5
additional appointments can be made to the Planning Commission, for each
special project, including but not limited to Environmental Management,
Maintenance Advisory, and the Old Village, to assist with special projects
currently in process, or directed by the City Council to be studied, drafted,
and completed.



      (2)   The term of the special appointments shall expire 2
years from the date of appointment, or upon completion of the special
project, whichever is first.  Any special appointee may request
reappointment if the specific project is not completed in that time.



      (3)   (a)   Special project appointees shall have full
voting privileges only on issues specifically related to the special project.



         (b)   Full voting privileges for the regular Planning
Commission shall remain consistent with this section.



(Ord. 97-67, passed 1-2-2001; Am. Ord. 97-70, passed 1-16-2001)



§ 32.028  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Each member and alternate member shall be a resident of the city. 
Wherever possible, Commission members should represent all geographical areas
of the city and a cross-section of the population of the city at the time of
appointment.



(1997 Code, § 210.04)



§ 32.029  REMOVAL.



   Any member or alternate member may be removed by a majority vote of the
Council, for cause.  Cause shall include but not be limited to having more
than 3 consecutive absences or being absent from more than 1/3 of the
meetings in any 1 calendar year.  The Council may consider exceptional
circumstances when applying this rule.



(1997 Code, § 210.05) (Am. Ord. 08-172, passed 4-18-2017)



§ 32.030  OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, and a
Secretary from among its appointed members at the annual meeting each year,
for a term of 1 year.  The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the
Commission, if present, and shall perform all other duties and functions
required by state statute or assigned by the Commission or the Council.  The
Vice Chairperson shall perform these duties in the absence of the
Chairperson.  If a vacancy occurs in the Chairperson's office, the Vice
Chairperson shall assume the Chairperson's duties for the remainder of the
year, and a new Vice Chairperson shall be elected by the Commission at a
special election to be held at the next regularly scheduled Commission
meeting, after at least 2-days written notice to each Commission member. 
The Secretary shall perform those duties assigned by state statute only.  A
recording Secretary shall be appointed by the Council to take and keep the
minutes and records of the Commission.



(1997 Code, § 210.06)



§ 32.031  ANNUAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall hold an annual meeting the second Monday
in the month of January in each year.



   (B)   The meeting shall be devoted to the election of officers and
other business as shall be scheduled.



(1997 Code, § 210.07)



§ 32.032  ANNUAL WORK PLAN.



   The Planning Commission shall develop an annual work plan, including a
list of projects, points of interaction on projects, programs, and goals for
the following year.



(1997 Code, § 210.08) (Am. Ord. 08-172, passed 4-18-2017)



§ 32.033  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings shall be held in the City Hall at 7:00 p.m. on the
second and fourth Mondays of each month.  No action shall be taken in the
absence of a quorum except to adjourn the meeting to a subsequent date.  A
regular meeting may be canceled or rescheduled by the Commission at a prior
meeting or if there are no scheduled agenda items on the Thursday prior to
the meeting.  All action taken by the Commission shall be by the affirmative
vote of a majority of the members present.



(1997 Code, § 210.09)



§ 32.034  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   Special meetings of the Commission shall be held in the City Hall at a
time and place designated or at a public place at a time designated and shall
be called by the Chairperson.  Upon the written request of at least 4
members, the Chairperson shall be required to call a special meeting to be
held within 7 days of the request.  Written notice of the meeting shall be
given to all members not less than 3 working days in advance of the meeting.



(1997 Code, § 210.10)



§ 32.035  QUORUM.



   A quorum shall consist of 4 members.



(1997 Code, § 210.11)  (Am. Ord. 97-14, passed 9-2-1997; Am. Ord. 08-046,
passed 6-21-2011)



§ 32.036  VOTING.



   Each member attending any meeting shall be entitled to cast 1 vote. 
Voting shall be by voice vote.  If any member has a personal interest of any
kind in the matter before the Commission, the member shall disclose the
interest and be disqualified from voting upon the matter.  The Secretary
shall record in the minutes that no vote was cast by that member.  Alternate
members shall be entitled to cast 1 vote in the absence of any member.  The
second alternate shall be entitled to cast 1 vote in the absence of any 2
members.



(1997 Code, § 210.12)



§ 32.037  PROCEEDINGS.



   At any regular meeting of the Commission, the following shall be the
regular order of business:



   (A)   Roll call;



   (B)   Approval of agenda;



   (C)   Minutes of the preceding meeting;



   (D)   Public hearings as scheduled on the agenda;



   (E)   Old and new business as scheduled on the agenda;



   (F)   Communications;



   (G)   Other; and



   (H)   Adjournment.



(1997 Code, § 210.13)



§ 32.038  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted in accordance with
the Revised Robert's Rules of Order.



(1997 Code, § 210.14)



§ 32.039  AGENDA.



   The Chairperson shall cause all items to be considered at any meeting
to be placed on a written agenda by the City Administrator or an appointed
designee.  The City Administrator, or appointed designee, shall advise the
Chairperson of any matters the Commission must consider by Council directive,
ordinance, or statute and shall have prepared and supply a written agenda of
all meetings to all Commission members, the Council, and the public no less
than 4 days before each meeting.



(1997 Code, § 210.15)



§ 32.040  RECORDS.



   Each formal action of the Commission shall be embodied in full upon the
minute book as formal motion or resolution.  The minutes of each meeting
shall be provided to each member, the Council, and the public no more than 7
days after the date of each meeting.  The recommendations and findings of
the Commission shall be presented to the Council at the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting.  The records of meetings and actions and
recommendations shall be transmitted to the City Administrator, or appointed
designee, for keeping and distribution.



(1997 Code, § 210.16)



§ 32.041  TRAINING.



   Commission members shall be encouraged to avail themselves of training
courses offered by the city, the state, and other government and public
training agencies and the Council shall budget for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred in training each year.



(1997 Code, § 210.17)



§ 32.042  DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION; COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   (A)   Plan.  The Planning Commission shall have the powers and
duties given city planning agencies generally by law.  The Commission shall
also exercise the duties conferred upon it by this code.  It shall be the
purpose of the Planning Commission to prepare and adopt a Comprehensive Plan
for the physical development of the city, including proposed public
buildings, street arrangements and improvements, efficient design of major
thoroughfares for moving of traffic, parking facilities, public utilities
services, parks and playgrounds, a general land use plan, and other matters
relating to the physical development of the city.  The plan may be prepared
in sections, each of which shall relate to the Comprehensive Plan program. 
After the Commission has prepared and adopted the Comprehensive Plan, it
shall periodically, but at least every 5 years, review the Comprehensive Plan
and any ordinances or program implementing the plan.



   (B)   Means of executing plan.  Upon the adoption of a
Comprehensive Plan or any section, it shall be the concern of the Planning
Commission to recommend to the Council reasonable and practicable means for
putting into effect the plan or section in order that the same will serve as
a pattern and guide for the orderly physical development of the city and as a
basis for judging the timely disbursements of funds to implement the
objective.  Means of effectuating the plan shall, among other things,
consist of a zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, capital improvement
programming and technical review, and recommendations of matters referred to
the Planning Commission by the Council.



   (C)   Zoning ordinance.  The Planning Commission shall review all
proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance, take part in public hearings,
and make recommendations to the Council as may be prescribed by the zoning
ordinance.



   (D)   Conditional use permits.



      (1)   The Planning Commission may make recommendations on all
requests for a conditional use permit under the terms of the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   The Commission shall report its recommendations to the
Council for action.



   (E)   Subdivisions.  The Planning Commission may make
recommendations in relation to the subdividing of land as prescribed by the
ordinance; the Commission shall report its recommendations to the Council for
action.



   (F)   Variances.  The Planning Commission shall hear all variance
requests from the literal provisions of this code, and shall follow the
guidelines set forth in the zoning code.



   (G)   Capital Improvement Program.



      (1)   (a)   The Planning Commission shall endeavor to
obtain from city officers a descriptive list of proposed improvements for the
ensuing 5-year period.



         (b)   The Planning Commission shall also request from
the local school district a similar list of its proposed public works.



      (2)   (a)   The Planning Commission shall list and classify
all the proposed public works and shall prepare a coordinated program of
proposed public works for the ensuing year and for a projected 5-year period.



         (b)   The program shall be recommended by the Planning
Commission to the Council and to the other officers, departments, boards, or
public bodies as have jurisdiction over the recommended planning or
construction of the public works.



(1997 Code, § 210.18)



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.055  ORGANIZATION.



   The Fire Department shall consist of 1 Chief, 1 Assistant Chief at each
fire station, and up to 28 firefighters between the ages of 18 to 65 years of
age who are approved by the Council.



(1997 Code, § 215.01)



§ 32.056  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall submit all applications or resignations
from the Fire Department to the City Administrator.



   (B)   The City Administrator will then notify the Council of any new
applicants or resignations from the Fire Department.



(1997 Code, § 215.02)



§ 32.057  DUTIES.



   In all cases of fire, the Chief, or in the Chief’s absence the
Assistant Chief or next senior officer, shall have full control over all fire
equipment and shall cause the equipment to be used in the most advantageous
manner.



(1997 Code, § 215.03)



§ 32.058  RECORDS.



   (A)   The Chief shall maintain records of all alarms, fire losses,
methods of extinguishment, drills, and conditions of equipment and hydrants.



   (B)   The Chief shall present current records to the Council at
least quarterly.



(1997 Code, § 215.04)



§ 32.059  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS.



   At any fire, the Chief and the Chief’s assistant shall have authority
to authorize and direct the removal of any and all obstructions from in front
of and around fire hydrants.



(1997 Code, § 215.05)



§ 32.060  MAINTENANCE.



   The Chief shall properly maintain all fire equipment and facilities,
inspect all new equipment, and conduct appropriate drills to maintain a
reasonable level of skill among the firefighters.



(1997 Code, § 215.06)



§ 32.061  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF EQUIPMENT.



   Unauthorized use of equipment of facilities shall be a misdemeanor.



(1997 Code, § 215.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.062  RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   All personal cars of Fire Department members shall have
right-of-way over all other traffic when responding to a call.



   (B)   Firefighters’ cars may be designated, if necessary. 
Firefighters shall obey all traffic laws en route to a fire alarm.



(1997 Code, § 215.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.063  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   No person shall park any vehicle of any description or place any
material or obstruction within 20 feet of the entrance to any fire station,
or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or fire cistern, nor park any vehicles
within 300 feet of a fire.



(1997 Code, § 215.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.064  FALSE ALARM.



   No person shall maliciously or intentionally sound a false fire alarm.



(1997 Code, § 215.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.065  PURSUIT.



   No unauthorized person shall ride upon, race with, trail, or follow
within 600 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Fire Department when
actively responding to a fire alarm.



(1997 Code, § 215.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.066  OBSTRUCTION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to oppose or obstruct a member
of the Fire Department or a firefighter in the performance of any legal duty.



   (B)   It is also unlawful for any person to obstruct or hinder the
entry of a firefighter upon premises or into buildings or other places where
a fire or fire hazard exists or is reasonably suspected to exist.



(1997 Code, § 215.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.067  COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Composition.  The Lake Elmo Fire Department (the "Fire
Department") is a volunteer department of the City of Lake Elmo (the "City")
and shall consist of a fire chief; 2 district fire chiefs; 4 fire captains,
and up to 28 additional firefighters. A total of 35 positions are authorized.
The Fire Department is also authorized 2 volunteer support services positions
(non firefighter) with need defined and requested by the chief and approved
by the City Administrator. Payment structure will be defined by the City
Administrator.



   (B)   Position classification. Firefighter positions have 2
classifications for compensation purposes: The city’s employee/voluntary
firefighter and voluntary firefighter. Non firefighter positions will be
defined as Volunteer Support Services.



   (C)   Compensation.  City employee voluntary firefighter positions
shall be compensated at an annual stipend rate of $2,500 per year. This
compensation will be provided to a volunteer firefighter, in good standing,
who is a City employee that volunteers for the Fire Department. City
volunteer firefighter positions shall be compensated at a rate of $10.25 per
hour for calls for service. The compensation for voluntary firefighter
service will change as proposed by the City Administrator and approved by the
City Council. In additional, an annual and equal contribution to the city's
Fireman's Retirement/Relief Association will be provided for each firefighter
position regardless of the position or employment classification. The rate of
contribution will vary as required by Minnesota Statute.



   (D)   Appointment of Fire Chief.  The replacement of the Fire Chief
shall be selected by the Mayor and City Administrator from a pool of existing
city firefighters, who have formally expressed interest in position through
an application process and after achieving the established selection
criterion. The Fire Chief will report to the City Administrator for overall
management and regulation subject to the review by the City Council. The City
Administrator and Mayor shall define the selection process. The selected
candidates name shall be forwarded to the City Council for appointment
confirmation. The Chief shall remain in that appointed position unless
removed by the City Administrator and Mayor after formal concurrence by the
City Council. The City Administrator and Mayor shall provide an annual
evaluation of the fire chief. A volunteer fire chief stipend will also be
paid in addition to volunteer firefighter payment for responding to calls for
service.



   (E)   Appointment of District Fire Chiefs.  The District Fire
Chiefs shall be selected in a designed process by the City Administrator and
the Fire Chief and confirmed by the City Council. The District Fire Chiefs
will continue to serve in the appointed position unless removed by the City
Administrator and Fire Chief and confirmed by the City Council. The District
Fire Chiefs will report to the Fire Chief for overall management and
regulation. A volunteer District Fire Chiefs stipend will also be paid in
addition to volunteer firefighter payment for responding to calls for service.



   (F)   Appointment of Fire Safety Officer.  The Fire Safety Officer
shall be selected by the Fire Chief and, recommended to the City
Administrator for confirmation by the City Council. The Fire Safety Officer
will continue to serve in the appointed position unless removed by the City
Fire Chief and City Administrator for confirmation by the City Council. The
Fire Safety Officer will report to the Fire Chief for overall management and
regulation. A volunteer Fire Safety Officer stipend will also be paid in
addition to volunteer firefighter payment for responding to calls for service.



   (G)   Appointment of Fire Captains.  The Fire Captains shall be
selected in a designed process by the City Fire Chief, District Fire Chiefs
and recommended to the City Administrator for confirmation by the City
Council. The position of Captain will continue to serve in the appointed
volunteer position unless removed by the Fire Chief and recommended to the
City Administrator for confirmation in by the City Council. The Captains will
report to the Fire Chief and District Fire Chiefs for overall management and
regulation. A volunteer Fire Captain's stipend will also be paid in addition
to the volunteer firefighter payment for responding to calls for service.



   (H)   Fire Department Policy Manual.  The Fire Chief and District
Fire Chiefs shall develop, review and implement Department policies to
communicate existing rules, operational procedures and practices and to
establish performance standards. Policy developed shall be reviewed by the
District Fire Chiefs, Fire Captains and the Fire Safety Officer prior to
review and concurrence by the city’s Administrator. Department Policies
shall define as required behavior. Standard Operating Guidelines (SOGs) shall
also be developed in a separate section of the Departmental Policy Manual.
SOGs should be considered as guidance's and not required behavior. All Fire
Department SOGs will have a final review and concurrence by the City
Administrator. Any portion of an SOG developed or implemented determined in
conflict with City operational practice or law will be considered repealed.



   (I)   Equipment.  The Fire Chief shall prepare and, from time to
time update, an inventory of the Fire Department equipment and shall
recommend additions to or replacement of equipment for inclusion in the
city's Capital Improvement Program.



   (J)   Unauthorized use of equipment. Unauthorized use of Fire
Department equipment or facilities shall be a misdemeanor.



   (K)   Right-of-way.  All personal cars of Fire Department members
shall have right-of-way over all other traffic when responding to a call.
Firefighters cars may be designated as such if necessary. Firefighters shall
obey all traffic laws en-route to a fire alarm.



   (L)   Obstructions. No person shall park any vehicle of any
description or place any material or any obstruction within 20 feet of the
entrance to a fire station or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or fire
system. No person shall park any vehicles within 300 feet of a fire. No
person shall oppose or obstruct a member of the Fire Department or a
firefighter in the performance of any legal duty. No person shall obstruct or
hinder the entry of a firefighter upon premises or into buildings or other
places where a fire or fire hazard exists or is reasonably suspected to exist.



   (M)   False alarm.  No person shall maliciously or intentionally
sound a false alarm.



   (N)   Pursuit.  No unauthorized person shall ride upon, race with,
trail or follow within 600 feet of any apparatus belonging to the Fire
Department when actively responding to a fire alarm.



(Ord. 97-141, passed 9-21-2004)



PARKS COMMISSION



§ 32.080  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Parks Commission of the city is hereby continued.



(1997 Code, § 225.01)



§ 32.081  PURPOSE.



   The Parks Commission is established to review and make recommendations
to the Council on the future development of city parks, including the
establishment of and improvements to the parks, and to make recommendations
to the Council on policies governing the maintenance and public use of the
parks within the city.



(1997 Code, § 225.02) (Am. Ord. 08-092, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 32.082  COMPOSITION.



   The Parks Commission shall consist of 7 members and 2 alternate
members.  The voting members shall be appointed by the City Council for a
3-year term.  Voting members may not serve more than 2 consecutive terms. 
Appointment to an additional term(s) will be considered with the available
applicant pool.  Alternate members shall be appointed to serve until there
is a vacancy on the Parks Commission.  The City Council shall appoint a
first alternate and a second alternate who shall become voting members in the
order of their appointment.  In its discretion, the City Council may adjust
the lengths of terms of office for Parks Commission members so that no more
than one-half of the terms expire in any given year.



(1997 Code, § 225.03)  (Am. Ord. 97-148, passed 2-15-2005; Am. Ord. 08-038,
passed 1-25-2011)



§ 32.083  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Each member and alternate member shall be a resident of the city. 
Wherever possible, Commission members should represent all geographical areas
of the city and a cross-section of the population of the city at the time of
appointment.



(1997 Code, § 225.04)



§ 32.084  REMOVAL.



   Any member or alternate member may be removed by a 4/5 vote of the
Council, for cause.  Cause shall include but not be limited to having more
than 3 consecutive unexcused absences or being absent from more than 1/3 of
the meetings in any 1 calendar year.  The Council may consider exceptional
circumstances when applying this rule.



(1997 Code, § 225.05)



§ 32.085  OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, and may
elect a Secretary from among its appointed members at the annual meeting each
year, for a term of 1 year.  The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings
of the Commission, if present, and shall perform all other duties and
functions assigned by the Commission or the Council.  The Vice Chairperson
shall perform these duties in the absence of the Chairperson.  If a vacancy
occurs in the Chairperson's office, the Vice Chairperson shall assume the
Chairperson's duties for the remainder of the year; and a new Vice
Chairperson shall be elected by the Commission at a special election to be
held at the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting, after at least
2-days written notice to each Commission member.  A recording Secretary
shall be appointed by the Council to take and keep the minutes and records of
the Commission.



(1997 Code, § 225.06)



§ 32.086  ANNUAL MEETING.



   The Commission shall hold an annual meeting the first Monday in the
month of January in each year, unless the first Monday is New Year's Day, in
which case the annual meeting shall be held at the first regularly scheduled
meeting of the Commission in the month of January in each year.  The meeting
shall be devoted to the election of officers and other business as shall be
scheduled.



(1997 Code, § 225.07)



§ 32.087  ANNUAL WORK PLAN.



   The Parks Commission shall meet with the Council at their first meeting
in April each year to develop an annual work plan, including a list of
projects, points of interaction on projects, programs, and goals for the year.



(1997 Code, § 225.08)



§ 32.088  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The date, place, and time of regular meetings of the Parks
Commission will be specified by the Council as a policy statement that will
be included in the city's policy book.  The intent of this section is to
allow the Parks Commission meetings to be set by city policy rather than by
ordinance.



   (B)   No action shall be taken in the absence of a quorum, except to
adjourn the meeting to a subsequent date.  A regular meeting may be canceled
or rescheduled by the Commission at a prior meeting if there are no scheduled
agenda items on the Thursday prior to the meeting.  All action taken by the
Commission shall be by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members
present.



(1997 Code, § 225.09)



§ 32.089  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings of the Commission shall be held in the City
Hall at a time and place designated or at a public place at a time designated
and shall be called by the Chairperson.



   (B)   Upon the written request of at least 4 members, the
Chairperson shall be required to call a special meeting to be held within 7
days of the request.



   (C)   Written notice of the special meeting shall be given to all
members not less than 72 hours in advance of the meeting.



(1997 Code, § 225.10)



§ 32.090  REQUIRED NUMBER OF MEMBERS PRESENT TO CONDUCT MEETINGS.



   A meeting can be conducted if 5 members of the Commission are present.



(1997 Code, § 225.11)  (Am. Ord. 97-114, passed 9-17-2002)



§ 32.091  VOTING.



   Each member attending any meeting shall be entitled to cast 1 vote. 
Voting shall be by voice vote.  If any member has a personal interest of any
kind in the matter then before the Commission, the member shall disclose this
interest and be disqualified from voting upon the matter.  The Secretary
shall record in the minutes that no vote was cast by the member.  Alternate
members shall be entitled to cast 1 vote in the absence of any member.  The
second alternate shall be entitled to cast 1 vote in the absence of any 2
members.



(1997 Code, § 225.12)



§ 32.092  PROCEEDINGS.



   At any regular meeting of the Commission, the following shall be the
regular order of business:



   (A)   Roll call;



   (B)   Minutes of the preceding meeting;



   (C)   Public hearings as scheduled on the agenda;



   (D)   Old and new business as scheduled on the agenda;



   (E)   Communications; and



   (F)   Adjournment.



(1997 Code, § 225.13)



§ 32.093  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted in accordance with
the Revised Robert's Rules of Order.



(1997 Code, § 225.14)



§ 32.094  AGENDA.



   The Chairperson shall cause all items to be considered at any meeting
to be placed on a written agenda by the City Administrator.  The City
Administrator shall advise the Chairperson of any matters the Commission must
consider by Council directive, ordinance, or statute and shall have prepared
and mailed a written agenda of all meetings to all Commission members, the
Council, and the public, no less than 4 days before each meeting.



(1997 Code, § 225.15)



§ 32.095  RECORDS.



   Each formal action of the Commission shall be embodied in full upon the
minute book as a formal motion or resolution after an affirmative vote as
provided in this section.  The minutes of each meeting shall be provided to
each member, the Council, and the public no more than 7 days after the date
of each meeting.  The recommendations and findings of the Commission shall
be presented to the Council at the next regularly scheduled Council
meeting.  The records of meetings and actions and recommendations shall be
transmitted to the City Administrator for keeping and distribution.



(1997 Code, § 225.16)



§ 32.096  TRAINING.



   Commission members shall be encouraged to avail themselves of training
courses offered by the city, the state, and other government and public
training agencies and the Council shall budget for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred in training each year.



(1997 Code, § 225.17)



§ 32.097  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall prepare, hold hearings on, and recommend
to the Council the plans, programs, and policies as it deems necessary to
carry out the purposes of §§ 32.080 et seq.



   (B)   The powers shall include but not necessarily be limited to
studying and recommending to the Council on the following:



      (1)   Land acquisition for park and recreation purposes;



      (2)   Plans for major improvements in city parks;



      (3)   Rules and requirements for conduct of and in parks and
recreation facilities;



      (4)   Plans and programs relating to the design and
programming of city parks; and



      (5)   The other plans and programs as may be assigned from
time to time.



   (C)   The Commission shall not be considered a park board under
Minnesota Statutes and shall have no powers to acquire or lease land, employ
personnel, enter into contracts or leases, or any similar powers authorized a
park board by Minnesota Statutes.



(1997 Code, § 225.18)



HERITAGE PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 32.110  ESTABLISHMENT.



   In accordance with M.S. § 471.193 (Municipal Heritage Preservation),
as it may be amended from time to time, and the powers of this statutory
city, a Heritage Preservation Commission is hereby continued.



(1997 Code, § 230.01)



§ 32.111  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the Heritage Preservation Commission is to engage in a
comprehensive program of historic preservation and to preserve and promote
the city's historic resources according to this section.



(1997 Code, § 230.02)



§ 32.112  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The Heritage Preservation Commission (H.P.C.) shall consist of
5 members, 2 alternate members, and 1 ex officio member from the Washington
County Historical Society.



   (B)   Members shall be appointed by the Council for 3 year terms so
that only 1/3 of the appointments will expire on December 31 of each year. 
No member may serve more than 2 consecutive 3-year terms unless the average
years of service for all Commission members is less than 4 years.  A member
who has served 2 terms may be reappointed by the Council after a 1-year
absence.



   (C)   The Council shall designate a first alternate and a second
alternate who will become full members in order of appointment and shall
complete the unexpired term of the member they succeed.



   (D)   If the office of any alternate becomes vacant, the vacancy
shall be filled in the same manner in which the last regular appointment for
that office was made.



(1997 Code, § 230.03)



§ 32.113  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Each Commission member must be a person with demonstrated interest and
expertise in historic preservation and must reside or work within the city
with the exception of ex officio members.



(1997 Code, § 230.04)



§ 32.114  REMOVAL.



   Any member or alternate member may be removed by a 4/5 vote of the
Council, for cause.  Cause shall include, but not be limited to, having more
than 3 consecutive unexcused absences or being absent from more than 1/3 of
the meetings in any 1 calendar year.  The Council may consider exceptional
circumstances when applying the rule.



(1997 Code, § 230.05)



§ 32.115  OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, and may
elect a Secretary from among its appointed members at the annual meeting each
year, for a term of 1 year.  The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings
of the Commission, if present, and shall perform all other duties and
functions assigned by the Commission or the Council.  The Vice Chairperson
shall perform these duties in the absence of the Chairperson.  If a vacancy
occurs in the Chairperson's office, the Vice Chairperson shall assume the
Chairperson's duties for the remainder of the year; and a new Vice
Chairperson shall be elected by the Commission at a special election to be
held at the next regularly scheduled Commission meeting, after at least
2-days written notice to each Commission member.



(1997 Code, § 230.06)



§ 32.116  ANNUAL MEETING.



   The Commission shall hold an annual meeting the first Monday in the
month of January in each year unless the first Monday is a New Year's Day, in
which case the annual meeting shall be held at the first regularly scheduled
meeting of the Commission in the month of January in each year.  The meeting
shall be devoted to the election of officers and the other business as shall
be scheduled.



(1997 Code, § 230.07)



§ 32.117  ANNUAL WORK PLAN.



   The Commission shall meet with the Council at their first meeting after
formation and at the first meeting in September each year thereafter to
review activities during the preceding year and develop an annual work plan
through the establishment and review of goals, objectives, and tentative
action steps.



(1997 Code, § 230.08)



§ 32.118  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings shall be held in the City Hall at __ p.m. on the ____
of each month.  No action shall be taken in the absence of a quorum except
to adjourn the meeting to a subsequent date.  A regular meeting may be
canceled or rescheduled by the Commission at a prior meeting if there are no
scheduled agenda items on the Thursday prior to the meeting.  All action
taken by the Commission shall be by the affirmative vote of a majority of the
members present.



(1997 Code, § 230.09)



§ 32.119  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   Special meetings of the Commission shall be held in the City Hall at a
time and place designated or at a public place at a time designated and shall
be called by the Chairperson.  Upon the written request of at least 4
members, the Chairperson shall be required to call a special meeting to be
held within seven days of the request.  Written notice of the special
meeting shall be given to all members not less than 72 hours in advance of
the meeting.



(1997 Code, § 230.10)



§ 32.120  QUORUM.



   A quorum shall consist of 2/3 of the members.



(1997 Code, § 230.11)



§ 32.121  VOTING.



   Each member attending any meeting shall be entitled to cast 1 vote. 
Voting shall be by voice vote.  If any member has a personal interest of any
kind in the matter then before the Commission, the member shall disclose this
interest and be disqualified from voting upon the matter.  The Secretary
shall record in the minutes that no vote was cast by the member.  Alternate
members shall be entitled to cast 1 vote in the absence of any member.  The
second alternate shall be entitled to cast 1 vote in the absence of any 2
members.



(1997 Code, § 230.12)



§ 32.122  PROCEEDINGS.



   At any regular meeting of the Commission the following shall be the
regular order of business:



   (A)   Roll call;



   (B)   Minutes of the preceding meeting;



   (C)   Old and new business as scheduled on the agenda;



   (D)   Communications; and



   (E)   Adjournment.



(1997 Code, § 230.13)



§ 32.123  RULES OF PROCEDURES.



   All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted in accordance with
the Revised Robert's Rules of Order.



(1997 Code, § 230.14)



§ 32.124  AGENDA.



   (A)   The Chairperson shall cause all items to be considered at any
meeting to be placed on a written agenda by the City Administrator.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall advise the Chairperson of any
matters the Commission must consider by Council directive, ordinance, or
statute and shall have prepared and mailed a written agenda of all meetings
to all Commission members, the Council, and the public no less than 4 days
before each meeting.



(1997 Code, § 230.15)



§ 32.125  RECORDS.



   Each formal action of the Commission shall be embodied in full upon the
minute book as a formal motion or resolution after an affirmative vote as
provided herein §§ 32.110 et seq.  The minutes of each meeting shall be
provided to each member, the Council, and the public no more than 7 days
after the date of each meeting.  The recommendations and findings of the
Commission shall be presented to the Council at the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting.  The records of meetings and actions and recommendations
shall be transmitted to the City Administrator for keeping and distribution.



(1997 Code, § 230.16)



§ 32.126  TRAINING.



   Commission members shall be encouraged to avail themselves of training
courses offered by the city, the state, and other government and public
training agencies, and the Council shall budget for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred in training each year.



(1997 Code, § 230.17)



§ 32.127  POWERS.



   The powers of the Commission are to actively promote historical
preservation within the city; to receive and cause to be made public display
of artifacts of significance to the community, and to appropriately receive
and secure them; to write, or cause to be written, a pictorial (all media)
history of the city; to establish and maintain liaison with civic, church,
and other groups for the purpose of promoting historic preservation and
timely securing artifacts; to promote giving of artifacts, structures, or
money to promote the activities involved in historical preservation; and
further:



   (A)   To survey and recommend to the Council the designation of
districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that are of historical,
architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance;



   (B)   To recommend to the Council rules governing construction,
alteration, demolition, and use, including the review of building permits,
and the adoption of other measures appropriate for the preservation,
protection, and perpetuation of designated properties and areas;



   (C)   To recommend to the Council the acquisition by purchase, gift,
or bequest of a fee or lesser interest, including preservation restrictions,
in designated properties and adjacent or associated lands which are important
for the preservations and use of the designated properties;



   (D)   To recommend to the Council the use of its powers of eminent
domain to maintain or preserve designated properties and adjacent or
associated lands;



   (E)   To recommend to the Council the granting of use variances to
the zoning ordinance for the purpose of promoting historical preservation or
continuity;



   (F)   To participate in the conduct of land use planning processes
by the review and comment on documents or actions relating to designated
areas and on comprehensive plans; and



   (G)   To recommend to the Council the removal of blighting
influences in designated areas, including signs, unsightly structures, and
debris incompatible with the physical well-being of the areas.



(1997 Code, § 230.18)



§ 32.128  COMMUNICATION WITH THE STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER.



   Proposed site designations and design guidelines must be sent to the
state historic preservation officer at the Minnesota Historical Society,
after initial review by the Council, who shall review and comment on the
proposal within 60 days.  By October 31 of each year, each Commission shall
submit an annual report to the State Historic Preservation Officer.  The
report must summarize the Commission's activities including designations,
reviews, and other activities during the previous 12 months.



(1997 Code, § 230.19)



HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



§ 32.140  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A Human Rights Commission of the city is hereby established.



(1997 Code, § 240.01)



§ 32.141  INTENT, PURPOSE, AND MISSION.



   The intent, purpose, and mission of the Human Rights Commission, in
cooperation with the Minnesota State Department of Human Rights, to secure
for all citizens equal opportunity in housing, employment, public
accommodations, public services, and education, and to work consistently to
foster a positive human relations climate in the City of Lake Elmo.



(1997 Code, § 240.02)



§ 32.142  COMPOSITION.



   (A)   The Human Rights Commission shall consist of 7 members.  The
Council shall appoint members for 3-year terms so that only 1/3 of the
appointments will expire on December 31 of each year.  No member may serve
more than 2 consecutive 3-year terms unless the average years of service for
all Commission members are less than 4 years.  The Council may reappoint a
member who has served 2 terms after a 1-year absence.



   (B)   In the case of original members, 1 member shall be appointed
for a term expiring in 1 year, 1 member shall be appointed for a term
expiring in 2 years, and 1 member shall be appointed for a term expiring in 3
years.



(1997 Code, § 240.03)



§ 32.143  REMOVAL.



   Any member may be removed by a 4/5 vote of the Council, for cause.
Cause shall include, but not be limited to, having more than 3 consecutive
unexcused absences or being absent from more than 1/3 of the meetings in any
1 calendar year. The Council may consider exceptional circumstances when
applying the rule.



(1997 Code, § 240.04)



§ 32.144  OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson, Secretary
from among its appointed members at the annual meeting each year, for a term
of 1 year.  The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Commission,
if present, and shall perform all other duties and functions assigned by the
Commission or the Council.  The Vice Chairperson shall perform these duties
in the absence of the Chairperson.  If a vacancy occurs in the Chairperson's
office, the Vice Chairperson shall assume the Chairperson's duties for the
remainder of the year.  A new Vice Chairperson shall be elected by the
Commission at a special election to be held at the next regularly scheduled
Commission meeting, after at least 2-days written notice to each Commission
member.  The Secretary shall take minutes of all meetings.



(1997 Code, § 240.05)



§ 32.145  ANNUAL MEETING.



   The Commission shall hold an annual meeting the first meeting in each
year.  The meeting shall be devoted to the election of officers and the
other business as shall be scheduled.



(1997 Code, § 240.06)



§ 32.146  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings shall be held in the City Hall at 7:00 p.m. on the
third Monday of each month.  No action shall be taken in the absence of a
quorum except to adjourn the meeting to a subsequent date.  A regular
meeting may be canceled or rescheduled by the Commission at a prior meeting
if there are no scheduled agenda items on the Thursday before the meeting. 
All action taken by the Commission shall be by the affirmative vote of a
majority of the members present.



(1997 Code, § 240.07)



§ 32.147  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   Special meetings of the Commission shall be held in the City Hall at a
time and place designated or at a public place at a time designated and shall
be called by the Chairperson.  Upon the written request of at least 4
members, the Chairperson shall be required to call a special meeting to be
held within 7 days of the request.  Written notice of the special meeting
shall be given to all members not less than 72 hours in advance of the
meeting.



(1997 Code, § 240.08)



§ 32.148  QUORUM.



   A quorum shall consist of 4 members.



(1997 Code, § 240.09)



§ 32.149  VOTING.



   (A)   Each member attending any meeting shall be entitled to cast 1
vote.



   (B)   Voting shall be by voice vote.



   (C)   If any member has a personal interest of any kind in the
matter then before the Commission, the member shall disclose this interest
and be disqualified from voting upon the matter.



   (D)   The Secretary shall record in the minutes that the member cast
no vote.



(1997 Code, § 240.10)



§ 32.150  PROCEEDINGS.



   At any regular meeting of the Commission, the following shall be the
regular order of business:



   (A)   Roll call;



   (B)   Minutes of the preceding meeting;



   (C)   Old and new business as scheduled on the agenda;



   (D)   Communications; and



   (E)   Adjournment.



(1997 Code, § 240.11)



§ 32.151  RULES OF PROCEDURES.



   All meetings of the Commission shall be conducted in accordance with
the Revised Robert's Rules of Order.



(1997 Code, § 240.12)



§ 32.152  AGENDA.



   An agenda shall be prepared for all meetings outlining the topics to be
discussed at the meeting.  The City Administrator shall advise the
Chairperson of any matters the Commission must consider by Council directive,
ordinance, or statute and shall have prepared and mailed a written agenda of
all meetings to all Commission members, the Council, and the public no less
than 4 days before each meeting.



(1997 Code, § 240.13)



§ 32.153  RECORDS.



   Each formal action of the Commission shall be embodied in full upon the
minute book as a formal motion or resolution after an affirmative vote as
provided in §§ 32.140 et seq.  The recommendations and findings of the
Commission shall be presented to the Council at the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting.  The records of meetings and actions and recommendations
shall be transmitted to the City Administrator for keeping and distribution.



(1997 Code, § 240.14)



§ 32.154  TRAINING.



   Commission members shall be encouraged to avail themselves of training
courses offered by the city, the state, and other government and public
training agencies, and the Council shall budget for the reimbursement of
expenses incurred in training each year.



(1997 Code, § 240.15)



§ 32.155  DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission shall foster, through education and public
information, general awareness and understanding of human relations and human
rights issues and laws in the community.



   (B)   The Commission shall enlist the cooperation of agencies,
organizations, and individuals in the community, and shall cooperate with the
Human and Civil Rights Agencies of other communities in an active program
directed to create equal opportunities and equal rights for all persons.



   (C)   The Commission shall annually recognize individuals and groups
for their contribution to furthering positive human relations in the
community.



   (D)   The Commission shall advise the Mayor, City Council, and City
Administrator on human relations and civil rights issues and recommend to the
Mayor, City Council, and City Administrator the adoption of the specific
policies or actions as are needed to provide for full equal opportunity in
the City of Lake Elmo.



   (E)   The Commission may recommend that the city take a part in the
no-fault grievance process administered by the Minnesota Department of Human
Rights, and, if an election is made, the Commission shall be bound by all
rules promulgated pursuant to the rule making authority of that body.



   (F)   The Commission shall not seek to impose penalties, or become
involved in issues not directly related to human relations and human rights.



   (G)   The Commission shall inform any persons seeking to resolve
their disputes through the Commission of their rights to pursue a claim
through the Minnesota Department of Human Rights as well as to voluntarily
participate in a dispute resolution process.



   (H)   The Commission will not become involved in matters which are
germane to other established boards or commissions of the city, but may
recommend that other commissioners review and comment on the issues.



(1997 Code, § 240.16)



CHAPTER 33:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   33.01   Policy and purpose



   33.02   Establishment of Emergency Management Organization



   33.03   Powers and duties of Director



   33.04   Local emergencies



   33.05   Emergency regulations



   33.06   Emergency management a government function



   33.07   Participation in labor disputes or politics



§ 33.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds, or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to
deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a City Emergency Management Organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters;



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters;



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of
the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 33.02  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government an Emergency
Management Organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.  The Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council for an
indefinite term and may be removed by him or her at any time.  The Director
shall serve with a salary as established by the City Council and shall be
paid his or her necessary expenses.  The Director shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, and operation of the
emergency preparedness organization, subject to the direction and control of
the Mayor.



§ 33.03  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director, with the consent of the Mayor, shall represent
the city on any regional or state conference for emergency management.  The
Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and
assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall
present these agreements to the Council for its action. These arrangements
shall be consistent with the State Emergency Plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the
Council for its approval.  When the Council has approved the plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. 
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.  The Director
shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans
of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans
of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the
Director shall institute training programs, public information programs, and
conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary
to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Plan when a
disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable.  The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city's Emergency Management
Organization and to the Governor upon request.  The head of each department
or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the
planning and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.  To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 33.04  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor.  It shall not be continued for a period in excess of 3
days except by or with the consent of the Council.  Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide
aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



§ 33.05  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting:  the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing;
shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.  A copy
shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours.  Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability
for inspection at the City Clerk's office shall be conspicuously posted at
the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the city or at other
places in the affected area as the Council shall designate in the
resolution.  By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.



   (C)   (1)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution
at any time.



      (2)   If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire
at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency
to which it relates, whichever comes first.



      (3)   Any resolution, rule, or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be suspended during the
period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   (1)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the
provisions of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time and
notwithstanding any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary,
empowered, through its Council, acting within or without the corporate limits
of the city, to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to
combat the disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and
property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.



      (2)   The city may exercise these powers in the light of the
exigencies of the disaster without compliance with the time-consuming
procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of
public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of supplies and
materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure
of public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions,
publication of calls for bids, provisions of personnel laws and rules,
provisions relating to low bids, and requirement for bids.



§ 33.06  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.



   (A)   All functions and activities relating to emergency management
are hereby declared to be governmental functions.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled
under this resolution or under the worker's compensation law, or under any
pension law, nor the right of any person to receive any benefits or
compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 33.07  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The Emergency Management Organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



   50.   WATER



   51.   WASTE WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS



   52.   SOLID WASTE



   53.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY



   54.   ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION



CHAPTER 50:  WATER



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Public utility



   50.02   Construction



   50.03   Phone read meter interface unit installation instructions




Installation Procedures




   50.15   Applications



   50.16   Plumbing permits



   50.17   Trunk water main facilities and lateral water main
connection charges



   50.18   Listing of accounts by house and street number




Service Regulations




   50.30   Water rates



   50.31   Statements; delinquent accounts



   50.32   Discontinuance of water service



   50.33   Authorized water shut downs



   50.34   Separate meters required



   50.35   Authorization required



   50.36   Service pipes



   50.37   Abandoned services



   50.38   Water pipe connected to pump, wells, or tank



   50.39   Water connections for newly acquired city property



   50.40   Water use restrictions



   50.41   Private wells



   50.42   Water cooled air conditioning system



   50.43   Operation of fire hydrants



   50.44   Sources of water contamination



   50.45   Curb stop boxes



   50.46   Water service excavators



   50.47   Water meters



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  PUBLIC UTILITY.



   The city's municipal water system (called the "water system") shall be
operated as a public utility and convenience from which revenue will be
derived, subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(1997 Code, § 600.01)



§ 50.02  CONSTRUCTION.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall make, construct, or install any
water service installation, or make use of any water service connected to the
water system, except in the manner provided in this chapter.  No person,
firm, or corporation shall otherwise make, construct, install, or make use of
any installation connected to the water system contrary to the regulatory
provisions of this chapter.



(1997 Code, § 600.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.03  PHONE READ METER INTERFACE UNIT INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS.



   The city’s phone read meter interface unit installation instructions
are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



INSTALLATION PROCEDURES



§ 50.15  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Application forms for service installations.  All
applications for service installations and for water service shall be made at
the city office on printed forms furnished by the city.



   (B)   Application by owner; payment.  All applications for service
installations shall be made by the owner of the property to be served, or
owner's duly authorized agent, and shall state the size and location of the
service connection required.  The applicant shall, at the time of making
application, pay to the city the amount of fees or deposit required for the
installation of the service connection as provided in this chapter.



   (C)   Application information needed.  The application shall also
contain the name of the owner, an account number, and a description of the
property, lot, block, and addition, name of the street upon which the
property fronts and the official street number assigned to the premises as
shown by the records of the city and the signature of the applicant, or
applicant's agent, agreeing to conform to the rules and regulations that may
be established by the city as conditions for the use of water.



   (D)   Application for water service.  When service connections have
been installed, application for water service may be made at the city office
either by the owner, a duly authorized agent, or by the tenant or occupant of
the premises.



   (E)   Water meter; notification.  A meter spacer interface unit
will be furnished to the contractor or plumber, at the time a connection
permit is issued.  The plumber shall notify the Building Official within 24
hours after piping is complete, giving street address and permit number. 
The city shall then program the meter interface unit.



(1997 Code, § 600.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.16  PLUMBING PERMITS.



   (A)   A permit must be obtained to connect to the water system. 
The fee for each permit shall be as set forth by City Council ordinance.  No
permit shall be issued except to a licensed plumber.  All costs to connect
to an existing water main shall be paid for by the property owner.



(Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



   (B)   If for any reason the contractor laying the service pipe
should fail to have the connection made at the time specified in contractor's
application, notice must be given to the city Building Official affixing
another day on which contractor wishes to make the connection.  The notice
must be given at least 2 business days prior to the excavation for laying of
the service pipe, and the connection must be made before 3:00 p.m., except in
special cases, and then the work must be done only upon a written order from
the city Building Official.



(1997 Code, § 600.05)  (Am. Ord. 97-177, passed 9-1-2006)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.17  TRUNK WATER MAIN FACILITIES AND LATERAL WATER MAIN CONNECTION
CHARGES.



   (A)   A full lateral benefit assessment shall be levied for any
building unit which is directly served by a trunk utility main and therefore
requires no lateral main, if the building unit resides in a municipal urban
service area designated by the City of Lake Elmo Comprehensive Plan.  The
building unit must connect to the municipal utility service within two years
of the installation of the trunk utility main.



   (B)   A lateral benefit assessment shall be levied for any building
unit which is directly served by a trunk utility main and therefore requires
no lateral main, if the building resides outside a municipal urban service
area as designated by the City of Lake Elmo Comprehensive Plan.  A stub
shall be placed in front of the building unit and the building unit shall be
levied at an equivalent of .5 lateral benefit assessment.  If the building
unit requests connection to water service subsequent to the completion of the
utility main, the building unit shall be levied the remaining .5 lateral
benefit assessment and charged all related connection and availability
charges consistent with the city’s current fee schedule and the cost of any
restoration to the street, right-of-way, or water transmission infrastructure
that results from the building unit connection.



   (C)   The Council shall set the fee from time to time by resolution,
using the most recent project data.



(1997 Code, § 600.06)  (Am. Ord. 97-177, passed 9-1-2006; Am. Ord. 08-108,
passed 6-17-2014)



§ 50.18  LISTING OF ACCOUNTS BY HOUSE AND STREET NUMBER.



   (A)   All accounts shall be kept on the books of the city by the
house and street number and under the account number assigned to the account
and by the name of the owner or of the person signing the application for
service.



   (B)   All bills and notices sent out by the city shall be sent to
the house and street number of the property.



   (C)   If non-resident owners or agents desire personal notice sent
to a different address, they shall file an application for the different
address to the city.



   (D)   Any error in address shall be promptly reported to the city.



(1997 Code, § 600.07)



SERVICE REGULATIONS



§ 50.30  WATER RATES.



   (A)   Establishment of rates.  The rate due and payable to the city
by each water user for water taken from a water system shall be that rate
established by the Council by resolution.



   (B)   Malfunctioning meter.  In case the meter is found to have
stopped, or to be operating in a faulty manner, the amount of water used will
be estimated in accordance with the amount used previously in comparable
periods of the year.



   (C)   Billings.  Water bills shall be mailed to the customers
quarterly and shall specify the water consumed and charge in accordance with
the foregoing rates.



   (D)   Sprinkler system charges.  Where a connection is made to an
automatic sprinkler system for standby service only, a charge as set by the
Council by resolution shall be made on an annual basis.  These rates shall
apply in all cases where automatic sprinklers are installed and where fire
gates and other outlets are sealed.  Meters or detector check valves must be
installed on the services as required by the city.  The amount of these
rates shall be due January 1 of the year for which service is to be provided
and shall be payable on or before February 1 of that year.  Where service is
for less than an annual period, the annual charge shall be prorated on a
monthly basis and the prorated amount shall be paid at the time of the
connection of the sprinkler system.



   (E)   Should it be found that water not metered is used through a
fire connection for any purpose other than the extinguishing of a fire upon
the premises, the owner and occupant will be notified, and if the improper
conditions are not corrected within 10 days, the water will be shut off until
proper adjustments are made.  The owner shall be subject to the penalties as
provided in § 10.99.  Regular inspections shall be made of all fire service
connections with all piping, fire gates, and other attached appurtenances. 
The city shall have access to the premises for the inspection and shall keep
a record of all inspections made.



(1997 Code, § 600.08)



§ 50.31  STATEMENTS; DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   Statements.  Statements for charges for water service for the
period shall be mailed to each customer on or before the fifth day of
January, April, July, and October of each year.  The statements shall be due
and payable to the City Administrator on or before the first day of the
second month following the quarterly period covered by the statement.



   (B)   Delinquent accounts.  It shall be the duty of the city to
endeavor to collect delinquent accounts as promptly as possible.  Where
satisfactory arrangements for payment have not been made, instructions shall
be given to discontinue service by shutting off the water at the stop box. 
All delinquent accounts may be certified to the Clerk/Administrator who shall
prepare an assessment roll each year providing for assessment of the
delinquent accounts against the respective property served.  This assessment
roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption on or before October 1 of
each year.  Upon approval of the assessment roll, the City Administrator
shall certify to the County Auditor the amount due.  The County Auditor
shall then enter the amount as part of the tax levy on the premises to be
collected during the ensuing year.  The action may be optional or subsequent
to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.



   (C)   Delinquent account fee.  All delinquent accounts shall be
charged a service fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.



(1997 Code, § 600.09)



§ 50.32  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.



   Water service may be shut off at any stop box connection whenever:



   (A)   Connection violations.  The owner or occupant of the premises
served, or any person working on any pipes or equipment on the premises which
as connected with the water system, has violated or threatens to violate or
causes to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter;



   (B)   Delinquent charges.  Any charge for water, service, meter, or
other financial obligation imposed on the present or former owner or occupant
of the premises served is unpaid;



   (C)   Fraud; misrepresentation.  Fraud or misrepresentation by the
owner or occupant of the premises served in connection with an application
for service;



   (D)   Service charge for disconnection.  For turning off water
service for non-payment of water bill, failure to repair leak, discontinuance
of service, or any other cause, and the like; and/or



   (E)   Property access.  Failure to allow city employees or
authorized representatives onto property for purposes of installing or
repairing water meters and/or remote reading devices (M.I.U.).



(Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



(1997 Code, § 600.10)



§ 50.33  AUTHORIZED WATER SHUT DOWNS.



   (A)   The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in
the supply of water to consumers, whether occasioned by shutting the water
off for the purpose of making repairs or connections, or from any other cause
whatever.  In case of fire, or alarm of fire, water may be shut off to
ensure a supply for firefighting.  In making repairs or construction of new
works, water may be shut off at any time and kept shut off as long as
necessary.



   (B)   (1)   Water turn-on/off.  No person, except an authorized
city employee, shall turn on or off any water supply at the stop box without
permission from the city.



      (2)   Service charge for reconnection.  For turning on water
where service has been turned off for non-payment of water bill, failure to
repair a leak, discontinuance of service, or any other cause, a service
charge as set forth from time to time by Council resolution will be made.



(1997 Code, § 600.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.34  SEPARATE METERS REQUIRED.



   No more than 1 housing unit or building shall be supplied from 1
service connection except by special permission of the city.  Whenever 2 or
more parties are supplied from 1 pipe, connecting with the distribution main,
each building or part of the building must have a separate stop box and a
separate meter.



(1997 Code, § 600.12)



§ 50.35  AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.



   Only persons authorized by this chapter shall tap any distributing main
or pipe of the water system, or insert stopcocks or ferrules in the main or
pipe.



(1997 Code, § 600.13)  (Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



§ 50.36  SERVICE PIPES.



   (A)   Maintenance of service pipe.  It shall be the responsibility
of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from the curb box into
the house or building.  In the case of failure upon the part of any consumer
or owner to repair any leak occurring in the owner's pipe within 24 hours
after verbal or written notice of the leak, the water will be shut off and
will not be turned on until the service charge set forth from time to time by
Council resolution and as specified in § 50.33, has been paid and the leak
repaired.  When the waste of water is great, or when damage is likely to
result from the leak, water may be turned off immediately pending repairs.



(1997 Code, § 600.14)



   (B)   Frozen service pipes.  If the service pipe is frozen, the
service pipe will be restored to proper operating condition only by an
authorized city employee.  The property owner/customer shall pay all costs
associated with thawing out water service.



(1997 Code, § 600.15)



   (C)   Specifications for service pipe.  Every service pipe must be
laid with sufficient waving to allow not less than 1 foot of extra length and
in a manner to prevent rupture by settlement.  The service pipe must be
placed not less than 8 feet below the surface and arranged to prevent rupture
by freezing.  Service pipes must extend from the curb box to the inside of
the building, if not taken into a building, then to the hydrants or other
fixtures which it is intended to supply.  A shut-off or other stop-cock with
waste valve, of the size and strength required, shall be used and placed to
be well protected from freezing.  Type K copper tubing shall be used up to
and including 2-inch services.  All underground joints are to be mechanical,
unless otherwise approved by the Plumbing Inspector.  Joints on copper
tubing shall be kept to a minimum, with not more than 1 joint used for
service up to 70 feet in length.  All joints and connections shall be left
uncovered until inspected and tested at normal water line pressure. 
Services over 2 inches shall be Type K copper or Doctile iron pipe. 
Connections with the mains for domestic supply shall be at least 1 inch.



(1997 Code, § 600.17)  (Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.37  ABANDONED SERVICES.



   (A)   Disconnection of abandoned/unused services, charges.  All
service installations that have been abandoned or have not been used for 1
year or, for any reason, have become useless for further service, shall be
disconnected at the main by the city and all pipe and appurtenances removed
shall be the property of the city.  Any expense of the city shall be charged
to the property and, if not paid within 30 days, shall be treated as a
delinquent account pursuant to § 50.31.



   (B)   Changes to "old," existing connections.  When new buildings
are erected on the site of the old ones, and it is desired to increase or
change the old water service, no connections with the mains shall be given
until all the old service shall have been removed and the main plugged.  If
any contractor, worker, or employee upon the building shall cause or allow
any service pipe to be hammered together at the ends to stop the flow of
water, or to save expense in removing the pipe from the main, the owner of
the building, the worker, and contractor shall, upon conviction of the
violation, be subject to the penalties as set forth in § 10.99, and shall
remove the service pipe from the main.  If the contractor, worker, or
employee fails to do so on 24 hours notice, the contractor, worker, or
employee shall be obligated to pay the city the cost incurred by it for the
removal.



(1997 Code, § 600.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.38  WATER PIPE CONNECTED TO PUMP, WELLS, OR TANK.



   No water pipe of the water system shall be connected with any pump,
well, tank, or piping that is connected with any other source of water
supply, and when these connections are found, the Building Official shall
notify the owner to disconnect the connection.  If not done immediately, the
water supply shall be turned off immediately.  Before any new connection to
the water system is permitted, the Plumbing Inspector shall ascertain that no
cross connection will exist when the new connection is made.  No person
shall permit water from the water system to be used for any purpose except
upon the person's own premises unless written consent is first obtained from
the city.



(1997 Code, § 600.18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.39  WATER CONNECTIONS FOR NEWLY ACQUIRED CITY PROPERTY.



   In any and all cases where water mains of the city have been or shall
be extended to or constructed in any road, street, alley, or public highway,
adjacent to or outside the corporate limits of the city, the Council is
authorized to issue permits to the owners or occupants of the properties
adjacent to, or accessible to, the water mains and to make proper water
service pipe connections with the water mains of the city and to be supplied
with water in conformity with and subject to all the terms, conditions, and
provisions of this chapter.  Persons accepting the service shall agree to be
bound and obligated by the ordinance.



(1997 Code, § 600.19)



§ 50.40  WATER USE RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Emergency authority.  To protect the health and safety of the
consumers, as well as the general welfare, the Mayor or City Council may
impose emergency regulations pertaining to city water use. Whenever the city
shall determine that a critical water deficiency prevails, it may limit the
times and hours during which water may be used from the city water system for
lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning, and
other nonessential uses. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause or
permit water to be used in violation of such determination after public
announcement thereof has been made through publication or by posting in the
City Hall and city website specifically indicating the restrictions thereof.



      (1)   The Mayor or City Council may declare a critical water
deficiency to prevail within the city whenever it finds and determines that
the ordinary demands and requirements of water consumers cannot be satisfied
without depleting the water supply of the city to the extent that there would
be insufficient water for human consumption, sanitation, and fire protection.



      (2)   The Mayor or City Council shall thereupon enact such
regulations and restrictions on the delivery of water and the consumption
within the city to conserve the water supply for the greatest public benefit
with particular regard to domestic use, sanitation, and fire protection.



      (3)   When the Governor of the State of Minnesota declares a
critical water deficiency, the Mayor or City Council will enact and enforce
water conservation restrictions in accordance with M.S. § 103G.291.



      (4)   Water use regulations and restrictions may include the
right to deny applications for new or additional service connections, and
provisions for their enforcement by discontinuing service to customers
willfully violating the regulations and restrictions.



   (B)   Permanent water use restrictions.  To encourage water
conservation and allow flexibility in the city’s water system in meeting
peak demands, and to reduce the required water supply and storage capacity
requirements allowing for a lower cost water system, certain limitations must
be placed on the city’s water supply.



      (1)   Odd/even sprinkling ban.  Property owners having even
numbered postal addresses may water, sprinkle, or irrigate their lawns only
on even numbered days, and property owners having odd numbered postal
addresses may water, sprinkle, or irrigate their lawns only on odd numbered
days.



      (2)   Time of day sprinkling ban.  All property owners are
prohibited from watering, sprinkling, or irrigating their lawns between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily.



      (3)   Exceptions.  The permanent water use restrictions do
not apply in the following situations.



         (a)   Private wells.



         (b)   Recently established lawns if permission is
granted through a watering restriction waiver form, allowing daily watering
for up to 30 days after installation. Watering must still adhere to the
restricted hours for the time of day sprinkling ban. New sod or seeded lawns
or other landscaping requiring watering, sprinkling, or irrigation, shall not
be installed during a water shortage emergency.



         (c)   Attended hand watering of plants, shrubs, trees,
and gardens.



   (C)   Lawn watering, sprinkling, and irrigation.  All lawn
sprinkler systems and irrigation systems connected to the municipal water
system, whether such systems are aboveground or underground, shall require a
permit for connection and shall be installed in accordance with the Minnesota
State Plumbing Code. To conserve water, all lawn sprinkler systems and
irrigation systems which are automatic or are equipped to operate
automatically and which are connected to the municipal water system, shall be
equipped with a rain-detection device such to prevent the system from
operating when it rains (per M.S. § 103G.298). All lawn sprinkler systems
and irrigation systems connected to the municipal water system shall be
constructed and operated to prevent water waste resulting from inefficient
landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff, low head drainage, over spray, or
other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property,
non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures.



   (D)   Enforcement.  Failure to comply with restrictions or
prohibitions imposed under this section  shall result in a surcharge for
water service for each violation in an amount determined by resolution of the
City Council, which shall be added to the water bill for the property on
which such violation occurs. Each day of violation shall be deemed a separate
violation. Continued violation shall be cause for discontinuing water service.



(Ord. 08-018, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 50.41  PRIVATE WELLS.



   (A)   Dual water system.  Except as provided in division (B), a
private well may be maintained and continued in use after connections made to
the city water system, provided that there is no means of cross connection
between the private well and the city water supply at any time. Hose bibs
that will enable the cross connection of the 2 systems are prohibited on
internal piping of the well supply system. Threads of the boiler drain of the
well volume tank shall be removed or the boiler drain hose bib replaced with
a sink faucet. Outside hose bibs will not be installed on the municipal water
system where dual water systems are in use.



   (B)   Sealing of well required.  A private well which has been
declared to be a known or potential health hazard by resolution of the City
Council shall be sealed pursuant to the regulations of the Department of
Health.



(1997 Code, § 600.21)  (Am. Ord. 97-166, passed 3-6-2006)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.42  WATER COOLED AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM.



   No water cooled air conditioning systems shall be connected to the
water system.



(1997 Code, § 600.22)  (Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.43  OPERATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   No persons, other than authorized city employees, shall
operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the water system without
first obtaining a permit to do so from the city, subject to the following
conditions.



   (B)   (1)   Use of fire hydrant.  A permit to use a fire hydrant
shall be issued for each individual job or contract for a minimum period of
30 days, and for additional 30-day periods as are requested and deemed
necessary.  The permit shall state the location of the hydrant and shall be
for the use of that hydrant and none other.



      (2)   Deposit for use.  The user shall make an advanced cash
deposit, as set forth from time to time by Council resolution, to guarantee
payment for water used and to cover breakage and damage to the hydrant or
meter.  This sum shall be refunded upon expiration of the permit, less
applicable charges for use.



      (3)   Rental charge for use.  The user shall pay a rental
charge, as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Council, for each
30-day period or fraction of that 30-day period and the required amount for
each 1,000 gallons of water used, set forth from time to time by resolution
of the Council.



(1997 Code, § 600.23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.44  SOURCES OF WATER CONTAMINATION.



   The following possible sources of contamination shall not be installed
within 75 feet of any public well:



   (A)   Building plumbing;



   (B)   Building drains;



   (C)   Septic tanks;



   (D)   Storm sewers;



   (E)   Sanitary sewers;



   (F)   Cesspools;



   (G)   Leaching pits; and/or



   (H)   Drain fields.



(1997 Code, § 600.24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.45  CURB STOP BOXES.



   (A)   Installation/location of stop box.  Curb stop boxes will be
installed at a point on the property line most suitable to the property and
shall be left in an accurate vertical position when backfilling is
completed.  One will be installed on each vacant platted lot.  Curb stop
boxes will be installed at an approximate depth of 8 feet below the grade
established by the owner.  Type K copper tubing shall be used for
installation of the water service.



   (B)   Connections to be made by licensed plumber.  All piping
connections from curb box to house supply piping shall be made under the
supervision of a licensed plumber.



(1997 Code, § 600.25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.46  WATER SERVICE EXCAVATORS.



   All water service excavation work shall be performed by water service
excavators licensed by the city.



(1997 Code, § 600.26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.47  WATER METERS.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   Except for extinguishing of fire, no person except
authorized city employees shall use water from the water supply system or
permit water to be drawn from the system unless the water is metered by
passing through a meter supplied or approved by the city.  No person not
authorized by the city shall connect, disconnect, and take apart, or in any
manner change or cause to be changed, or interfere with any meter or the
action of the meter.



(Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



      (2)   (a)   Water meter charge.  A charge for water
meters, and meter interface units, shall be paid to the city by customers for
water meters in advance before meter interface unit delivery of the water
meter for installation.  The charge shall be determined by resolution by the
Council.  Remote reading devices will be required on all water meters.



(Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



         (b)   Meter repair/replacement.  The city shall
maintain and repair all meters when rendered unserviceable through ordinary
wear and tear and shall replace them if necessary.  Where any replacement,
or repair, or adjustment of any meter is necessary because of damage from hot
water backup, damage from freezing water, or damage from any act,
carelessness, or negligence of the owner or occupants of any premises, any
expense incurred by the city to repair the damage shall be charged against
and collected from water consumer.  Water service may be discontinued until
the cause is corrected and the amount charged collected.



         (c)   Meter re-readings.  When a consumer makes a
complaint that the bill for any past services has been excessive, the city
shall, upon written request, have the meter re-read.  If the consumer
remains dissatisfied and desires that the meter be tested, the consumer shall
then make a deposit pursuant to the schedule set forth below, and the city
shall test the meter.  The consumer shall, if the consumer desires, be
present when the test is made.  In case a test should show an error of over
5% of the water consumed in favor of the city, the deposit will be refunded
to the consumer, and a calibrated meter will be installed and the date of the
written request and the minimum charge shall not be affected.  In case the
test shows an accurate measurement of water or an error in favor of the
consumer, the amount deposited shall be retained by the city to cover part of
the expenses of making the test, and the additional costs, if any, will be
included on the next quarterly statement.  The deposit charges for a meter
testing are those set by resolution by the Council.



         (d)   Meters property of city.  All water meters shall
be and remain the property of the city and may be removed or replaced or
changed as to size and type by the city whenever deemed necessary.



         (e)   Access for meter readings.  Authorized city
employees shall have free access at reasonable hours of the day to all parts
of every building and premises connected to the water system for reading of
meters and inspection.  The City Administrator shall be authorized to make
adjustments in water charges when, in the Administrator's opinion, the amount
billed is erroneous due to a meter deficiency or other mistake.



(1997 Code, § 600.27)



   (B)   Installation of water meters.



      (1)   The installation of a water meter shall be installed at
the time of structure construction, and shall meet the requirements of this
section and shall not be installed prior to receiving a permit approved by
the Building Official.  The Building Official shall maintain permit
application forms.



(Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



      (2)   (a)   Installation.  Installation of the water
meter, raising the curb box to finished grade, and flushing of the lines
shall be the responsibility of a plumber duly licensed and registered
according to state statute.  The city's Water Department must do turning on
the water service.  The meter setting shall be provided as follows.



            1.   Meter settings shall be located in the
utility, laundry, or furnace room and in every case shall be located no more
than 8 feet from the nearest floor drain unless there is prior approval from
the Building Official.



            2.   The setting shall be installed to provide
that the meter is between 6 and 12 inches from the wall and between 18 and 36
inches from the finished floor.



            3.   The water meter shall have full accessibility
with a clear space of 3 feet in all directions except as noted in division
(B)(2)(a)2. above.



            4.   Each meter setting shall be provided with a
ball valve on the street side and the house side of the meter.  The valves
shall be well protected from freezing.  Meters 1 inch and larger shall be
provided with ball valve, valved bypass (1 nominal size less than inlet) and
ball valve, valved drain outlet with iron pipe threads (plugged 1 nominal
size less than inlet).  This tee and ball valve shall be installed between
the meter outlet and the meter outlet ball valve.



            5.   Meter setting shall be accomplished with
brass mechanical joint ahead of the inlet ball valve.



            6.   A meter interface unit (M.I.U.) shall be
securely installed on the exterior surface of the wall closest to the water
meter.  A single RJ11 telephone jack receptacle shall also be installed on
the exterior surface of the wall within 18 inches of the M.I.U.  This jack
receptacle shall be wired into the existing active telephone circuit.  The
water meter encoded register (E.C.R.) shall be connected to the M.I.U. with
3-wire conductor type as specified by the water utility.  The M.I.U. shall
be connected to the telephone jack with telephone wire and a RJ11 jack
plug.  Use of wire ties or clips shall secure all wires.



(Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



         (b)   Notification of completion of installation.  The
water utility shall be notified that the meter setting is complete, at which
time the water utility will inspect and approve the installation, seal the
water meter, and program the M.I.U.



(Am. Ord. 97-29, passed 4-21-1998)



         (c)   Stop and waste valve.  All meter installations
shall have a stop and waste valve on the street side of the meter.  There
shall be no more than 12 inches of pipe exposed between the point of entrance
through the basement floor and the stop and waste valve.  A stop and waste
valve shall also be installed on the house side of the meter.  Meter setting
devices for 5/8 inch, 3/4 inch, and 1 inch meters shall be of copper pipe or
tubing from the terminus of the service pipe up to and including the house
side stop and waste valve.  Gate valves shall be brass 125 pounds
standard.  There shall also be installed on the house side of the meter gate
valve a 3/4 inch side outlet tee and a 2 inch by 4 foot minimum air chamber
or shock absorber, or an air chamber of equal volume.



(1997 Code, § 600.28)



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 51:  WASTE WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS



Section



Subsurface Sewage Treatment Systems



   51.001   Intent and purpose



   51.002   Regulations adopted by reference



   51.003   Exceptions to county regulations



   51.004   Generally



   51.005   Administration




Municipal Sanitary Sewer System




   51.020   General operation



   51.021   Definitions



   51.022   Connections with sewer required



   51.023   Supervision of sewer connections



   51.024   Permits



   51.025   Connection charge



   51.026   Types of wastes prohibited



   51.027   Pretreatment, control, and refusal of extraordinary wastes



   51.028   Tampering with municipal sanitary sewer system prohibited



   51.029   Entry upon private property



   51.030   Maintenance of municipal sanitary sewer connections



   51.031   Rates and charges



   51.032   Establishment of strength charges




Community Sewage Treatment System Service Charge




   51.045   Intent and purpose



   51.046   Regulations



   51.047   Determination of community sewage treatment system service
charge



   51.048   Delinquent accounts; revocation



   51.049   Community Sewage Treatment System Service Fund




Alternative Waste Disposal Systems; Wetland Treatment Systems




   51.065   Intent and purpose



   51.066   Rules



SUBSURFACE SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS



§ 51.001  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is adopted for the purpose of protecting the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the city through regulating the
location, design, installation, use and maintenance of individual sewage
treatment systems so as to prevent contamination of surface waters and
groundwater.



(1997 Code, § 700.02)  (Am. Ord. 08-029, passed 9-21-2010; Am. Ord. 08-159,
passed 12-6-2016)



§ 51.002  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   Chapter 4 of the Washington County Development Code entitled Subsurface
Sewage Treatment Systems Regulations, Ordinance # 196 (the “County
Regulations”), with the exception of Sections 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, 22.10, 23,
26.3, 28.1, and 29.1 is hereby adopted by reference and made part of this
chapter. Whenever the term “Department” appears in the County
Regulations, it shall mean the “Lake Elmo Planning Department.” Whenever
the word “County” appears in the County Regulations, it shall mean the
“City of Lake Elmo” except as used in Section 3.14 of the County
Regulations. Whenever the term “local unit of government” appears in the
County Regulations, it shall mean the “City of Lake Elmo.”



(Ord. 08-029, passed 9-21-2010; Am. Ord. 08-159, passed 12-6-2016)



§ 51.003  EXCEPTIONS TO COUNTY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The following provisions are adopted in addition to the County
Regulations and are more restrictive than the County Regulations:



      Mound systems are not allowed for new collector systems in the OP
Open Space Preservation District except to replace existing non-compliant
systems.



(Ord. 08-029, passed 9-21-2010; Am. Ord. 08-159, passed 12-6-2016)



§ 51.004  GENERALLY.



   General requirements - community sewage treatment systems.



   (A)   (1)   Lawful connections to community sewage treatment
systems will be allowed, with a city permit.



      (2)   When an existing individual sewage treatment system is
failing and the property in question is near the community sewage treatment
system provided capacity is available in all components of the community
sewage treatment system.



      (3)   A new connection to a community sewage treatment system
will not be permitted for new construction, unless the previous structure in
which the new construction occurs was previously connected to the existing
community sewage treatment system. In that event, a city permit is required.



(Am. Ord. 97-105, passed 4-2-2002)



   (B)   The fee for new connections will be determined by the city.
The new user will be responsible for paying all costs to connect to the
system, plus a charge to pay for previously built drainfield areas.



   (C)   No person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any community sewage treatment system or
appurtenance of the system without first obtaining a written permit from the
city. This provision shall not apply to certified qualified employees
performing tasks within their area of certification for which a permit is not
required. The definition of a CERTIFIED QUALIFIED EMPLOYEE shall be as set
forth in the County Regulations.



(1997 Code, § 700.04)  (Am. Ord. 08-029, passed 9-21-2010; Am. Ord. 08-159,
passed 12-6-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.005  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



      (1)   Administrative appeals.



         (a)   An aggrieved party may appeal a decision by the
permitting authority regarding the interpretation or application of the
provisions of §§ 51.001et seq.



         (b)   Appeals shall be reviewed and determined by the
city’s Board of Adjustment and Appeals.



      (2)   Variance procedures.



         (a)   Request for variances to the provisions of §§
51.001et seq. shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures and standards
contained in the zoning code.



         (b)   No variances with respect to Sections 4.1, 4.7,
4.8, 4.9, and Sections 16.2(1) through 16.2(4) of the County Regulations will
be considered or granted by the city. The city may grant a variance with
respect to Section 4.8(4)(A) of the County Regulations for replacement MSTS
serving existing dwellings or other establishments.



(Am. Ord. 97-124, passed 11-18-2003; Am. Ord. 08-029, passed 9-21-2010; Am.
Ord. 08-159, passed 12-6-2016)



MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM



§ 51.020  GENERAL OPERATION.



   The municipal sanitary sewer system shall be operated as a public
utility and convenience from which revenues will be derived, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.



(1997 Code, § 705.01)



§ 51.021  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined within §§ 51.020et seq., common
definitions, words, and phrases used in §§ 51.020 et seq. shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning throughout this code, and are
found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 705.02)



§ 51.022  CONNECTIONS WITH SEWER REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any building used for human habitation or in which a toilet or
other plumbing facility for the disposal of human waste is installed and
located on property adjacent to a sewer main, or in a platted block through
which the system extends, shall be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer
system within 2 years from the date on which a connection is available to the
building.



   (B)   All buildings subsequently constructed within the city on
property adjacent to a sewer main or in a platted block through which the
municipal sanitary sewer system extends, shall be provided with a connection
to the sewer system for the disposal of all human waste.



(1997 Code, § 705.03) (Am. Ord. 08-139, passed 6-21-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 51.023  SUPERVISION OF SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The Building Official shall supervise all sewer connections
made to the municipal sanitary sewer system and excavations for installing or
repairing the connections.



   (B)   All sewer installers shall verify the location and elevation
of a sewer connection stub by securing a written statement from the City
Engineer before proceeding with the installation of the sewer house
connection.



   (C)   The City Engineer shall not deviate from the planned location
without written permission from the Council.



(1997 Code, § 705.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.024  PERMITS.



   (A)   Persons desiring a connection to the municipal sanitary sewer
system shall apply to the city for a permit.  The application shall be made
on forms furnished by the Administrator and shall be accompanied by plans,
specifications, and other information required by the Building Official,
together with a permit fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Council.  When reinspection is necessary, a fee as set forth from time
to time by resolution of the Council for the reinspection shall be paid. 
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection shall be
borne by the owner, and the owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or
damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of
the sewer connection, including restoring streets and street surfaces.



   (B)   Permits for connections will be issued only to the property
owner or to a person duly licensed to make the connection under the
provisions of this chapter.



(1997 Code, § 705.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.025  CONNECTION CHARGE.



   (A)   A connection charge as determined by resolution of the Council
and the permit fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Council shall be paid at the time of making application for a connection to
the municipal sanitary sewer system.



   (B)   Before a permit shall be issued, the following conditions
shall be complied with.



      (1)   Permit requirements.  No permit shall be issued to
connect any lot or tract of land with the municipal sanitary sewer system of
the city, either directly or indirectly, unless it shall be determined that:



         (a)   The lot or tract of land to be served by the
connection has been assessed for the cost of construction of the sanitary
sewer main with which the connection is made;



         (b)   If no assessment has been levied for the
construction cost, the proceedings for levying the assessment have been or
will be commenced and completed in due course; or



         (c)   If no assessment has been levied, and no
assessment proceedings will be completed in due course, a sum equal to the
portion of cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main which would be
assessable against the lot or tract has been paid to the city.



      (2)   Additional connection fee.



         (a)   If none of the above conditions are met, no permit
to connect to any sanitary sewer main shall be issued unless the applicant
shall pay an additional connection fee which shall be equal to the portion of
the cost of construction of the sanitary sewer main which would be assessable
against the lot or tract to be served by the connection.



         (b)   The assessable cost is to be determined by the
Administrator upon the same basis as any assessment previously levied against
other property for the main.



         (c)   If no assessment has been levied, the assessable
cost will be determined upon the basis of the uniform charge which may have
been or which shall be charged for similar connection with the sanitary sewer
main, determined on the basis of the total assessable cost of the main,
allocated on a frontage basis, acreage basis, or both.



(1997 Code, § 705.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.026  TYPES OF WASTES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Unlawful discharges.  It is unlawful to discharge any of the
following described waters or wastes into the municipal sanitary sewer system:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F;



      (2)   Any water or waste containing more than 100 parts per
million by weight of fat, oil, or grease;



      (3)   Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the waste water disposal system or to the operation of the system. 
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, and
sulfides;



      (4)   Any waste water having a pH of less than 5.0 or greater
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the waste water disposal
system;



      (5)   Any waste water containing toxic pollutants, including
pesticides and herbicides, in sufficient quantity, either single or by
interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any waste water
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a
toxic effect in the receiving waters of the waste water disposal system.  A
toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified
pursuant to § 307(a) of the Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended;



      (6)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;



      (7)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, plastics, wood, manure, or any other solid or viscous
substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage system;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of a
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle the materials at the sewage treatment plant;



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance; and/or



      (10)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the Building Official, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any inflammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that the
interceptors shall not be required for private dwelling units which discharge
only normal wastes.  Grease and oil interceptors shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers, which,
when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight.  All grease, oil,
and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at owner's expense,
and in continuously efficient operation at all times.



   (B)   Substances prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
directly or indirectly the following described substances to any public
sewers unless, in the opinion of the city, the discharge will not harm the
municipal sanitary sewer system facilities, nor cause obstruction to free
flow in sewers, nor otherwise endanger life, limb, or public property, nor
constitute a nuisance.  In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of
the wastes, the city may give consideration to the factors as the materials
or construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process,
capacity of the municipal sanitary sewer system facilities, the city's
S.D.S./N.P.D.E.S. permit and other pertinent factors.  City may make the
determination either on a general basis or as a discharges from individual
users or specific discharges, and may prohibit certain discharges from
individual users because of unusual concentrations or combinations which may
occur.



      (2)   The substances prohibited are:



         (a)   Any water or wastes containing strong acid, iron
and pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized
or not;



         (b)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other
taste or odor-producing substances which constitute a nuisance or hazard to
the structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works, or which
interfere with the treatment required to meet the requirements of the state
or federal government, or any other public agency with proper authority to
regulate the discharge from the sewage treatment plant; and



         (c)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of the
half-life or concentration that they are not in compliance with regulations
issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use or may
cause damage or hazards to the treatment works or personnel operating it.



   (C)   Water runoff discharge prohibited.  It shall be unlawful to
discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal sanitary sewer system,
either directly or indirectly, any roof, storm, surface or ground water of
any type or kind, or water discharged from any air conditioning unit or
system.



(1997 Code, § 705.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.027  PRETREATMENT, CONTROL, AND REFUSAL OF EXTRAORDINARY WASTES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   If any water or wastes are discharged, or are proposed
to be discharged directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which water or
wastes do not meet the standards set out in or promulgated under this
section, or which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect
upon the treatment facilities, processes, equipment, and soil, vegetation,
and ground water or which otherwise create a hazard to life, or constitute a
public nuisance, the city may take all or any of the following steps:



         (a)   Refuse to accept the discharges;



         (b)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge;



         (c)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition
for the discharge to the public sewers; and/or



         (d)   Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling or treating the wastes.



      (2)   The design and installation of plant or equipment for
pretreatment or equalization of flows shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403, as
it may be amended from time to time, entitled "Pretreatment Standards," and
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (B)   Operation and maintenance; preliminary treatment.  Where
preliminary treatment, flow equalization, or interceptors are required for
any water or waste, they shall be effectively operated and maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective condition by the owner at owner's
expense and shall be available for inspection by the city at all reasonable
times.



   (C)   Control; observation devices.



      (1)   When required by the city, the owner of any property
services by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a
suitable control structure together with the necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes.



      (2)   The structure and equipment, when required, shall be
constructed at the owner's expense in accordance with plans approved by the
city and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.



   (D)   Sampling.  All measurements, tests, and analysis of the
characteristics of water and waste to which reference is made in this section
shall be determined in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 136, as it may be amended
from time to time, "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis
of Pollutants"; the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Waste Water and shall be determined at the control structure
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control structure.  If no
special structure has been required, the control structure shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the
point at which the building sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried
out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effluent constituents and
their effect upon the treatment works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, health, and property.  Sampling methods location, times,
durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis
subject to approval by the city.



   (E)   Proof of compliance.  The owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at the discretion of the
city, be required to provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analysis of
waters or wastes to illustrate compliance with §§ 51.020et seq. and any
special condition for discharge established by the city or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.  The number, type, and
frequency of sampling and laboratory analysis to be performed by the owner
shall be as stipulated by the city.  The industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the waste water discharge to assure that
compliance with the federal, state, and local standards are being met.  The
owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analysis, and reporting
required by the city.  At the times as deemed necessary, the city reserves
the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside
laboratory.



   (F)   New connections; sufficient capacity.  New connections to the
sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless sufficient flow capacity is
available in all downstream facilities.



   (G)   Special considerations.  No statement contained in §§
51.020et seq. shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the city and any industrial concern where an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for
treatment, subject to payment for the special agreement/arrangement by the
industrial concern, providing that National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards and the city's N.P.D.E.S. and/or state disposal system permit
limitations are not violated.



(1997 Code, § 705.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.028  TAMPERING WITH MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any part of the municipal sewer system.



(1997 Code, § 705.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.029  ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The Building Official, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall at reasonable times be permitted to enter upon all properties connected
to the municipal sanitary sewer system for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in connection with the
operation of the municipal sanitary sewer system.



(1997 Code, § 705.11)



§ 51.030  MAINTENANCE OF MUNICIPAL SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   Each property owner shall be responsible at all times for the
maintenance of owner's sewer connection to the municipal sanitary sewer
system, and shall have the obligation to keep the connection in good repair,
to the end that there shall be no interference or obstruction to the sewer
system as a whole, nor shall there be any violation of this chapter, and the
laws of the state.  The Building Official is authorized to make the
inspections of the sewer connections as the Building Official may deem
necessary to accomplish this purpose, and the property owner shall be
responsible for carrying out the instructions as the Building Official deems
necessary to accomplish this purpose.



(1997 Code, § 705.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.031  RATES AND CHARGES.



   Except as provided in §§ 51.020et seq., the Council shall prescribe
by resolution the rates to be charged for sewer service and the method of
billing and payments.  Delinquent accounts may be assessed against the
respective property served.



(1997 Code, § 705.13)



§ 51.032  ESTABLISHMENT OF STRENGTH CHARGES.



   (A)   The Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, a metropolitan
commission organized and existing under the laws of the State of Minnesota
(the "Commission"), in order to receive and retain grants in compliance with
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (the "Acts"), as
amended from time to time, and the regulations under the Act, has determined
to impose an industrial user sewer strength charge upon users of the
Metropolitan Disposal System (as defined in M.S. § 473.121, Subd. 24, as it
may be amended from time to time) to recover operation and maintenance costs
of treatment works attributable to the strength of the discharge of
industrial waste, the sewer strength charge being in addition to the charge
based upon the volume of discharge.  In order for the city to pay the costs
based upon strength of industrial discharge and allocated to it each year by
the Commission, it is found, determined, and declared to be necessary to
establish sewer strength charges and a formula for the computation of the
charges for all industrial users receiving waste treatment services within or
served by the city.  Furthermore, M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, empowers the city to make the sewer charge a
charge against the owner, lessee, occupant, or all of them and certify unpaid
charges to the county auditor as a tax lien against the property served.



   (B)   For the purpose of paying the costs allocated to the city each
year by the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission that are based on the
strength of discharge of all industrial users receiving waste treatment
service within or served by the city, in addition to sewer charge based on
volume of discharge, a sewer charge upon each person, company, or corporation
receiving waste treatment services within or served by the city, based upon
strength of industrial waste discharged into the sewer system of the city,
the charges referred to as "strength charge."



      (1)   Establishment of strength charge formula.  For the
purpose of computation of the strength charge established by this section,
there is established, approved, and adopted the same strength charge formula
designated in Resolution No. 76-172 adopted by the Metropolitan Waste Control
Commission on 6-15-1976, a formula based upon pollution qualities and
difficulty of disposal of the sewage produced through an evaluation of
pollution qualities and quantities in excess of an annual average base and
the proportionate costs of operation and maintenance of waste treatment
service provided by the commission.



      (2)   Strength charge payment.  The strength charge
established by this section shall be paid by each industrial user receiving
waste treatment services and subject to the charge before the twentieth day
next succeeding the date of billing of the charge to the user by or on behalf
of the city.  The payment of the charge shall be deemed to be delinquent if
not paid to the billing entity before the date.  If the payment is not paid
before the date an industrial user shall pay interest compounded monthly at
the rate of 2/3 of 1% per month on the unpaid balance due.



      (3)   Establishment of tax lien.



         (a)   As provided by M.S. § 444.075, Subd. 3, as it may
be amended from time to time, if payment of the strength charge established
by this section is not paid before the sixtieth day next succeeding the date
of billing of the charge to the industrial user by or on behalf of the city,
the delinquent sewer strength charge, plus accrued interest, shall be deemed
to be a charge against the property served, and the city or its agent shall
certify the unpaid delinquent balance to the collection as other taxes are
collected.



         (b)   The certification shall not preclude the city or
its agent from recovery of the delinquent sewer strength charge and interest
on the charge under any other available remedy.



(1997 Code, § 705.14)



COMMUNITY SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM SERVICE CHARGE



§ 51.045  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Sections 51.045et seq. is adopted for the purpose of:



   (A)   Setting forth the requirements for accruing revenues to enable
the city to comply with the state and federal laws and to provide sufficient
revenues to financially balance expenditures for the administration of those
waste water systems within the city constructed with federal and state grant
funds; and



   (B)   Charging those users of the waste water utilities within the
city, which are constructed with federal and state grant funds, for the
operation, maintenance, and replacement costs in proportion to use.



(1997 Code, § 710.02)



§ 51.046  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The city has established a waste water service charge system
whereby revenues collected from users of the waste water treatment facilities
will be used to offset all expenditures incurred for administration, annual
operation and maintenance, and equipment replacement.



   (B)   (1)   A passive maintenance program shall be required of
all those properties utilizing individual onsite sewage treatment systems
while all properties connected to community collection and treatment systems,
cluster system, or individual off-site treatment systems shall be on the
active maintenance program.



      (2)   For those properties on the passive maintenance program,
the property owner shall be responsible for the cost of operating,
maintaining, and replacing owner's system.  This will include arranging for
all repairs and maintenance to septic tanks, pipes, pumps, controls, drain
fields, as well as septic tank pumping.  The property owner shall report all
problems and the steps taken to alleviate the problems to the City
Administrator.  The city will supply inspection cards to the pumpers within
the city.  When a septic tank is pumped, the tank will also be inspected by
the pumper and the signed inspection card returned to the city.  The city
shall, at regular intervals, and at least biennially, determine which septic
tanks have not been inspected and/or pumped.  If owners on passive
maintenance fail to pump their septic tanks or to return the inspection card,
the city will, at its option, inspect the system and perform the required
maintenance.  All costs of the inspection and maintenance shall be charged
to the property owner.



      (3)   For those properties on the active maintenance program,
the city shall be responsible for operating, maintaining, and replacing the
collection and final treatment and disposal system.  The city shall arrange
for all repairs and maintenance on sewers, lift stations, controls, and drain
fields.  The property owner shall be responsible for all repairs and
maintenance to septic tanks, including septic tank pumping, and to all
individual pump stations and sewer pipes up to the collector sewer or final
treatment and disposal system.  Unless otherwise prescribed, city ownership
and the city's responsibility for conducting operation, maintenance, and
replacement shall begin at the property line.



      (4)   If owners on active maintenance fail to pump their
septic tanks or to return the inspection card, the city will, at its option,
inspect the system and perform the required maintenance.  All costs of the
inspection and maintenance shall be charged to the property owner.  Property
owners shall report all problems to the City Administrator who will determine
responsibility for their correction.  Damages caused by the abuse of the
system by the property owner will be repaired by the city and assessed
against the property owner.



      (5)   When it has been determined that maintenance and
replacement is necessary on an individual or community sewage treatment
system (apart from septic tank pumping addressed above), the maintenance and
replacement shall be accomplished in a manner acceptable to the city. 
Replacement parts, equipment, and appurtenances shall be of a design and
quality acceptable to the city and shall be installed in a manner acceptable
to the city and in conformance with requirements of State of Minnesota Rule
7080, "Individual Sewage Treatment Systems," as it may be amended from time
to time.  In the absence of code provisions or in the amplification of code
provisions, materials and procedures shall be as set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M., and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. 
Replacement effected on individual systems shall be reported to the sewer
authority.



   (C)   Community sewage treatment system service charges will be
established based on equivalent residential units (E.R.U.).  One E.R.U. is
defined as a unit of waste water volume of 250 gallons per day with a
theoretical waste strength of 250 mg/l of B.O.D. and 300 mg/l of total
suspended solids.  The assignment of E.R.U.s will be made by the City
Administrator in accordance with Tables I and II of Appendix A.



   (D)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, each user
will be notified annually at the beginning of each calendar year of the user
charge rates attributable to waste water treatment services.



   (E)   In accordance with federal and state requirements, the city
will be responsible for maintaining all records necessary to document
compliance with the waste water service charge system adopted.



(1997 Code, § 710.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.047  DETERMINATION OF COMMUNITY SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM SERVICE CHARGE.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   It is the intent of §§ 51.045et seq. that the user
charges shall cover the costs of operating and maintaining the waste water
systems, and that costs are recovered from all users in a proportionate
manner.  The City Administrator shall maintain a proper system of accounts
suitable for determining the operation and maintenance, equipment
replacement, and debt retirement costs of the collection and treatment
facilities.



      (2)   These costs shall be reviewed at regular annual
intervals.  The city shall determine whether or not sufficient revenue is
being generated for the effective operation and maintenance and management of
the waste water system, and that user charges are being distributed
proportionately to all users.  Any inequities and/or shortages shall be
corrected by adjusting the rates accordingly by Council resolution.



      (3)   The annual user charge per equivalent residential unit
is described as follows.



         (a)   User charge rate per equivalent residential unit:









         (b)   Where:



            1.   Uc = Annual User Charge;



            2.   Comr = Total Annual OM&R Costs;



            3.   ERU = Equivalent Residential Unit; and



            4.   Total ERUs = The total number of ERUs
connected to community sewage treatment systems.



   (B)   Use formula.  All users shall be charged in accordance with
the methodology described below.



      (1)   (a)   Individual off-site or clustered sewage
treatment units:









         (b)   Where:



            1.   SCC = Sewer Service Charge;



            2.   Uc = User charge for operation, maintenance,
and replacement;



            3.   Ac = Administration charge; and



            4.   #ERU = Number of ERUs assigned to a
particular connection.



      (2)   (a)   Individual on-site sewage treatment units:









         (b)   Where:



            1.   SCC = Sewer service charge; and



            2.   Ac = Administration charge.



   (C)   Basis for annual user charge.  All users of the waste water
treatment facilities shall be charged annually for sewer service based on the
number of equivalent residential units assigned to each and based on whether
the unit is seasonal or year-round.



   (D)   Additional requirements.



      (1)   If a user discharges toxic pollutants or wastes of
unusual strength of character to the treatment facilities which cause or
increase the operation and maintenance costs, the user shall be ordered
either to install pretreatment facilities or pay for the extra costs of
treating the wastes.



      (2)   This decision will be made by the City Administrator at
the time the user begins to discharge extra strength wastes.



(1997 Code, § 710.06)



§ 51.048  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; REVOCATION.



   (A)   Delinquent accounts.  Any bill not paid for 4 weeks after
date of billing shall be declared delinquent and a past-due notice shall be
issued to the billed party.  The past-due notice shall contain an additional
charge to cover the costs of the rebilling.  Additional delinquent notices
including their respective charges shall be sent at 8 and 12 weeks after the
billing date.  Should a bill still be delinquent after 120 days, the city
may elect to take the following actions.



      (1)   Tax.  Whenever waste water service charge bills become
delinquent, the amount due shall be certified to the City Auditor for
inclusion with the following year's tax statement.



      (2)   Lien.  Whenever waste water treatment bills become
delinquent, the same shall become and constitute a lien upon the real estate
to which the sewer service is supplied.  Statements rendered for the charge
shall be deemed notice to all parties, whether or not the person charged with
the statement is the owner of the property served.  The claim for lien shall
be made in the form of a sworn statement setting forth:



         (a)   A description of the real estate, sufficient for
the identification of the real estate, upon or for which the sewage service
was supplied;



         (b)   The amount of money due for the sewage service; and



         (c)   The date or dates when the amount or amounts
became delinquent.  If all amounts shown due remain unpaid after recording
as provided by state statutes, the city may foreclose the lien in the same
manner and with the same effect as in the foreclosure of mortgages on real
estate.



      (3)   Civil action.



         (a)   In the alternative of levying a lien, the city
may, at its discretion, file suit in a civil action to collect the amounts as
are delinquent and due against the occupant or user of the real estate and
shall collect, as well, all attorney's fees incurred by the city in filing
the civil action.



         (b)   The attorney's fees shall be fixed by order of the
court.



   (B)   Delinquent account penalties.  In addition to all penalties
and costs attributable and chargeable to recording notices of the lien or
filing a civil action, the owner or user of the real estate being served by
the treatment works shall be liable for interest upon all unpaid balances at
the rate of 12% per annum.



   (C)   Revocation.  The city reserves the right to revoke discharge
permits and to disconnect service to any user whenever waste water treatment
becomes delinquent.



(1997 Code, § 710.07)



§ 51.049  COMMUNITY SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM SERVICE FUND.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The city, by §§ 51.045et seq., establishes a "Sewer
Service Fund" as an income fund to receive all revenues generated by the
sewer service charge system, and all other income dedicated to the operation,
maintenance, replacement, and construction of the waste water treatment
works, including taxes, special charges, fees, and assessments intended to
retire construction debt.



      (2)   The city also establishes the following accounts as
income and expenditure accounts within the Sewer Service Fund:



         (a)   Operation and Maintenance Account;



         (b)   Equipment Replacement Account; and



         (c)   Debt Retirement Account.



   (B)   Management of funds.



      (1)   All revenue generated by the sewer service charge
system, and all other income pertinent to the treatment system, including
taxes and special assessments dedicated to retire construction debt, shall be
held by the Clerk separate and apart from all other funds of the city.



      (2)   Funds received by the Sewer Service Fund shall be
transferred to the Operation and Maintenance Account, the Equipment
Replacement Account, and the Debt Retirement Account in accordance with state
and federal regulations and the provisions of §§ 51.045et seq.



   (C)   Replacement.  Revenue generated by the sewer service charge
system sufficient to ensure adequate replacement throughout the design of
useful life, whichever is longer, of the waste water facility shall be held
separate and apart in the Equipment Replacement Account and dedicated to
effecting replacement costs.  Interest income generated by the Equipment
Replacement Account shall remain in the Equipment Replacement Account.



   (D)   Operation and maintenance.  Revenue generated by the sewer
service charge system sufficient for operation and maintenance shall be held
separate and apart in the Operation and Maintenance Account.



(1997 Code, § 710.08)



ALTERNATIVE WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS; WETLAND TREATMENT SYSTEMS



§ 51.065  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Health, safety, and welfare.  The purpose of §§ 51.065et
seq. is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
community, present and future.



   (B)   Contamination of surface/ground water.  The purpose of §§
51.065et seq. is to regulate the location, design, installation, use, and
maintenance of alternative waste disposal systems so as to prevent the
contamination of the surface and ground water within the community.



   (C)   Contamination of private water supply wells.  The intent of
§§ 51.065et seq. is to protect the individual water supply wells of the
community from contamination by inadequate, improperly designed, located,
installed, or maintained individual and community sewage treatment systems.



   (D)   Open space development.  The intent of §§ 51.065et seq. is
to allow subsurface flow "wetland treatment" systems to be an allowed
alternative system within cluster developments.



(1997 Code, § 720.02)



§ 51.066  RULES.



   (A)   Specifications which apply.  Lake Elmo Municipal Code §§
51.001et seq. shall apply, except as provided below:  § 51.003(B)(1). 
Each dwelling shall have its own sewage tank and a stilling tank shall be
installed before the first cell.



   (B)   Location of systems.



      (1)   Setbacks.



         (a)   All components of a wetland treatment system
within a new residential or commercial development, including stilling tanks,
pump stations, and treatment cells, shall be located a minimum of 100 feet
from any property line, and 200 feet from any existing or proposed home. 
Stilling tanks may however be located 50 feet from a street right-of-way.



         (b)   Wetland treatment systems used to replace failed
septic systems shall have setbacks considered reasonable for the site and the
neighboring properties.



      (2)   Ground water.  Treatment cells shall have a minimum of
3 feet between the bottom of the cell and the ground water table.  Drain
tile or French drains shall not be used to artificially lower the ground
water table.



   (C)   System design.



      (1)   Designer.  Wetland treatment systems shall be designed
by a registered professional engineer with experience and specific training
in the design of these types of systems.



      (2)   Design flow.  Wetland treatment systems shall be sized
based on a minimum of 50 gallons per day per person.



      (3)   Level of treatment.



         (a)   Wetland treatment systems shall be designed to
remove total suspended solids (T.S.S.), phosphorous (P.), total nitrogen
(T.N.), and fecal coliforms (F.C.), and reduce the 5-day carbonaceous
biochemical oxygen demand (C.B.O.D.5).  Calculations showing the design
level of treatment shall be submitted.



         (b)   Prior to discharge into the infiltration cell, the
following discharge limits shall be met:



            1.   C.B.O.D.5 - 50 mg/l;



            2.   T.S.S. - 20 mg/l;



            3.   T.N. - 15 mg/l;



            4.   N.H.4 - 10 mg/l;



            5.   T.P. - 5 mg/l; and



            6.   F.C. - 200 mg/l.



         (c)   One foot below the infiltration cell, the
following discharge limits shall be met:



            1.   C.B.O.D.5 - 0 mg/l;



            2.   T.S.S. - 0 mg/l;



            3.   T.N. - 5 mg/l;



            4.   N.H.4 - 1 mg/l;



            5.   T.P. - 1 mg/l; and



            6.   F.C. - 10 mg/l.



      (4)   Inspection points.  Inspection and monitoring ports
shall be located within the system so that the water level can be determined,
and a water sample can be easily taken in each treatment cell, and 1 foot
below the infiltration cell.



      (5)   Operating plan.  An operating plan shall be developed
by the designer.  This plan shall include standard operating procedures and
maintenance of the system.



      (6)   Monitoring plan.



         (a)   Systems designed for greater than 1,500 gallons
per day shall have a monitoring plan developed by the designer.  It shall
include monitoring of sludge and scum levels in the septic tanks and pumping
stations, effluent flow into the system.  Water quality exiting the first
treatment cell shall be monitored to ensure that it meets the design level of
treatment.  Monitoring 1 foot below the second treatment cell shall be done
to ensure that it meets the design level of treatment.  Monitoring shall be
conducted annually.



         (b)   The city shall be sent a copy of all test results.



      (7)   Mitigation plan.  The system designer shall develop a
plan to follow in case expansion or abandonment of the system is necessary.



      (8)   City review.  The city shall review and approve all
parts of the system design and associated plans prior to any construction
taking place.  Once approval of the system is given, a permit shall be
issued by the city.



   (D)   Construction.



      (1)   Sanitary sewers.  All sanitary sewers shall be
constructed and tested in accordance with the City Engineers Association of
Minnesota Standards for Utility Construction.



      (2)   Treatment cells; testing.



         (a)   Liners of treatment cells shall be visually
inspected for tears, holes, or poor seams prior to placing rock.  A leak
test shall be performed after the rock is in placed.  The liner shall be
uncovered, repaired, and the test rerun if any leaks show up during this
testing.



         (b)   A city representative shall be present for all
treatment cell testing.



      (3)   Turf establishment; plant growth.



         (a)   The designer shall prepare a vegetation plan to
establish a wetland community over the treatment cells.



         (b)   Prior to final acceptance, wetland plants shall
display vigorous growth, and turf shall be established outside of the
treatment cell area.



         (c)   No erosion shall be present on the site.



      (4)   Certification.  The system designer shall certify in
writing to the city that the treatment system has been constructed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and that all test
requirements have been met.  This certification must be received before
start-up of the system.



(1997 Code, § 720.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 52:  SOLID WASTE



Section




Garbage, Refuse, Waste Materials, and Recycling




   52.01   Purpose



   52.02   State rules adopted



   52.03   Metropolitan Council Plan adopted



   52.04   Conflict



   52.05   Definitions



   52.06   Required collection of mixed municipal solid waste



   52.07   Disposal requirements



   52.08   Container required and placement



   52.09   License to collect required; exception



   52.10   Hauler equipment requirement



   52.11   Types of licenses



   52.12   Condition of a license



   52.13   Licensing procedure



   52.14   Insurance certificate



   52.15   Cash deposit or surety bond required of license



   52.16   License fee; expiration; transferability



   52.17   License revocation or suspension



   52.18   Payment of charges; notice of discontinuance of service



   52.19   Frequency of collections



   52.20   Burying and burning



   52.21   Rules and regulations




Composting




   52.40   Composting




Solid Waste Abatement/Recycling




   52.55   Purpose



   52.56   Definitions



   52.57   Curbside recycling



   52.58   Collection



   52.59   Participation



   52.60   Materials to be picked up at curbside



   52.61   Ownership



   52.62   Scavenging



   52.63   Land disposal of yard waste



   52.64   Ownership of compost



   52.65   City’s commitment to solid waste abatement




Open Fires Prohibited




   52.75   Adoption by reference



   52.76   Permits



Cross-reference:



   Waste Water Treatment Systems, see Ch. 51



   Water, see Ch. 50



GARBAGE, REFUSE, WASTE MATERIALS, AND RECYCLING



§ 52.01  PURPOSE.



   The general purpose of §§ 52.01et seq. is for the following:



   (A)   To protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
and general welfare of the residents of the city;



   (B)   To establish powers, duties, rules, regulations, and standards
for the removal of solid waste from the city;



   (C)   To promote a program to reduce waste materials purchased and
promote yard waste reduction through separation of recyclables, yard and
garden wastes; and encourages the purchasing of products that contain
recycled or recyclable materials;



   (D)   To set minimum standards and requirements established by rules
of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency;



   (E)   To adopt the plans, policies, rules, standards, and
requirements of the Metropolitan Council and Washington County regarding
solid waste; and



   (F)   To provide for the administration of §§ 52.01et seq.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.02  STATE RULES ADOPTED.



   Solid Waste Rules 7035 of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, as
they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference as
part of §§ 52.01et seq., as they apply to cities.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.03  METROPOLITAN COUNCIL PLAN ADOPTED.



   The Solid Waste Management Development Guide/Policy Plan of the
Metropolitan Council of the Twin Cities Area, adopted March 1985, Publication
No. 12-85-059, is hereby adopted by reference as part of §§ 52.01et seq.,
as they apply to cities.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.04  CONFLICT.



   In case of conflict between §§ 52.01et seq. and the Minn. Rules 7035,
as it may be amended from time to time, or the Metropolitan Council Plan, the
wording and meaning of the Minn. Rules 7035, as it may be amended from time
to time, or the Metropolitan Council Plan shall prevail.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Unless specifically defined in §§ 52.01et seq., common
definitions, words, and phrases used herein shall be interpreted so as to
give them the same meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code.



   (B)   Definitions are found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.06  REQUIRED COLLECTION OF MIXED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.



   (A)   Every residential dwelling, multiple dwelling, and
commercial/industrial establishment must be under a contract for at least
weekly collection of mixed municipal solid waste.



   (B)   A residential dwelling, multiple dwelling, or
commercial/industrial establishment may apply to the Council or its designee
for an exemption from this requirement if the applicant presents a plan,
acceptable to the Council or its designee, to ensure an environmentally sound
alternative.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.07  DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
fail to dispose of garbage, refuse, and waste materials in a sanitary manner
which may be or may accumulate upon property owned or occupied at least as
often as hereinafter provided.  All garbage and refuse shall be stored out
of sight of neighbors and not visible from the street, except with permission
from the Building Inspector and then not longer than 72 hours.



   (B)   Targeted recyclables shall be source separated, placed in
separate containers, and set out with the regular pick-up of
garbage/refuse.  Recycling shall be voluntary at this time but the
separation of targeted recyclables from the refuse is encouraged.  The
hauler shall not landfill or incinerate any targeted recyclable materials
collected, not sell, trade, or give materials to any person or business for
the purpose of landfilling or incinerating the materials without the prior
written consent of the city.



   (C)   Yard waste shall be separated from other refuse.



   (D)   Contractor's waste building materials, which accumulate on
construction sites, must be contained within an enclosure to prevent matter
from escaping.  Enclosures can be a fenced-in area or a dumpster.  The
capacity of the enclosure must be sufficient for the project or planned
removal (pick-ups) must be scheduled.  Waste materials cannot be stored in
the structure.  Failure to contain and control waste building materials will
result in a stop work order.



   (E)   Disposing of garbage, refuse, targeted recyclables, waste
materials, or yard waste in an unregulated manner on any street, alley,
drive, park, playground, or other public place or on any occupied or vacant
privately owned lot shall constitute a violation of §§ 52.025 et seq.,
whether the material is discarded by the individual upon whose premises the
material originates or whether it is discarded by some other person or
collector, licensed or unlicensed.



   (F)   Any person, firm, business, or corporation that picks up
garbage, refuse, waste materials for the City of Lake Elmo, including, but
not limited to, its city office, city parks, City Maintenance Department, or
City Fire Department must dispose of garbage, refuse, or waste materials at
the Resource Recovery Facility in Newport, Minnesota.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.08  CONTAINER REQUIRED AND PLACEMENT.



   (A)   Every person, firm, or corporation who owns or occupies any
residential dwelling, boarding house, multiple dwelling, restaurant, place of
business, or other establishment where garbage is accumulated, who does not
otherwise dispose of the garbage in a sanitary manner, shall provide 1 or
more fly-tight containers sufficient to receive all garbage and other refuse
which may accumulate between the time for collection hereinafter set forth. 
Each can shall have an enclosed pail with handles, have a tightfitting cover,
and be so anchored or fastened that it cannot easily be accidentally tipped
over.



   (B)   The owners, operators, or managers of any multiple dwelling
containing more than 4 rental dwelling units or of any firm or corporation
where garbage or refuse accumulates in excess of 4 30-32 gallon containers
per week may elect to have vat service weekly from a licensed hauler.  The
vats shall be of a minimum capacity of 1 cubic yard and of any approved
sanitary type with the proper attachments for lifting on to licensed trucks.



   (C)   Each person, firm, or corporation, unless supplied by the city
or the hauler, shall provide 1 or more containers sufficient to retain all
targeted recyclables, which may accumulate between the times for collection
hereinafter, set forth.  The container shall be constructed so the contents
can be lifted by suitable handles rectangular in shape and have a capacity of
not to exceed 14 gallons for residential dwelling units.



   (D)   All garbage and refuse containers shall be placed as follows
in residential areas.



      (1)   Except for collection day, all containers shall be
located behind the front setback line of the dwelling or in the garage or
screened from view from the street and at least 10 feet from any abutting
dwelling.



      (2)   On collection day, except where vat or in-yard service
is required, containers shall be placed at the curb, in a location easily
accessible for motor vehicle pick-up.  Containers must be placed for pick-up
before 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection to ensure service.  The hauler
shall complete pick-ups by 7:00 p.m., unless emergency permission is granted
by the City Administrator, and all containers must be removed no later than
8:00 p.m. on collection day.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.09  LICENSE TO COLLECT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation, except city employees, shall
collect garbage, refuse, recyclables, or waste materials belonging to another
in the city without a license from the city.



   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation, except city employees, shall
scavenge, sort through, or in any way handle the garbage, refuse,
recyclables, or waste materials of another person, firm, or corporation
without a license from the city or permission from the owner thereof. 
Garbage, refuse, recyclables, and waste materials shall be considered the
property of the generator until picked up by a hauler.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.10  HAULER EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENT.



   Hauler licenses shall be granted only upon the condition that the
licensee have watertight packer-type vehicles or.  For recycling, haulers
must have appropriate container vehicles in good condition to prevent loss in
transit of liquid or solid cargo.  All vehicles used by haulers must be kept
clean and as free from offensive odors as much as possible.  They shall not
be allowed to stand in any street longer than reasonably necessary to collect
garbage, refuse, and yard waste materials or recyclables.  They shall not be
parked any place or in any manner that constitutes a traffic hazard of
nuisance.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.11  TYPES OF LICENSES.



   (A)   There shall be 2 license categories defined by the type of
account served.



      (1)   Commercial refuse/recycling residential dwelling.  A
commercial refuse/recycling license is required for any hauler that serves
commercial establishment(s) as defined in § 11.01.



      (2)   Residential refuse/recycling.  A residential
refuse/recycling license is required for any hauler that serves residential
dwelling(s) as defined in § 11.01.



   (B)   Residential refuse/recycling and commercial refuse/recycling
licensees shall provide refuse pickup and recycling on the same day.



   (C)   Every licensed hauler shall offer collection and disposal of
yard waste, unless otherwise provided by Council action.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.12  CONDITION OF A LICENSE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a licensed hauler to operate on
residential streets in the city on any day, except for regularly scheduled
collections, to collect a missed pick-up, a special pick-up or when an
observed holiday falls within that week.



   (B)   The Council, in the interest of maintaining healthful and
sanitary conditions in the city, hereby reserves the right to limit the
number of licenses issued within the city.



   (C)   Each applicant shall file with the City Administrator, before
a license is issued or renewed, a schedule of proposed rates to be charged
during the licensed period for which the application is made.



   (D)   Every licensee shall notify customers 30 days n advance of any
rate increase and provide written notification of any rate increase to the
City Administrator 15 days prior to notification of the customer of the
increases.



   (E)   Residential refuse/recycling licenses rates shall include a
minimum of 2 levels of regular service, priced on the basis of volume
beginning at a volume of 32 gallons or less and in increments of 32 gallons
or less.  Residential refuse/recycling licenses shall also include a cost
for curbside recycling.



   (F)   Commercial refuse/recycling licenses rates shall also include
a cost for curbside recycling.



   (G)   No hauler shall exceed weight limits established by the city.



   (H)   No hauler shall operate in a residential district after 7:00
p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. on any day, and no hauler shall operate in a
residential district on Sunday.



   (I)   Each vehicle for which a hauler's license is issued shall
exhibit the license in a prominent position on the vehicle.



   (J)   All residential refuse/recycling and commercial
refuse/recycling license holders shall report to the city on a form provided
for the purposes, the recycling yard waste abated from the landfills and
other recycling information requested.  The reports shall be submitted
quarterly and submitted to the city on or by January 10, April 10, July 10,
in October 10.  The penalty for not submitting the reports shall be $500 for
the first offense, $500 plus an appearance before the City Council for the
second offense, and automatic license revocation for the third offense.



   (K)   All licensee employees shall report to the licensees any
violations of §§ 52.01et seq. they observe in the performance of their work
and the licensees shall report all the violations to the city's Code
Enforcement Officer.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.13  LICENSING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person desiring a hauler license shall make application
for the same to the City Administrator upon a form prescribed by the
Council.  The application shall at a minimum set forth the name and address
of the applicant, a list of the equipment which the hauler proposes to use in
the collection, the portion of the city in which collections are to be made,
and the other information as the city may require.  The application shall be
submitted to the City Administrator for investigation and report.



   (B)   (1)   The City Administrator shall review the application
and make a recommendation for approval/denial to the City Council.



      (2)   The City Council, after any additional investigation it
deems necessary, shall approve or deny the application.



   (C)   To control the number of heavy trucks that use city streets,
to reduce the wear of those streets, to reduce air and noise pollution, and
to reduce the traffic hazard in residential neighborhoods where children
play, the city shall not issue more than 10 licenses for residential
refuse/recycling, as defined in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.14  INSURANCE CERTIFICATE.



   Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the
City Administrator an executed indemnification in the form provided by the
City Administrator and proof of insurance as filed with Washington County, in
an amount and in the form as shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.15  CASH DEPOSIT OR SURETY BOND REQUIRED OF LICENSE.



   The applicant shall deposit with the City Administrator the sum of
$3,000 or, in the alternative, shall file with the City Administrator a
surety bond in an amount of $3,000.  The condition of the bond shall bind
the holder of the license to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter and the other items as maybe imposed by the Council.  The Council
based on a review and favorable recommendation of the City Attorney shall
approve the bond.  Where a cash deposit is used, all or any part thereof may
be subject to forfeiture in case of the violation of any provisions of §§
52.01et seq.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.16  LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION; TRANSFERABILITY.



   (A)   The fees for a license required by §§ 52.01et seq. shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   Every license shall expire on December 31 next after its
issuance.



   (C)   The fee for part of a year shall be prorated.



   (D)   No license shall be issued for more than 1 year.



   (E)   The license shall not be transferable from 1 person to another.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.17  LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   (1)   Every license required by §§ 52.01et seq. may be
revoked, suspended, or a civil fine of not more than $2,500 imposed by the
Council for a violation of any law or regulation pertaining to solid waste
adopted by the city, county, or state.



      (2)   If the county revokes or suspends any hailer's license,
the city license, in case of revocation, shall be automatically terminated
without any further action of the city, or, in case of suspension, the city
license shall also be automatically suspended for the same length of time,
without further actions of the city.



   (B)   No suspension or revocation takes effect until the licensee
has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing under M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69
of the Administrative Procedure Act, as they may be amended from time to time.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.18  PAYMENT OF CHARGES; NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   The expense of collection shall be paid to the licensed hauler at
intervals as may be determined by the licensed hauler.  The licensed hauler
shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer and the City Administrator of the
discontinuance of service to any premises with a 5-day notice prior to
service being discontinued, if possible, but no later than the date service
is actually discontinued.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



§ 52.19  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTIONS.



   Each licensed hauler shall make collections of garbage and refuse, and
recyclables at least weekly, or more often as sanitary conditions warrant as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. Single-sort residential recycling
shall be collected at least bi-weekly.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999; Am. Ord. 97-128,
passed 5-18-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.20  BURYING AND BURNING.



   No person shall bury any garbage within the city, no person shall bum
garbage except in an incinerator located within a residence or other
building, and that conforms to the requirements of the State of Minnesota.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 52.21  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The City Council, by resolution, shall have the authority to make rules
and regulations concerning type and location of waste containers, the
collection of yard and garden wastes and recyclables, license applications
and the information required, and any other matter concerning solid waste
management which is not in conflict with this chapter.



(1997 Code, § 800.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999)



COMPOSTING



§ 52.40  COMPOSTING.



   All yard waste collected or concentrated by any individual shall be
disposed at a licensed compost site or on site providing the following
compliance with the following regulations are complied with.



   (A)   Location of compost. The compost shall be located in the rear
yard of the property, be at least 5 feet from lot lines, outside any drainage
easement, and be placed no closer than 50 feet to any adjacent habitable
building, other than the residents own home.



   (B)   Prohibited ingredients. None of the following materials shall
be placed on the property for composting:  meat, bones, fat oils, dairy
products, whole branches or logs, plastics, synthetic fibers, human or pet
wastes, or diseased plants.



   (C)   Proper maintenance required.



      (1)   Compost shall be properly managed to minimize odor
generation and promote effective decomposition of the material.



      (2)   The operation of composting in a manner that results in
objectionable odors and/or the placing of prohibited materials for composting
to create a health hazard is considered a public nuisance.



(1997 Code, § 800.03)  (Am. Ord. 97-41, passed 9-21-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99



SOLID WASTE ABATEMENT/RECYCLING



§ 52.55  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of the policies set forth within §§ 52.55et seq.
is to reduce the amount of solid waste sent to landfills through source
separation of recyclable items.



   (B)   Sections 52.55et seq. is intended to serve several purposes:



      (1)   To raise the public's awareness of recycling and to make
recycling services available to city residents;



      (2)   To encourage recycling activity within the city; and



      (3)   To be prepared for a seemingly inevitable mandatory
source separation ordinance which may occur at the discretion of the city,
the county, and/or the state.



(1997 Code, § 805.01)



§ 52.56  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined §§ 52.55et seq., common definitions,
words, or phrases used in §§ 52.55 et seq. shall be interpreted so as to
give them the same meaning as they have in common usage throughout this
code.  Definitions are found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 805.02)



§ 52.57  CURBSIDE RECYCLING.



   (A)   The city has initiated a program in which every resident
within the city is afforded the opportunity to voluntarily separate
recyclable solid waste.



   (B)   The city will provide curbside pickup of recyclables based on
the following conditions.



(1997 Code, § 805.03)



§ 52.58  COLLECTION.



   All collection of recyclables shall be at curbside on the boulevard, in
a clearly identifiable manner to be designated by the city staff.



(1997 Code, § 805.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.59  PARTICIPATION.



   The initial curbside collection of recyclables shall be voluntary. 
This program may be supported by mandatory source separation at the
discretion of the city, the county, or the state, pending further analysis.



(1997 Code, § 805.05)



§ 52.60  MATERIALS TO BE PICKED UP AT CURBSIDE.



   (A)   Items to be collected and instructions for preparation shall
be uniform throughout the city.



   (B)   Material to be collected shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:



      (1)   Newspapers;



      (2)   Corrugated cardboard;



      (3)   Glass (clear, green, and brown);



      (4)   Aluminum and bi-metal cans;



      (5)   Batteries;



      (6)   Special items; and



      (7)   Tires will be picked up with recyclables at a cost
determined by the city and the contracted recycler.



(1997 Code, § 805.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.61  OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Ownership of recyclable materials set out for the purpose of
participating in curbside recycling programs shall remain that of the person
or household from which the materials originated until collected by
authorized collector.



   (B)   Upon removal by the city or its designated agents or
contractors from a designated collection point, ownership of properly
prepared and stored recyclable materials intended for a city authorized
collection program shall be vested in the authorized collector.



   (C)   Materials not prepared, cleaned, or stored according to city
specifications shall remain the responsibility and property of the
individuals or household from which the materials originated.



   (D)   Nothing in §§ 52.55et seq. shall abridge the right of any
individual or household to give or sell their recyclable materials to any
recyclable material program.



(1997 Code, § 805.07)



§ 52.62  SCAVENGING.



   (A)   Unauthorized collection or "scavenging" may reduce the volumes
of material collected as part of a designated program and thereby threaten
the economic viability of the authorized program.  Scavenging may also cause
confusion among participating residents and thereby disrupt the publicity and
educational processes of an authorized program.



   (B)   To ensure that a designated recycling program will be
implemented in an orderly fashion and to avoid adverse effects on the public
health, welfare, safety, and environment, it shall be unlawful for any person
who is not authorized by the city to take or collect recyclable material set
out for authorized collection programs within the city.



(1997 Code, § 805.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.63  LAND DISPOSAL OF YARD WASTE.



   (A)   The Minnesota Waste Management Act of 1980 prohibits the
deposit of yard waste:



      (1)   In mixed municipal solid waste;



      (2)   In a disposal facility; and/or



      (3)   In a resource recovery facility except for the purposes
of composting or co-composting.



   (B)   In compliance with this state law, the city shall prohibit the
deposit of yard waste:



      (1)   In mixed municipal solid waste;



      (2)   In a disposal facility; and/or



      (3)   In a resource recovery facility except for the purposes
of composting or cocomposting.



   (C)   The city will provide to its residents a place at which
uncontaminated leaves and grass clippings may be deposited.  This site, to
be known as "the Lake Elmo Compost Site," will be open to the residents of
the city on a regularly scheduled basis.



   (D)   Residents who use the compost site for the deposit of
uncontaminated leaves and grass clippings shall remove from the site any bags
or containers in which yard waste was brought to the site.



(1997 Code, § 805.09)



§ 52.64  OWNERSHIP OF COMPOST.



   (A)   The uncontaminated leaves and grass clippings deposited at the
city compost site shall remain the property of the city.  However, it is the
intent of the city to make available to the general residential public the
finished compost, on a first come, first serve basis.



   (B)   No motorized loading equipment, other than that used by the
city, is allowed on the premises at any time for the purpose of obtaining
finished compost without the approval of the city.



(1997 Code, § 805.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.65  CITY'S COMMITMENT TO SOLID WASTE ABATEMENT.



   The city is firmly dedicated to the education of the public on the
importance of natural resources protection and preservation, and the many
environmentally and socially responsible ways in which the resources should
be used and enjoyed.



(1997 Code, § 805.11)



OPEN FIRES PROHIBITED



§ 52.75  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The ambient air quality standards, air pollution control regulations of
the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (M.P.C.A.), and the Open Burning
Restrictions and Permitting Regulations of the Department of Natural
Resources (D.N.R.) are adopted by reference, and have the same force and
effect as if they were reproduced in their entirety.



(1997 Code, § 810.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-80, passed 5-5-2001)



§ 52.76  PERMITS.



   Open fires are prohibited provided thqat a recreational fire is allowed
upon issuance of a permit by the Lake Elmo Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s
designee.



(1997 Code, § 810.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-80, passed 5-5-2001; Am. Ord. 97-116,
passed 4-1-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 53:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY



Section



   53.01   General operation



   53.02   Surface water management utility equations



   53.03   Surface water management fee



   53.04   Credits



   53.05   Exemptions



   53.06   Statement of surface water management charges



   53.07   Appeal of fee



   53.08   Delinquent payments



   53.09   Annual certification of delinquent accounts



§ 53.01  GENERAL OPERATION.



   (A)   The municipal surface water system shall be operated as a
public utility (hereinafter called the surface water management utility),
pursuant to M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from time to time, from
which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes.



   (B)   In general, revenue from the surface water utility shall be
used for preparation of a Surface Water Management Plan, maintenance of
existing ditches, culverts, pond, and storm sewers, capital improvement in
developed areas, equipment, planning, inventories, and water quality
improvements, including weed control.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 53.02  SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY EQUATIONS.



   The utility charge (UC) shall be reviewed and determined annually by
the City Council. The utility equation for various land uses to determine the
surface water management fees are assigned as follows.



 

Property Class Code
 
Current Land Use
 
Utility Factor
(multiplied by the utility charge (UC)




151-208,402
 
Residential
 
1.0 * UC per Lot


101-111, 401
 
Agricultural
 
3.0 * UC ÷ 40 * Total Acres


210
 
Manufactured Home Park
 
0.52 * UC per Acre


230, 231, 233-241
 
Commercial/Industrial
 
3.08 * UC per Acre


250-252
 
Vacant Land
 
0.15 * UC per Acre


232
 
Golf/Park
 
0.35 * UC per Acre


900-999
 
School/Church
 
1.12 * UC per Acre


-
 
Conditional Use Permit
 
Site Specific




 



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 53.03  SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT FEE.



   Surface water management fees shall be established for a period of time
as set by City Council resolution.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 53.04  CREDITS.



   Surface water management fee adjustment credits.



   (A)   The City Council, upon report and recommendation of the City
Administrator, Finance Director and Public Works Director, shall apply a
credit to a property owner’s surface water management fee provided the
property owner has contributed to the management of surface water through
intentional acts of retaining or re-using surface water to have a minimal
impact on the municipal surface water management system or surface waters of
the State of Minnesota. The Council may apply a 25% to 75% credit based on
the property owner’s employment of surface water retention practices in
accordance with § 150.277. These practices include the installation of:



      (1)   Rain barrel;



      (2)   Rain garden;



      (3)   Retention pond;



      (4)   Swales, ditches or man-made watercourses;



      (5)   Riparian area plantings;



      (6)   Other practices that may be deemed as intentional
detention of surface water run-off.



   (B)   The City Council, may grant a one-time or ongoing credit based
the effectiveness of the surface water retention as it relates to the
management of the municipal surface water management system as a whole. For
practices, such as rain gardens constructed in the adjacent right-of-way, the
City Council may grant an ongoing credit in exchange for the adjacent
property owner’s participation in the maintenance of the surface water
retention device. This credit will not exceed 50% of the annual surface water
management fee.



   (C)   The City Council, upon the report and recommendation of the
City Administrator and Finance Director, may apply a financial hardship
credit of no greater than 75% based on a review of the property owner’s
ability to pay.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011; Am. Ord.
12-057, passed 5-15-2012)



§ 53.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following land uses are exempt from the surface water management
fee:



   (A)   Public right-of-way;



   (B)   Parks;



   (C)   Lakes; and



   (D)   Railroad property.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 53.06  STATEMENT OF SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT CHARGES.



   Statements for the preceding yearly surface water management service
shall be mailed to each customer on or before March 5.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 53.07  APPEAL OF FEE.



   (A)   If a property owner or person responsible for paying the
surface water management fee believes that a particular assigned fee is
incorrect, the person may request that the fee be recomputed.



   (B)   Appeals will be heard once a year, in a manner determined by
the Council in accordance with the schedule established for credit
applications, in established city policy.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 53.08  DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.



   A penalty equal to $5 or 10% of the amount due, whichever is greater,
shall be added to accounts not paid in full on or before May 1.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



§ 53.09  ANNUAL CERTIFICATION OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   Each year the city staff shall prepare a list of delinquent
surface water management service charge accounts, including accrued penalties
thereon, in the form of an assessment roll.



   (B)   On or before October 1 of each year, the City Council shall
review the delinquent surface water management service charge assessment roll
and adopt an appropriate resolution directing that the assessment roll be
certified to the County Auditor as a lien against the premises served and
directing that the County Auditor collect the assessment as part of the
ensuing year’s tax levy.



(Ord. 97-122, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-041, passed 4-5-2011)



CHAPTER 54:  ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION



Section



   54.01   Establishment



   54.02   Purpose



   54.03   Composition; appointment and terms of members



   54.04   Residency requirement



   54.05   Organization



   54.06   Commission meetings and records



   54.07   Commissioner to attend City Council meetings



   54.08   Duties



   54.09   Commission expenditures



   54.10   Removal of Commission members for nonattendance



§ 54.01  ESTABLISHMENT.



   An Environmental Commission for the city is hereby established.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.02  PURPOSE.



   The general purpose of the Commission is to assist the City Council in
establishing plans, policies, and procedures in matters affecting the
environment.  This will include, but not be limited to:  the orderly
disposal of solid waste, recycling, composting, storm water runoff, water
quality improvements, wetland conservation and management, air quality,
ground water (drinking), tree preservation, and quality of the environment
and natural resources.  Additionally, the Commission may assist in
educational tasks and other environmental interests and concerns that Council
deems appropriate.  All conclusions reached by the Commission shall serve as
recommendations and powers of execution shall be vested in the Council.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.03  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Environmental Commission shall consist of 5 regular
members, appointed by the Council for 3-year terms.  The initial term for
appointments to the Commission shall be staggered so that only 1 new
appointment or re-appointment need to be made in any 1 year.  Commission
members must be voting age residents of the city.  Vacancies during a term
due to resignation or removal from the Commission shall be filled by a
Council appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term.  Resignation of
Environmental Management Commission members shall be submitted in writing to
the Council.  A majority of the serving members shall constitute a quorum.



   (B)   At their discretion, the Council may appoint up to 2 ex
officio members and up to 2 student representatives to serve on the
Commission.  The individuals shall serve in an advisory role without voting
privileges and do not need to meet the age or residency requirements for a
Commissioner.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.04  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.



   No person appointed to represent the residents shall continue to serve
on the Commission once that member has taken residence outside of the
corporate limits of the city.  A resignation shall be submitted to the
Council in this instance.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.05  ORGANIZATION.



   Officers of the Environmental Commission shall be the Chair and
Vice-Chair.  These officers shall be elected annually by the members of the
Commission at the first meeting in January.  The Environmental Management
Commission may elect the other officers as may be necessary and may give the
Chair the authority to appoint and change committees if the appointments
might become necessary.  The Environmental Management Commission shall
provide for the date, time, and location for meeting.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.06  COMMISSION MEETINGS AND RECORDS.



   The Environmental Commission shall hold regular meetings as established
by the Commission and approved by the Council.  These meetings shall be open
to the public.  The Environmental Management Commission shall submit to the
Council written minutes of its meetings and actions.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.07  COMMISSIONER TO ATTEND CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The Environmental Commission shall have 1 or more of its members
present at all pertinent Council meetings.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.08  DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Environmental Commission:



   (A)   To assist the Council in developing and reviewing policies,
plans, reports, regulations, and other matters affecting solid waste
disposal, recycling, composting, storm water runoff, water quality
improvements, or other areas affecting the environment that may be assigned
by the Council;



   (B)   To advise the Council and residents on solid waste disposal,
recycling, composting, storm water runoff, water quality improvements, or
other issues affecting the environment;



   (C)   To assist in the collection of background data to determine
goals, policies, and programs that will maintain or improve the environment
in the city;



   (D)   To assist in preparing public education materials and methods
on solid waste disposal, recycling, composting, storm water runoff, water
quality improvements, and other issues affecting the environment;



   (E)   To recommend additional methods, policies, or procedures that
will reduce the solid waste stream, expand recycling, and/or improve the
orderly disposal of solid waste;



   (F)   To hold public meetings; and



   (G)   To cooperate with other agencies, commissions, and volunteer
organizations to achieve common goals related to solid waste and the
environment.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.09  COMMISSION EXPENDITURES.



   The expenditures of the Environmental Commission shall be within
amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Council, provided, however, that
all expenditures are duly authorized through normal administrative purchasing
policies.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



§ 54.10  REMOVAL OF COMMISSION MEMBERS FOR NONATTENDANCE.



   Given that the Council expects diligence in attendance by the members
of the Environmental Management Commission at Commission meetings, excessive
absences will be considered as grounds for removal from the Commission. 
Excessive absences may be considered as absence from more than 1/3 of the
meetings, or absence from 3 or more consecutive meetings.



(Ord. 97-97, passed 1-15-2002)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES



   71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



   72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



   73.   PARKING SCHEDULES



   74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES



Section



   70.01   Incorporation by reference



   70.02   Regulations



§ 70.01  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Provisions of M.S. Ch. 84, as amended from time to time, shall be
applicable to the City of Lake Elmo.  In those cases where there is a
conflict between the provisions of M.S. Ch. 84 and this chapter, the more
restrictive regulation shall apply.



(Ord. 97-164, passed 12-20-2006)



§ 70.02  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle on
a public sidewalk or within the unimproved portion of a city street.



   (B)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle on
city-owned property.



   (C)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. provided that all-terrain
vehicles may be used for snow plowing purposes during prohibited hours.



   (D)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle
within 50 feet of a residential dwelling unless such operation occurs on
property owned or occupied by the operator of the snowmobile or all-terrain
vehicle and such operation is for the purpose of accessing a public
right-of-way from private property.



   (E)   No person shall operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle
within 100 feet of any fisherman, pedestrian, skating rink, or sliding area.



(Ord. 97-164, passed 12-20-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section




Highways and Highway Vehicles




   71.01   Adoption of Highway Traffic Regulation Acts



   71.02   Exhibition driving prohibited



HIGHWAYS AND HIGHWAY VEHICLES



§ 71.01  ADOPTION OF HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACTS.



   The regulatory provisions and definitions of M.S. Ch. 169, the Highway
Traffic Regulation Act, and of M.S. Ch. 168B are, by this section, adopted as
the traffic code and parking regulations for the use of highways, streets,
alleys and other portions of the city and are, by this section, incorporated
in and made a part of this code. The parking provisions shall apply to the
parking of trailers as well as vehicles.



(1997 Code, § 1000.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-179, passed 9-19-2006)



§ 71.02  EXHIBITION DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall turn, accelerate, decelerate, or otherwise
operate a motor vehicle within the city in a manner which causes unnecessary
engine noise or backfire, squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying,
throwing of sand or gravel, or in a manner simulating a race.



   (B)   Unreasonable squalling or screeching sounds emitted by tires,
or the unreasonable throwing of sand or gravel by the tires, is prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.



(1997 Code, § 1000.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Generally



   72.02   Temporary parking permit



Cross-reference:



   Parking Schedules, see Ch. 73



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Parking and fire lanes.



      (1)   (a)   The Council, upon report and recommendation of
the Administrator and Fire Chief, may order the establishment of fire lanes
on public or private property in order that the travel of fire equipment may
not be interfered with and that access to fire hydrants or buildings may not
be obstructed.  The fire lanes shall be designated by appropriate signs
indicating "no parking - fire lane" or words of similar import.



         (b)   The city shall erect and maintain the signs on
public property.  The owner of private property shall erect and maintain the
signs on owner's property at owner's expense within 30 days after
notification of the establishment of a fire lane.



      (2)   After appropriate signs have been erected, no person
shall park a vehicle or otherwise occupy or obstruct a fire lane.



   (B)   Parking term.  No person shall park or permit any vehicle to
stand upon any highway, street, alley, or any other public property in the
city for more than 48 consecutive hours.



   (C)   Trailers.  The provisions of this section shall apply to the
parking of trailers as well as vehicles.



(1997 Code, § 1005.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-179, passed 9-19-2006)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 72.02  TEMPORARY PARKING PERMIT.



   (A)   An owner who resides adjacent to a posted "No Parking" zone
may obtain up to 2 temporary parking permits per calendar year for a special
non-business or social event (including, but not limited to, weddings,
birthday parties, family reunions, bar mitzvahs, confirmations, first
communions, fraternal gatherings, holiday gatherings, and the like) by making
application to the City Administrator at least 3 working days before the date
of special event.



   (B)   A temporary parking permit shall allow for parking of
residential passenger vehicles within a “No Parking” zone for a period
not to exceed 24 consecutive hours.



   (C)   The City Administrator shall notify the County Sheriff before
issuing a temporary parking permit and shall arrange to have the posted “No
Parking” Signs covered during the period described in the permit.



(1997 Code, § 1005.05)



CHAPTER 73:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking prohibited



   II.   Parking of trailers



SCHEDULE I.  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No vehicle shall be parked in the following "No Parking" zones, unless
a temporary parking permit has been issued by the City Administrator as
provided in § 72.02.



 


Street

 

Location

 

Sides





—
 
Two signs added 45 feet apart at the asphalt trail into Carriage Station Park
 
—


Eagle Point Boulevard
 
From Inwood Avenue to Hudson Boulevard
 

Both



15th Street N.
 
From Ivy Avenue N. to the east end of the street
 

Both



50th Street
 
From DeMontreville Trail N. to Hill Trail N. in Lanes DeMontreville Country
Club
 

Both



50th Street
 
From State Highway 5 to CSAH 17 (Lake Elmo Avenue)
 

Both



53rd Street N.
 
DeMontreville Highlands, 5th Addition
 

Both



Highlands Trail North
 
From DeMontreville Trail to a distance 100 yards from the intersection with
DeMontreville Trail North on both segments of Highlands Trail N. in
DeMontreville Highlands
 

Both



Hill Trail N.
 
Lanes DeMontreville Country Club
 

Both



Jamaca Avenue North
 
475 feet south of its intersection with Lake Jane Trail
 

Both



Jane Road North
 
Beginning at the south line of PID 10-029-21-24-0003 extending 33 feet
northerly, thereof
 

West



Klondike Ave. N.
 
The south 100 feet to the dead end
 

Both



Lake Jane Trail N.
 
From 250 feet west of Jamaca Avenue N. to Jane Road N.
 

Both



Laverne Ave. N.
 
From Upper 33rd Street to 36th Street and the east side only from 36th Street
N. to State Highway 5
 

Both



Layton Avenue N.
 
From 36th Street N. to State Highway 5
 

West



32nd Street N.
 
From Lampert Ave. N. to Klondike Ave. N.
 

North





 



(1997 Code, § 1005.04)  (Am. Ord. 97-82, passed - -; Am. Ord. 9785, passed
- -; Am. Ord. 97-119, passed 6-17-2003; Am. Ord. 97-181, passed 10-3-2006;
Am. Ord. 08-052, passed 8-9-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE II.  PARKING OF TRAILERS.



   (A)   No trailer shall be parked in the following “No Trailer
Parking” zones unless a temporary parking permit has been issued by the
City Administrator as provided in § 72.02.



 


Lake DeMontreville Public Access




Street

 

Location





53rd Street
 
From Demontreville Trail to the west of the street


DeMontreville Trail
 
From 50th Street to DeMontreville Circle


Highlands Trail
 
From Hilltop Avenue to DeMontreville Trail; and from DeMontreville Trail to
Highland Trail Court


Hytrail
 
From Highlands Trail to 59th Street


50th Street
 
From Hilltop Avenue to the east end of the street



Lake Jane Public Access



Lake Jane Trail
 
From Irvin Court to Tapestry Drive


Jamaca Avenue
 
From Lake Jane Trail to 42nd Street


Jane Road
 
From Lake Jane Trail to Jane Court




 



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of this schedule shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $150 nor more than
$300, plus the cost of prosecution.



(Ord. 97-179, passed 9-19-2006)



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Stop signs



SCHEDULE I.  STOP SIGNS.



 


Stop sign

 

Intersection with

 

Ord. No.

 

Date



Westbound Highlands Trail
 
Hilltop Avenue North
 

97-152

 

3-15-2005



Southwest corner of 47th Street
 
Kimbro Avenue North
 

08-053

 

8-9-2011




 



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   MINING



   91.   FORESTS AND TREES



   92.   ABANDONED PROPERTY



   93.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



   94.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT PERMITS



   95.   ANIMALS



   96.   NUISANCES



   97.   PARKS AND RECREATION



CHAPTER 90:  MINING



Section



   90.01   Purpose



   90.02   Conditional use permit required



   90.03   Termination of permit



   90.04   Application



   90.05   Operating conditions



§ 90.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   For the health, welfare, safety, and optimum land development,
it is necessary to regulate the removal of sand, gravel, rock, soil, and
other natural deposits in the city.



   (B)   Other purposes include the following:



      (1)   To provide for the economical availability of sand,
gravel, rock, soil, and other materials vital to the continued growth of the
city;



      (2)   To establish reasonable and uniform limitations,
safeguards, and controls in the city, for the future production of sand,
gravel, rock, soil, and other natural resources;



      (3)   To control noise, dust, hazards, effect on adjacent
property, and other factors related to the active mining and/or excavating
operation;



      (4)   To provide for control of the extent of excavation
compatible with the surroundings; and for the restoration of the mining area
after termination of the removal operation to make the site compatible with
the surroundings and the comprehensive plan for development of the city; and



      (5)   To control pollution by erosion or sedimentation.



(1997 Code, § 900.01)



§ 90.02  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Conditional use permit required.  It shall be unlawful for
any person, partnership, company, or corporation to engage in mining within
the city or for an owner to permit a person to mine on the owner's property,
without first having obtained a conditional use permit for mining from the
Council.



   (B)   Application and review of conditional use permit.  The
applicant shall submit an application together with the required fees to the
Planning Commission.  Property owners within 350 feet shall be notified by
certified mail 10 days prior to the date the Planning Commission considers
the request.  The Planning Commission shall consider the request at its next
regularly scheduled meeting, but not earlier than 10 days from the date of
submission.  The petitioner or petitioner's representative shall appear
before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the
proposed mining.  The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to
the Council within 60 days after the submission of the application.  The
Council must take action on the application within 60 days of receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.  If it grants the mining permit,
the Council may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the
health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city and to ensure the use
is in harmony with the general purpose of the intent of this section and the
comprehensive plan.  No application for a mining permit shall be resubmitted
within 6 months from the date of denial.



(1997 Code, § 900.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.03  TERMINATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Violations.  The Council may terminate a mining permit for
violation of this chapter or a condition of the permit, or for violation of
other applicable laws.



   (B)   Notice to terminate.  To terminate a permit, the Council
shall give notice of the violation or other cause for the termination along
with an order that the condition be remedied.  If the condition has not been
repaired within 2 weeks, the Council shall hold a hearing to determine
whether the permit should be terminated.



   (C)   Cease operation upon termination.  No mining shall take place
after the permit is terminated pursuant to this section.



(1997 Code, § 900.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.04  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Filing.  The application for the permit required in § 90.02
shall be filed with the Administrator for presentation to the Council.  A
fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Council shall
accompany each application.  Application for renewal permit must be made 45
days prior to the termination of the previous permit.  The application shall
be made in the name(s) of the operator of the mine and the owner of the land
to be mined.



   (B)   Contents.  The application shall contain:



      (1)   The name and address of the operator and owner of the
land;



      (2)   The correct legal description of the property where the
mining shall occur;



      (3)   Names of neighboring landowners within 350 feet;



      (4)   A map of the property where the mining is to occur that
clearly indicates the property lines and the limits of the proposed
excavation.  Topographic data, including contours at vertical intervals of
not more than 5 feet except where the horizontal contour interval is 100 feet
or more, a 2 foot vertical interval shall be shown on this map.  Water
courses, marshes, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and
lines, and other significant features shall also be shown.  1929 seal level
datum shall be used for all topographic mapping where feasible;



      (5)   The purpose of the removal, storage, or excavation;



      (6)   The estimated time required to complete the removal,
storage, or excavation;



      (7)   The plan of operation, including soil processing (any
operation other than direct mining and removal), nature of the processing and
equipment, location of the plant, source of water, disposal of water, and
reuse of water;



      (8)   The plans for drainage, water and wind erosion control,
sedimentation and dust control.  These plans shall be in conformity with the
recommendations of the county soil and water conservation district office;



      (9)   A map of plat of the proposed pit or excavation showing
the confines or limits hereof the excavation together with the proposed
finished elevations based on 1929 sea level datum.  Where the finished
elevations prohibit natural drainage, certified soil borings shall be
included through the proposed excavation;



      (10)   A comprehensive plan showing that suitable provision
will be made for the restoration of the excavated area so that it will not
become a health or safety hazard or a nuisance.  The plan must include
anticipated final elevations, slope, and a plan for the return of sub-soil
and topsoil; where the Council deems it necessary, the plan shall include
adjoining related areas where excavations have previously been made and
remain under the control of the owner of the land on which the excavating is
to be done or under the control of the person other than the owner to whom
the permit is to be issued; and



      (11)   The travel routes to and from the site.



   (C)   Operation and land rehabilitation.  The applicant shall abide
by 1 of the 2 following operating and land rehabilitation practices.



      (1)   Excavations resulting in the accumulation of substantial
water areas after rehabilitation must meet the following requirements.



         (a)   The water depth must not be less than 3 feet.



         (b)   All banks shall be sloped to the water line at a
slope which shall not be steeper than 4 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical.



         (c)   All banks shall be sodded or surfaced with soil of
a quality at least equal to the topsoil of land areas immediately surrounding
and to a depth of at least 3 inches.



         (d)   The topsoil as required by division (C)(1)(c)
above shall be planted with trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses upon the parts
of the area where re-vegetation is possible.



         (e)   Slopes on boundary areas shall not be steeper than
4 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical.



      (2)   Excavations not resulting in water areas after
rehabilitation, but which must be graded or backfilled, shall meet the
following requirements.



         (a)   The grading or backfilling shall be made with
non-noxious, non-flammable, non-combustible solids.



         (b)   The graded or backfilled area shall not collect or
permit stagnant water to remain in the graded or backfilled area.



         (c)   The peaks and depressions of the area shall be
reduced to a gently rolling topography in substantial conformity to the land
area immediately surrounding and which will minimize erosion due to rainfall.



         (d)   The graded or backfilled area shall be sodded or
surfaced with soil of a quality at least equal to the topsoil of and areas
immediately surrounding, and to a depth of at least 3 inches.



         (e)   The topsoil as required by division (C)(2)(d)
above shall be planted with trees, shrubs, legumes, or grasses upon the parts
of the area where re-vegetation is possible.



         (f)   New slopes on boundary areas shall not be steeper
than 4 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical.



(1997 Code, § 900.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.05  OPERATING CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The owner of the premises must meet all conditions in division
(B) below.



   (B)   (1)   Fence.  The applicant must properly fence any pit or
excavation.



      (2)   Slope of excavation.  The applicant must slope the
banks, and otherwise properly guard and keep any pit or excavation in a
condition not to be dangerous because of sliding or caving banks.



      (3)   Setbacks.  The applicant must refrain from mining below
grade closer than 30 feet to the boundary of any zone where the operations
are not permitted, or closer than 50 feet to the boundary of an adjoining
property line, unless the written consent of the owner in fee of the property
is first secured in writing and filed with the Administrator.  The applicant
must refrain from excavating below road grade closer than 50 feet to the
right-of-way line and any existing or platted street, road, or highway,
except that excavating may be conducted within the limits in order to reduce
the elevation of the right-of-way line or existing or platted street, road,
or highway in conformity to the existing or proposed street grades.  The
applicant must refrain from excavating below any maximum depth designated by
the Council.



      (4)   Inspection fee.  An annual inspection fee shall be paid
to the city.  The minimum annual inspection fee shall be set forth from time
to time by resolution of the Council.  The annual inspection fee shall be
based on the actual reasonable costs which are incurred by the city in
providing periodic inspections and administering the provision of the annual
permit.  The Council shall estimate these charges at the time the annual
permit is issued and the applicant shall make a cash deposit with the city
equal to the estimate at the time the annual permit is issued.  Any surplus
at the expiration of the annual permit shall be refunded to the applicant or,
if the costs exceed the estimate, the applicant shall pay the additional
costs.



      (5)   Survey.  The applicant must furnish a survey by a
certified registered surveyor showing the boundaries of the property.



      (6)   Bond.  The applicant must post a bond in the amount as
set forth from time to time by resolution of the Council.  The bond must be
conditioned to pay the city the cost and expense of repairing any highways,
street, or other public ways and the restoration of other sites within the
city made necessary by the special burden resulting from hauling and
transporting on the roadways by the applicant in the removal of rock, sand,
dirt, gravel, clay, or other material.  The bond must be conditioned further
to comply with all the requirements of this section and the particular permit
(including provisions relating to completion of operations and restoration of
the site).  Additionally, the bond must save the city free and harmless from
any and all suits or claims for damage resulting from the negligent
excavation, removal, or storage of rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay, or other
material within the city boundary.



      (7)   Insurance.  The applicant must carry bodily injury and
property damage, public liability insurance in the amount of $100,000 for any
1 person and $300,000 for any occurrence including blasting insurance naming
the city as an additional insured.



      (8)   Noise.  The applicant must maintain and operate all
equipment in a manner as to eliminate objectionable noises and vibrations,
and comply with state and county noise standards.



      (9)   Hours of operation.  The applicant must conduct
operations only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.  However, no
trucking or mining shall be allowed on Sundays or holidays.



      (10)   Dust and dirt.  The applicant must construct,
maintain, and operate all equipment in a manner as to minimize dust
conditions.  All operations shall meet the standards of the State Pollution
Control Agency.



      (11)   Appearance.  The applicant must maintain buildings and
plants in a safe condition in accordance with acceptable industrial
practice.  Weeds shall be controlled.



      (12)   Removal of structures.  The applicant must, within a
period of 3 months after the termination of a sand and gravel operation, or
within 3 months after abandonment of the operation for a period of 6 months
(or within 3 months after expiration of a sand and gravel permit), dismantle
or remove buildings, structures, and plants incidental to the operations. 
However, the buildings, structures, and plants need not be dismantled and
removed so long as they are legally being used for the production of
processing of sand and gravel or for some other purpose permitted in the zone
in which they are located.



      (13)   Lighting.  The applicant shall set forth the planned
lighting of the area and any other equipment or structures that will be
installed or built.



(1997 Code, § 900.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 91:  FORESTS AND TREES



Section




Forest Management




   91.01   Intent



   91.02   Permit



   91.03   Application; commercial lumbering or harvesting



   91.04   Application; removal of trees from any forested area



   91.05   Reforestation, rural land



   91.06   Reforestation of land, subdivided




Tree Diseases




   91.20   Declaration of policy



   91.21   Forester position created



   91.22   Duties of Forester



   91.23   Nuisance declared



   91.24   Inspection and investigation



   91.25   Abatement of Dutch elm disease and oak wilt nuisances



   91.26   Action by Forester



   91.27   Spraying elm or oak trees



   91.28   Transporting elm wood prohibited



   91.29   Interference prohibited



FOREST MANAGEMENT



§ 91.01  INTENT.



   Sections 91.01 et seq. is adopted to:



   (A)   Regulate commercial lumbering or harvesting of forest products
to provide for future production of lumber and forest products;



   (B)   Regulate the alteration of forested areas and spatial patterns
to prevent the development of strong wind currents and to maximize the
temperature moderation effects of evapotranspiration; and



   (C)   Regulate the alteration of forested areas and spatial patterns
to maintain the aesthetic appearance and monetary value of the forested land.



(1997 Code, § 905.01)



§ 91.02  PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required.  It shall be unlawful for any person,
partnership, company, corporation, or association to engage in commercial
lumbering or harvesting of forest products or to remove any trees on any
forested area within the city without first obtaining a permit from the
Council.



   (B)   Application and review.  The applicant shall submit an
application together with the required fees to the Planning Commission. 
Property owners within 350 feet shall be notified by certified mail 10 days
prior to the date the Planning Commission considers the request.  The
Planning Commission shall consider the request at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, but not earlier than 10 days from the date of
submission.  The petitioner or petitioner's representative shall appear
before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the
proposed permit.  The Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to
the Council within 60 days after the submission of the application.  The
Council must take action on the application within 60 days of receiving the
recommendation of the Planning Commission.  If it grants the permit, the
Council may impose conditions it considers necessary to protect the health,
safety, morals, or general welfare of the city and to ensure the use is in
harmony with the general purpose of the intent of §§ 91.01 et seq. and the
Comprehensive Plan.  No application for a permit shall be re-submitted
within 6 months from the date of the denial.



   (C)   Exclusions.  This section shall not apply to any parcel of
land 2 acres in size or less nor does it apply to the removal of diseased
trees.



   (D)   Permit duration.  The permit shall be valid for 1 year unless
terminated by the Council for failure to comply with the provision of §§
91.01 et seq.



   (E)   Fee.  The fee for the permit shall be the fee for certain
occupations as set by resolution of the Council.



(1997 Code, § 905.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.03  APPLICATION; COMMERCIAL LUMBERING OR HARVESTING.



   The application for a permit for commercial lumbering or harvesting of
forest products shall contain:



   (A)   The name and address of the operator and owner of the land;



   (B)   The legal description of the land involved;



   (C)   Names of neighboring landowners within 350 feet;



   (D)   The plan of operation, approved by the forestry extension
service of the University of Minnesota;



   (E)   The plan of reforestation, approved by the forestry extension
service of the University of Minnesota; and



   (F)   A bond sufficient to cover the costs of reforestation required
by §§ 91.01 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 905.04)



§ 91.04  APPLICATION; REMOVAL OF TREES FROM ANY FORESTED AREA.



   The application for a permit for the removal of trees from any forested
area shall contain:



   (A)   The name and address of the operator and owner of the land;



   (B)   The legal description of the land involved;



   (C)   Names of neighboring landowners within 350 feet; and



   (D)   The plan of reforestation.



(1997 Code, § 905.05)



§ 91.05  REFORESTATION, RURAL LAND.



   Reforestation of rural land shall be in accordance to the plan approved
by the extension forestry service of the University of Minnesota.



(1997 Code, § 905.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.06  REFORESTATION OF LAND, SUBDIVIDED.



   (A)   A subdivision planting plan shall be submitted.



   (B)   The plan shall be in accordance with the provisions in Chapter
153.



(1997 Code, § 905.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TREE DISEASES



§ 91.20  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   The Council determines that the health of the elm and oak trees within
the municipal limits is threatened by fatal diseases known as Dutch elm and
oak wilt diseases, and other trees may be threatened by other epidemic
diseases of shade trees.  It further determines that the loss of elm, oak,
and other trees growing upon public and private property would substantially
depreciate the value of property within the city and impair the safety, good
order, general welfare, and conveniences of the public.  It is declared to
be the intention of the Council to control and prevent the spread of those
diseases and §§ 91.20 et seq. is enacted for that purpose.



(1997 Code, § 910.01)



§ 91.21  FORESTER POSITION CREATED.



   The powers and duties of the City Forester as set forth in this section
are conferred upon the persons or employees whom the Council shall deem
appropriate.



(1997 Code, § 910.02)



§ 91.22  DUTIES OF FORESTER.



   (A)   It is the duty of the Forester to coordinate, under the
direction and control of the Council, all activities of the municipality
relating to the control and prevention of Dutch elm, oak wilt, or similar
plant pests or plant diseases.



   (B)   The Forester shall recommend to the Council the details of a
program for the control of Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, or similar plant
pests or plant diseases, and perform the duties incident to the program
adopted by the Council.



(1997 Code, § 910.03)



§ 91.23  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   (A)   Nuisance Defined.  The following are public nuisances
wherever they may be found within the city:



      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part of the elm tree
infected to any degree with Dutch elm disease fungus Ceretocystis Uhni
(Buisman) Moreau, or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles, Scolytus
Multistriatus (Eichh.), or Hylugopinus Rufites (Marsh);



      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part of the tree, including
branches, stumps, firewood, or other elm material from which the bark has not
been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle
insecticide;



      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part of an oak tree
infected to any degree with the oak wilt fungus, Endoconidiothora
Faga-ceaarum; and/or



      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part which, in the opinion of the
Forester, constitutes a hazard, including, but not limited to, logs,
branches, stumps, roots, firewood, or other oak material, which has not been
stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide.



   (B)   Abatement.  It is unlawful for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in division (A) above to remain on any premises
owned or controlled by that person within the city.  The nuisance may be
abated in the manner prescribed by §§ 91.20 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 910.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.24  INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Inspection.  As often as practicable, the Forester shall
inspect all public and private premises within the city which might harbor
any plant pest as defined in M.S. § 18.46, Subd. 13, as it may be amended
from time to time, to determine whether any condition described in § 91.23
exists.  The Forester shall investigate all reported incidents of
infestation by Dutch Elm fungus, elm bark beetles, oak wilt fungus, or any
other epidemic disease of shade trees.



   (B)   Entry on private premises. The Forester or Forester's duly
authorized agents may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for
the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned the Forester under
§§ 91.20 et seq.



   (C)   Diagnosis.  The Forester shall, upon finding conditions
indicating Dutch elm infestation or oak wilt, immediately send appropriate
specimens or samples to the Commissioner of Agriculture for analysis, or take
the other steps for diagnosis as may be recommended by the Commissioner. 
Except as provided in § 91.26, no action to remove infected trees or wood
shall be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been made.



(1997 Code, § 910.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.25  ABATEMENT OF DUTCH ELM DISEASE AND OAK WILT NUISANCES.



   In abating the nuisances defined in § 91.23, the Forester shall cause
the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned, or otherwise
effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as possible the
spread of epidemic diseases including Dutch elm disease or oak wilt
disease.  The Forester shall also take steps that are necessary to prevent
root graft transmission of the diseases.  The abatement procedures shall be
carried out in accordance with current technical and expert opinions and
plans as may be designated by the Commissioner of Agriculture.



(1997 Code, § 910.06)



§ 91.26  ACTION BY FORESTER.



   (A)   Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable certainty that the
infestation defined in § 91.23 exists in any tree or wood in any public or
private place in the city, the Forester shall in writing notify the owner of
the existence of a nuisance, which notice shall state that the owner has 60
days to abate the nuisance and avoid city action. A copy of the notice shall
be transmitted to the City Clerk for the information of the Council.  If
within the 60-day period the property owner has not abated the nuisance, the
Forester shall report all the facts surrounding the unabated nuisance to the
Council.



   (B)   (1)   Abatement.  Upon receipt of the Forester's report
required by this section, the Council shall, by resolution, order the
nuisance abated.  Before action is taken on the resolution, the Council
shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to
abate the nuisance.  This notice shall be mailed to affected property owners
and published once no less than 1 week prior to the meeting.  The notice
shall state the time and place of the meeting, the streets affected, action
proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of
assessment, if any, of costs.  At the hearing or adjournment of the hearing,
the Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and
desirability of the proposed project.  The Council shall then adopt a
resolution confirming the original resolution with modifications as it
considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by
contract.



      (2)   Records.  The Forester shall keep a record of the costs
of abatements done under §§ 91.20 et seq. and shall report monthly to the
Administrator all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and
certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the
amount chargeable to each.



      (3)   Assessment.  On or before September 1 of each year, the
Administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section.  The Council may then spread the charges or any portion of the
charges against the property involved as a special assessment under M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year
along with current taxes.



(1997 Code, § 910.07)



§ 91.27  SPRAYING ELM OR OAK TREES.



   (A)   Treatment of nearby trees.  Whenever the Forester determines
that any elm or oak tree or elm or oak wood within the city is infected with
Dutch elm fungus or oak wilt fungus, the Forester may spray all nearby high
value elm or oak trees with an effective elm bark beetle destroying
concentrate or other appropriate substance suitable for destroying or
controlling Dutch elm disease fungus or oak wilt fungus.  Spraying
activities authorized by this section shall be conducted in accordance with
technical and expert opinions and plans for the Commissioner of Agriculture
and under the supervision of the Commissioner and Commissioner's agents
whenever possible.



   (B)   Notice.  The notice provisions hereof apply to spraying
operations conducted under this section.



(1997 Code, § 910.08)



§ 91.28  TRANSPORTING ELM WOOD PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to transport within the city any
barkbearing elm wood without having obtained a permit from the Forester. 
The Forester shall grant the permits only when the purposes of §§ 91.20 et
seq. will be served.



(1997 Code, § 910.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.29  INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the
Forester or Forester's agents while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by §§ 91.20 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 910.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:  ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section



   92.01   Abandoned motor vehicles



   92.02   Other abandoned property



§ 92.01  ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Impoundment and sale.  The Washington County Sheriffs
Department shall take into custody and impound any abandoned motor vehicle as
defined by M.S. § 168B.011, Subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to
time.  It shall give notice of the taking as provided by law and, if the
owner or any lien holder does not reclaim the vehicle within the period
provided by law, it shall provide for the sale of the vehicle to the highest
bidder at public auction or sale following 2 weeks published notice.



   (B)   Summary action in certain cases.  When an abandoned motor
vehicle is more than 7 model years of age, is lacking vital component parts,
and does not display a license plate currently valid in Minnesota or any
other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be eligible for sale
under division (A) above and shall not be subject to the notification,
reclamation, or title provisions of M.S. §§ 168B.01 to 168.101, as they may
be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Disposition of proceeds.  The proceeds of the sale of an
abandoned motor vehicle shall be placed in the general fund of the city.  If
the former owner or entitled lien holder makes application and furnishes
satisfactory proof of ownership or lien interest within 90 days of the sale,
the former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the vehicle less
the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle and all
administrative, notice, and publication costs incurred in its handling.



(1997 Code, § 110.01)



§ 92.02  OTHER ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Procedure.  All other property lawfully coming into the
possession of the city shall be disposed of as provided in this section.



   (B)   Storage.  The department of the city acquiring possession of
the property shall arrange for its storage.  If city facilities for storage
are unavailable or inadequate, the department may arrange for storage at
privately owned facilities.



   (C)   Claim by owner.  The owner may claim the property be
exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or
maintenance costs incurred by it.  A receipt for the property shall be
obtained upon release to the owner.



   (D)   Sale.  If the property remains unclaimed in the possession of
the city for 60 days, the property shall be sold to the highest bidder at a
public auction conducted by the Washington County Sheriffs Department after 2
weeks published notice setting forth the time and place of the sale and the
property to be sold.



   (E)   Disposition of proceeds.  The proceeds of the sale shall be
placed in the general fund of the city.  If the former owner makes
application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within 6 months of
the sale, the former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the
property less the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of
published notice and other costs of the sale.



(1997 Code, § 110.02)



CHAPTER 93:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Streets




   93.01   Application



   93.02   Permit required for work on public property




Driveways




   93.20   Purpose



   93.21   Permit requirements



   93.22   Application



   93.23   Permit fees



   93.24   Permit revocation



   93.25   General requirements



   93.26   Driveway standards



   93.27   Parking areas




Boulevards




   93.40   Definition



   93.41   Maintenance responsibility



STREETS



§ 93.01  APPLICATION.



   All streets hereafter constructed within the city shall meet the
specifications set forth in Chapter 153.



(1997 Code, § 1400.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.02  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR WORK ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person, other than the city or its employees, shall do any work of
any kind whatsoever in any public right-of-way or any other public property
within the city, without first having obtained a permit for the work from the
properly designated city employee, after the application for the work has
been approved by the City Engineer.  The term "work" includes, but is not
limited to, any improvement, construction, or alteration of sidewalks, curb
or gutter, driveways, tree planting, boulevards, and drainage facilities.



(1997 Code, § 1400.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DRIVEWAYS



§ 93.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of §§ 93.20et seq. is to control the location of
driveways and curb cuts in order that traffic hazards be reduced, adequate
street drainage be maintained, and that ingress and egress from properties
shall not constitute a hazard or impair the health, safety, or general
welfare of the residents of the city.



(1997 Code, § 1405.01) (Am. Ord. 08-096, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 93.21  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   No driveway shall be constructed in any location where motor vehicles
will be provided with access to any public right-of-way without first
obtaining a permit for construction. Prior to the issuance of the permit, the
provisions of this subchapter shall be complied with.



(1997 Code, § 1405.02) (Am. Ord. 08-096, passed 12-3-2013)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 93.22  APPLICATION.



   Applications for permits shall be made in writing upon printed forms
furnished by the city.  Each application for a permit shall have thereon the
correct legal description of the property and a drawing of the land showing
the location of the proposed driveway with respect to the boundary lines of
the property.  The written application shall describe the project along with
a site plan that indicates that the requirements of this subchapter are met.



(1997 Code, § 1405.03) (Am. Ord. 08-096, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 93.23  PERMIT FEES.



   The permit fees shall be set in the city’s Fee Schedule by ordinance
by the City Council.



(1997 Code, § 1405.04) (Am. Ord. 08-096, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 93.24  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   The permit issued may be revoked by the city at any time after its
issuance for failure to comply with the conditions of the permit or the
directions of the city relative to the work covered by the permit.



(1997 Code, § 1405.05) (Am. Ord. 08-096, passed 12-3-2013)



§ 93.25  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Licensed contractor. All work done within the right-of-way of
the street shall be done by a city licensed contractor as specified in
Chapter 115 of the City Code.



   (B)   Site plan. Prior to the construction of a driveway, a scaled
plan must be submitted which indicates the location and specifications for
driveways and curb cuts, the widths and dimensions at the street, property
line and building structure, the slope of the driveway, and the location of
the curb box as applicable in accordance with §§ 93.20et seq. The site plan
submitted shall be approved prior to the issuance of a permit for a driveway.



(1997 Code, § 1405.06) (Am. Ord. 08-096, passed 12-3-2013)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 93.26  DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.



   The following regulations shall apply to all driveways and curb cuts.
All driveway work shall be constructed in accordance with the approved site
plan.  No deviations or changes shall be made in the field without first
obtaining permission from the city.



   (A)   Driveway width. All driveways shall conform to the following
requirements:



      (1)   Residential districts.



         (a)   Minimum width. All driveways shall have a minimum
width of 12 feet.



         (b)   Maximum width. All driveways shall have a maximum
width of 26 feet within the public right-of-way. In the absence of platted
right-of-way, the setback at which point the driveway width is measured shall
be established by the prescriptive easement as determined by the City
Engineer.  Increased driveway width in the public right-of-way up to
commercial standard (34 feet) will be considered for active farms or
agricultural properties.



         (c)   Curb cut. A curb cut must not exceed the width of
the driveway approach at the property line by more than 10 feet.



      (2)   Commercial and mixed-use districts.



         (a)   Minimum width. All driveways shall have a minimum
width of 20 feet.



         (b)   Maximum width. All driveways shall have a maximum
width of 34 feet at the point it intersects the right-of-way line.



         (c)   Curb cut. A curb cut must not exceed the width of
the driveway approach at the property line by more than 10 feet.



   (B)   Vertical clearance. There must be 14 feet of vertical
clearance above all driveways.



   (C)   Number of curb cuts. In residential districts, each property
shall be limited to 1 curb cut per dwelling unit. Exceptions may be allowed
when neither access is onto a major street, and when the lot exceeds 150 feet
in width or is a corner lot. All requests for a second curb cut shall be
reviewed by the City Engineer.



   (D)   Distance between driveways. The minimum distance between curbs
of driveways at right-of-way line shall be 10 feet in any residential
district. Lots that have been developed with zero lot line setbacks may be
exempt from this provision. In all other districts, the minimum distance
shall be 20 feet.



   (E)   Distance from intersection. No driveway or curb cut shall be
less than 20 feet from any right-of-way line of any street intersection,
except that in high density residential, commercial and mixed-use zoning
districts, the minimum distance shall be 50 feet.



   (F)   Driveway angle. All driveways shall connect to the public
street at 90 degree angles, or must be approved by the City Engineer. 
Exceptions must demonstrate an inability to meet the 90 degree angle due to
extenuating circumstances.



   (G)   Driveway grade. Driveways exceeding a grade of 10% must be
approved by the City Engineer. Exceptions must demonstrate an inability to
meet the 10% maximum grade due to extenuating circumstances.



   (H)   Driveway materials.



      (1)   Urban districts. All driveways shall be constructed of
hot mix bituminous asphalt, concrete or a durable material approved by the
City Engineer.



      (2)   Rural districts. Driveways may be constructed of crushed
rock or equivalent crushed material provided that the portion of the driveway
within the road right-of-way shall be constructed of hot mix bituminous
asphalt, concrete or a durable material approved by the City Engineer when
the driveway is accessing an improved street.



   (I)   Curb box, residential districts. Curb boxes located within
driveway shall be protected with an A1 Ford Lid or approved equal.



   (J)   Control of traffic.



      (1)    Where other alternatives exist, commercial sites should
not be accessed from local residential streets.



      (2)   Traffic shall be controlled to ensure that the location
of driveways shall not constitute a hazard nor be injurious to adjacent
residential uses.



   (K)   Access to major streets (thoroughfares). On properties having
frontage on both thoroughfares and minor roads, access shall be provided via
the minor road unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Access may be
restricted on any non-residential local road.  The number and types of
access drives onto major streets may be controlled and limited in the
interests of public safety and efficient traffic flow.



   (L)   State and county highway requirements. Driveways constructed
to access any street designated as a state or county highway shall meet all
additional specifications of the appropriate jurisdiction. Access drives onto
state and county roads shall require a review by the road authority and the
City Engineer.  The state, county and City Engineer shall determine the
appropriate location, size and design of such access drives and may limit the
number of access drives in the interest of public safety and efficient
traffic flow.



   (M)   Distance from driveways to side lot line. A driveway must be
at least 5 feet from any side lot line.



   (N)   Emergency vehicle access. Driveways to principal structures
that traverse wooded, steep or open field areas shall be constructed and
maintained to a width and base material depth sufficient to support access by
emergency vehicles.



(1997 Code, § 1405.07) (Am. Ord. 97-18, passed 9-16-1997; Am. Ord. 08-096,
passed 12-3-2013; Am. Ord. 08-099, passed 2-5-2014; Am. Ord. 08-109, passed
5-20-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.27  PARKING AREAS.



   The parking restrictions applicable to driveways are stated in the
zoning code and §§ 150.001et seq.



(1997 Code, § 1405.08) (Am. Ord. 08-096, passed 12-3-2013)



BOULEVARDS



§ 93.40  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of §§ 93.40et seq., definitions shall be as set out
in § 11.01.



§ 93.41  MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Keeping property in safe condition.  The owner and the
occupant of any property adjacent to a boulevard within the city shall use
due diligence to keep the boulevard in a safe condition.  The owner or
occupant shall not allow any noxious weeds, rubbish, dead trees or branches,
or other debris to remain on the boulevard longer than 12 hours after its
deposit on the property.  The owner or occupant shall abate or prevent the
nuisance on the property.



   (B)   Requiring compliance to specific sections of this code.  The
owners and the occupant of any property adjacent to a boulevard within the
city shall use due diligence to abate or prevent the nuisances described in
§§ 96.03 and 150.070et seq.  Failure to control these nuisances shall
constitute a violation of this code.



(1997 Code, § 1410.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 94:  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT PERMITS



Section




General Provisions




   94.01   Findings and purpose



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Administration



   94.04   Franchise; franchise supremacy



   94.05   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



   94.06   Severability; revocable permits




Registration




   94.20   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   94.21   Registration information



   94.22   Reporting obligations




Permits




   94.35   Right-of-way permit requirement



   94.36   Application for a right-of-way permit



   94.37   Issuance of permit; conditions



   94.38   Right-of-way permit fees



   94.39   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   94.40   Joint applications



   94.41   Supplementary applications



   94.42   Other obligations



   94.43   Denial of permit




Regulations and Procedures




   94.55   Installation requirements



   94.56   Inspection



   94.57   Work done without a permit



   94.58   Supplementary notification



   94.59   Revocation of right-of-way permits



   94.60   Mapping data



   94.61   Location of facilities



   94.62   Relocation of facilities



   94.63   Pre-excavation facility and facilities location



   94.64   Damage to other facilities



   94.65   Right-of-way vacation



   94.66   Indemnification and liability



   94.67   Abandoned and unusable equipment



   94.68   Appeals



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety, and well-being of its
citizens, and to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the
appropriate use of the rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its
rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary
encumbrances.  Although the general population bears the financial burden
for the upkeep of the rights-of-way, a primary cause for the early and
excessive deterioration of its rights-of-way is frequent excavation.



   (B)   Right-of-way obstruction is a source of frustration for
merchants, business owners, and the general population which must avoid these
obstructions or change travel or shopping plans because of them and has a
detrimental effect on commerce.  Persons whose equipment is within the
right-of-way are the primary cause of these frequent obstructions.



   (C)   The city holds the rights-of-way within its geographical
boundaries as an asset in trust for its citizens.  The city and other public
entities have invested millions of dollars in public funds to build and
maintain the rights-of-way.  It also recognizes that some persons, by
placing their equipment in the right-of-way and charging the citizens of the
city for goods and services delivered thereby, are using this property held
for the public good.  Although the services are often necessary or
convenient for the citizens, the persons receive revenue and/or profit
through their use of public property.



   (D)   The Minnesota Legislature has recognized that it is in the
public's interest that the use and regulation of rights-of-way be carried on
in a fair, efficient, competitively neutral, and substantially uniform manner
while recognizing the regulation must reflect distinct engineering,
construction, operation, maintenance, and public and worker safety
requirements and standards applicable to various users of rights of way. 
Further, the legislature has determined that because increasing numbers of
persons may seek usage of rights-of-way, municipalities such as the city must
be and have been authorized to regulate use of rights-of-way.  Consistent
with this mandate, the city has endeavored to model its right-of-way
regulations consistent with those of models enacted or under consideration by
municipalities throughout the state.  Further, the city has endeavored to
create competitively neutral rights-of-way standards and regulations of
general applicability.



   (E)   In response to the foregoing facts, the city hereby enacts
this chapter relating to right-of-way management.  This chapter imposes
reasonable regulations on the placement and maintenance of equipment
currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed therein at some future
time.  It is intended to complement the regulatory roles of state and
federal agencies.  Under this chapter, persons disturbing and obstructing
the rights-of-way will bear a fair share of the financial responsibility for
the integrity of the city's rights-of-way.  Finally, this chapter provides
for recovery of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the
public rights-of-way.



   (F)   By enactment of this chapter, the City Council hereby
exercises its lawful police power and common law authority, and all statutory
authority which is available to it, including, but not limited to, the powers
conferred on it under M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be amended
from time to time, while preserving all power and authority to further
require franchises from rights-of-way users under M.S. §§ 216B.36, 222.37,
300.03, and 412.11, as they may be amended from time to time, and other
provisions of law.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Administrator of the City of Lake Elmo, or
the Administrator's designee.



   APPLICANT.  Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   CITY.  The City of Lake Elmo, Minnesota.  For purposes of § 94.66,
CITY means its elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.



   DEGRADATION.  The accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST.  Money paid to the city to cover the cost associated
with a decrease in the useful life of a public right-of-way caused by
excavation.



   DELAY PENALTY.  The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way construction.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Department of Public Works of the city.



   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR.  Any person authorized by the Administrator to
carry out inspections related to the provisions of this chapter.



   DISRUPTIVE FEE.  The penalty imposed as a result of the adverse impact
on the residents of the city and others who are required to alter travel
routes and times resulting from right-of-way obstructions.



   EMERGENCY.  A condition that:



      (1)   Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or
of a significant loss of property; or



      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement in order to
restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT.  Any tangible thing in any right-of-way; but shall not
include boulevard plantings or gardens planted or maintained in the
right-of-way between a person's property and the street curb.



   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way, except horticultural practices of
penetrating the boulevard area to a depth of less than 12 inches.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way.  An excavation
permit allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in the permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by an applicant to
cover the costs as provided in § 94.38.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES.  Any tangible asset in the right-of-way
required to provide utility service.



   IN.  When used in conjunction with "right-of-way," means over, above,
in, within, on, or under a right-of-way.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE.  A local person or persons, or designee of the
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
chapter.



   MANAGEMENT COST.  The actual cost incurred by the city for public
rights-of-way management; including but not limited to costs associated with
registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way
permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user equipment during public
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
restoring work inadequately performed; and revoking right-of-way permits and
performing all other tasks required by this chapter, including other costs
the city may incur in managing the provisions of this chapter.  MANAGEMENT
COST does not include payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user for
the use of the right-of-way, the fees and costs of litigation relating to the
interpretation of Minnesota Session Laws 1997, § 123; M.S. §§ 237.162 or
237.163; as they may be amended from time to time; or any ordinance enacted
under those sections, or the city's fees and costs related to appeals taken
pursuant to § 94.68.



   OBSTRUCT.  To place any object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free
and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT.  The permit which, pursuant to this chapter, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for
the duration specified therein.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.  Money paid to the city by a registrant to
cover the costs as provided in § 94.38.



   PATCH or PATCHING.



      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature.



      (2)   A patch consists of:



         (a)   The compaction of the sub-base and aggregate base;
and



         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement
for a minimum of 2 feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all directions.



      (3)   A patch is considered full restoration only when the
pavement is included in the city's 5-year project plan.



   PERFORMANCE SECURITY.  A performance bond, a restoration bond, a
letter of credit, or cash deposit posted to ensure the availability of
sufficient funds to assure that right-of-way excavation and obstruction work
is completed in both a timely and quality manner.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any natural or corporate person, business association, or
other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, an utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity which has or seeks to have equipment in any right-of-way.



   PROBATION.  The status of a person that has not complied with the
conditions of this chapter.



   PROBATIONARY PERIOD.  One year from the date that a person has been
notified in writing that they have been put on probation.



   REGISTRANT.  Any person who:



      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment located in any
right-of-way; or



      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way.



   REPAIR.  The temporary construction work necessary to make the
right-of-way usable for travel.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION.  The process by which an excavated
right-of-way and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation, is
returned to the same condition that existed before the commencement of the
work.



   RESTORATION COST.  An amount of money paid to the city by a permittee
to cover the cost of restoration.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The surface and space above and below a public roadway,
highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which the city
has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes
and utility easements of the city.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.  Either the excavation permit or the obstruction
permit, or both, depending on the context, required by this chapter.



   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE.  Includes but is not limited to:



      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, Subds. 4 and 6, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (2)   Telecommunications, pipeline, community antenna
television, fire and alarm communications, water, electricity, light, heat,
cooling energy, or power services;



      (3)   The services provided by a corporation organized for the
purposes set forth in M.S. § 300.03, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   The services provided by a district heating or cooling
system;



      (5)   Cable communications systems as defined in M.S. Ch. 238;
and



      (6)   A telecommunication right-of-way user.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION.  An application made to excavate or
obstruct more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit
that had already been issued.



   TELECOMMUNICATION RIGHTS-OF-WAY USER.  A person owning or controlling
a facility in the public right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a
facility in the public right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used
for transporting telecommunication or other voice or data information.  For
purposes of this chapter, a cable communication system defined and regulated
under M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to time, and
telecommunication activities related to providing natural gas or electric
energy services are not telecommunications right-of-way users.



   UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT.  Equipment in the right-of-way which has remained
unused for 1 year and for which the registrant is unable to provide proof
that it has either a plan to begin using it within the next 12 months or a
potential purchaser or user of the equipment.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.03  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Administrator is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the right-of-way permits, and the regulations related
thereto.  The Administrator may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.04  FRANCHISE; FRANCHISE SUPREMACY.



   The city may, in addition, to the requirements of this chapter, require
that any person, which has or seeks to have equipment located in any
right-of-way, obtain a franchise for the full extent permitted by law, now or
hereinafter enacted.  The terms of any franchise which are in direct
conflict with any provision of this chapter, whether granted prior or
subsequent to enactment of this chapter, shall control and supersede the
conflicting terms of this chapter, provided, however, that requirements
relating to insurance, bonds, penalties, security funds, letters of credit,
indemnification, or any other security in favor of the city may be cumulative
in the sole determination of the city or unless otherwise negotiated by the
city and the franchise grantee.  All other terms of this chapter shall be
fully applicable to all persons, whether franchised or not.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.05  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.06  SEVERABILITY; REVOCABLE PERMITS.



   If any subchapter, section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, or
portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by
any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and the
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.  If
a regulatory body or a court of competent jurisdiction should determine by a
final, non-appealable order that any permit, right, or registration issued
under this chapter or any portions of this chapter is illegal or
unenforceable, then the permit, right, or registration granted or deemed to
exist hereunder shall be considered as a revocable permit with a mutual right
in either party to terminate without cause upon giving 60-days written notice
to the other.  The requirements and conditions of the revocable permit shall
be the same requirements and conditions as set forth in the permit, right, or
registration, respectively, except for conditions relating to the term of the
permit and the right of termination.  If a permit, right, or registration
shall be considered a revocable permit as provided herein, the permittee must
acknowledge the authority of the City Council to issue the revocable permit
and the power to revoke it.  Nothing in this chapter precludes the city from
requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in
addition to requirements set forth herein.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



REGISTRATION



§ 94.20  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Registration.  Each person who occupies, uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or any equipment in the right-of-way,
including by lease, sublease, or assignment, or who has, or seeks to have,
equipment in any right-of-way must register with the Administrator. 
Registration will consist of providing application information and paying a
registration fee.



   (B)   Registration prior to work.  No person may construct,
install, repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on or use any
equipment or any part thereof in any right-of-way without first being
registered with the Administrator.



   (C)   Exceptions.  Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of a city ordinance permitting persons to plant or
maintain boulevard plantings or gardens in the area of the right-of-way
between their property and the street curb.  Except as hereinafter provided,
persons planting or maintaining boulevard plantings or gardens shall not be
deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and shall not be required to obtain
any permits or satisfy any other requirements for planting or maintain the
boulevard plantings or gardens under this chapter.  However, excavations
deeper than 12 inches are subject to the permit requirements of § 94.35. 
Nothing herein relieves a person from complying with the provisions of M.S.
§ 216D, as it may be amended from time to time, "1 call" law.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.21  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information required.  The information provided to the
Administrator at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited
to:



      (1)   Each registrant's name, Gopher One-Call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers;



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.  The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times.  Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration;



      (3)   A certificate of insurance shall be on a form approved
by the city:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of Minnesota, or that registrant is covered by self insurance which the
Administrator determines to provide the city with protections equivalent to
that of a Minnesota licensed insurance company, legally independent from the
registrant;



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees, and placement
and use of equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers,
agents, employees, and permittees, and that registrant's insurance coverage
includes, but is not limited to, protection against liability arising from
completed operations, damage of underground equipment, and collapse of
property;



         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all the coverages;



         (d)   Requiring that the Administrator be notified 30
days in advance of cancellation of the policy; and



         (e)   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the Administrator in amounts sufficient to protect the city
and carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance
policies;



      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06 as recorded and
certified to by the Secretary of State;



      (6)   A copy of the person's certificate of authority from the
Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable state or federal
agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the certificate from
the Commission or other state or federal agency; and



      (7)   The other information as the city may require.



   (B)   Notice of changes.  The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the
Administrator information as to changes within 15 days following the date on
which the registrant has knowledge of any change.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.22  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations.  Each registrant shall, at the time of
registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major
maintenance plan with the Administrator.



      (1)   The plan shall be submitted by using a format designated
by the Administrator and shall contain the information determined by the
Administrator to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in
the frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way.



      (2)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year (a
"next-year project"); and



         (b)   The tentative locations and estimated beginning
and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the 5 years following the
next calendar year (a "5-year project").



      (3)   The term "project" in this chapter shall include both
next-year projects and 5-year projects.



      (4)   By January 1 of each year, the Administrator will have
available for inspection in the Administrator's office a composite list of
all projects of which the Administrator has been informed in the annual
plans.  All registrants are responsible for keeping themselves informed of
the current status of this list.



      (5)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change
any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the
Administrator and all other registrants of all the changes in the list. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a
next-year project of another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Additional next-year projects.  Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Administrator will not deny an application for a right-of-way
permit for failure to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if
the registrant has used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and
plan for the project.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PERMITS



§ 94.35  RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Right-of-way permit required.  Except as otherwise provided
in the city's regulations, no person may obstruct or excavate any
right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way
permit from the City Administrator and posting of the appropriate performance
security with the City Administrator.



      (1)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit is required by
a registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the
permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein, to the extent and for
the durations specified therein.



      (2)   Obstruction permit.  An obstruction permit is required
by registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
the right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way,
to the extent and for the durations specified therein.



   (B)   Right-of-way permit extensions.  No person may excavate or
obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit
unless the person makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way
permit before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new right-of-way
permit, or right-of-way permit extension, is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable
delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration. 
The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by City Council
resolution.



   (D)   Right-of-way permit display.  Right-of-way permits issued
under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the
Administrator.



   (E)   Performance security.  Performance security shall be in an
amount determined in the city's sole discretion, sufficient to serve as
security for the full and complete performance of permittee's obligation
under this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages, or loss the city
pays or incurs because of any failure to comply with this chapter or any
other applicable law, regulation, or standard.  During the period of
construction, repair, or restoration of rights-of-way or equipment within the
rights-of-way, the performance security shall be in an amount sufficient to
cover 125% of the estimated cost of the work, as documented by the person
proposing to perform the work, or in a lesser amount as may be determined by
the Administrator, taking into account the amount of equipment in the
right-of-way, the location and method of installation of the equipment, the
conflict or interference of the equipment with the equipment of other
persons, and the purposes and policies of this chapter.  Sixty days after
completion of the work, the performance security may be reduced in the sole
determination of the city.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.36  APPLICATION FOR A RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT.



   (A)   Applications for a right-of-way permit is made to the
Administrator.



   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the
following provisions:



      (1)   Registration with the Administrator pursuant to this
chapter;



      (2)   Submissions of a completed permit application form,
including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location
and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and
proposed equipment;



      (3)   Payment of all money due to the city for:



         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and
other management costs;



         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered
by the city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; and/or



         (d)   Franchise fees, if applicable.



      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting
performance security or depositing in a city-approved escrow account an
amount equal to at least 110% of the amount owing; and



      (5)   When an excavation permit is requested for purposes of
installing additional equipment, and the posting of a restoration bond for
the additional equipment is insufficient, the posting of an additional or
larger restoration bond for the additional equipment may be required.



      (6)   A Storm Water Management Plan and/or an Erosion and
Sediment Control Plan if applicable as specified in § 150.283.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000; Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)



§ 94.37  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance.  If the Administrator determines that the
applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the Administrator
may issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions.  The Administrator may impose reasonable
conditions upon the issuance of the permit and the performance of the
applicant thereunder to protect the public health, safety, and welfare to
ensure the structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property
and safety of other users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the disruption
and inconvenience to the traveling public.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.38  RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee.  The excavation permit fee shall be
established by the Administrator in an amount sufficient to recover the
following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs; and



      (2)   Degradation cost, if applicable.



   (B)   Obstruction permit fee. The obstruction permit fee shall be
established by the Administrator and shall be in an amount sufficient to
recover the city management costs.



   (C)   Payment of permit fees.  No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees.  The city may allow applicant to pay the fees within 30 days of
billing.



   (D)   Non-refundable.  Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the Administrator has revoked for a breach as stated in § 94.59 are not
refundable.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.39  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing.



      (1)   The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the
patching and/or restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of extraordinary circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or
unreasonable under § 94.42.



      (2)   In addition to repairing its own work, the permittee
must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas,
including the paving and its foundations, to the same condition that existed
before the commencement of the work and must inspect the area of the work and
use reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 36 months thereafter.



   (B)   Patch and restoration.  Permittee shall patch its own work. 
The city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or
the city shall restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration.  If the city restores the
right-of-way, permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of
billing.  If, during the 36 months following the restoration, the pavement
settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing the pavement.



      (2)   Permittee restoration.  If the permittee restores the
right-of-way, it shall at the time of application for an excavation permit,
post a performance security in an amount determined by the Administrator to
be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to its
pre-excavation condition.  If, 36 months after completion of the restoration
of the right-of-way, the Administrator determines that the right-of-way has
been properly restored, the surety on the performance security shall be
released.



   (C)   Standards.  The permittee shall perform repairs and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the Administrator.  The Administrator shall have the authority to prescribe
the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures
of general application or on a case-by-case basis.  The Administrator in
exercising this authority shall be guided by the following standards and
considerations:



      (1)   The number, size, depth, and duration of the
excavations, disruptions, or damage to the right-of-way;



      (2)   The traffic volume carried by the right-of-way; the
character of the neighborhood surrounding the right-of-way;



      (3)   The pre-excavation condition of the right-of-way; the
remaining life-expectancy of the right-of-way affected by the excavation;



      (4)   Whether the relative cost of the method of restoration
to the permittee is in reasonable balance with the prevention of an
accelerated depreciation of the right-of-way that would otherwise result from
the excavation, disturbance, or damage to the right-of-way; and



      (5)   The likelihood that the particular method or restoration
would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the right-of-way that would
otherwise take place.



   (D)   Guarantees.  By choosing to restore the right-of-way itself,
the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 36 months
following its completion.  During this 36-month period, it shall, upon
notification from the Administrator, correct all restoration work to the
extent necessary, using the method required by the Administrator.  The work
shall be completed within 5 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from
the Administrator, not including days during which work cannot be done
because of the circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is
prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under § 94.42.



   (E)   Failure to restore.  If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the
Administrator, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration
required by the Administrator, the Administrator at its option may do the
work.  In that event the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of
billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way.  If permittee fails to pay
as required, the city may exercise its rights under the restoration bond.



   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee.  However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching
and the degradation fee shall not include the costs to accomplish these
responsibilities.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.40  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same time and place.



   (B)   With city projects.  Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by 2 or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the obstruction and degradation portions of the permit fee.



   (C)   Shared fees.  Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee.  Registrants must agree
among themselves as to the portion each will pay and indicate the same on
their applications.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.41  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do
any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided
herein.  Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that
specified in the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working
in that greater area make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit
extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit.  No permittee may begin its work before
the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after
the end date.  If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end
date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and
receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after
the end date of the previous permit.  This supplementary application must be
done before the permit end date.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.42  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws.  Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city,
county, state, or federal rules, laws, or regulations.  A permittee shall
comply with all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including
M.S. § 216D.01-09, as it may be amended from time to time ("1 Call
Excavation Notice System").  A permittee shall perform all work in
conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations,
and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its
permit, regardless of who does the work.



   (B)   Prohibited work.  Except in an emergency, and with the
approval of the Administrator, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may
be done when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for
the work.



   (C)   Interference with right-of-way.



      (1)   A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that
the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other
waterways shall be interfered with.



      (2)   Private vehicles may not be parked within or next to a
permit area.



      (3)   The loading or unloading of trucks next to a permit area
is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the permit.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.43  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The Administrator may deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements and conditions of this chapter, or if the Administrator
determines that the denial is necessary to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, or if necessary to protect the right-of-way and its
current use.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES



§ 94.55  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching, and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of-way, shall be done in conformance with
engineering standards adopted by the P.U.C. or other applicable local
requirements, insofar as they are not inconsistent with P.U.C. rules.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.56  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion.  When the work under any permit
hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate
in accordance with P.U.C. rules.



   (B)   Site inspection.  Permittee shall make the work-site
available to the Administrator and to all others as authorized by law for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.



   (C)   Authority of Administrator.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Administrator may order
the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Administrator may issue an order to the permittee
for any work which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other
applicable standards, conditions or codes.  The Order shall state that
failure to correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the
permit.  Within 10 days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall
present proof to the Director that the violation has been corrected.  If the
proof has not been presented within the required time, the Director may
revoke the permit pursuant to § 94.59.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.57  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the
Administrator of any event regarding its equipment which it considers to be
an emergency.  The registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are
necessary to respond to the emergency.  Within 2 business days after the
occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for the necessary
permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the rest of the
requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter for
the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   (a)   If the Administrator becomes aware of an
emergency regarding a registrant's equipment, the Administrator may attempt
to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or
potentially affected, by the emergency.



         (b)   In any event, the Administrator may take whatever
action it deems necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which
shall be borne by the registrant whose equipment occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations.  Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the
normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees required by the
Legislative Code, deposit with the Administrator the fees necessary to
correct any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.58  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
Administrator of the accurate information as soon as this information is
known.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.59  REVOCATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.  The city reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund, if there is
a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule, or regulation, or any condition of the permit.  A substantial breach
by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to maintain the required bonds and/or
insurance;



      (5)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner; or



      (6)   The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order
issued pursuant to § 94.56.



   (B)   Written notice of breach.  If the Administrator determines
that the permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition
of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit,
the Administrator shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy
the violation.  The demand shall state that continued violations may be
cause for revocation of the permit.  Further, a substantial breach, as
stated above, will allow the Administrator, at his or her discretion, to
place additional or revised conditions on the permit.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach.



      (1)   Within 24 hours of receiving notification of the breach,
permittee shall contact the Administrator with a plan, acceptable to the
Administrator, for its correction.



      (2)   Permittee's failure to so contact the Administrator, or
the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure
to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be cause for immediate
revocation of the permit.



      (3)   Further, permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for 1
full year.



   (D)   Cause for probation.  From time to time, the Administrator
may establish a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will
automatically place the permittee on probation for 1 full year, such as, but
not limited to, working out of the allotted time period or working on
right-of-way grossly outside of the permit.



   (E)   Automatic revocation.  If a permittee, while on probation,
commits a breach as outlined above, permittee's permit will automatically be
revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for 1 full year,
except for emergency repairs.



   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs.  If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorney's fees incurred in connection with the revocation.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.60  MAPPING DATA.



   (A)   Information required.  Each year, registrant shall provide
mapping information required by the Administrator in accordance with P.U.C.
rules.



   (B)   Trade secret information.  At the request of any registrant,
any information requested by the Administrator, which qualifies as a "trade
secret" under M.S. § 13.37(b), as it may be amended from time to time, shall
be treated as trade secret information as detailed therein.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.61  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Undergrounding.  Unless otherwise permitted by an existing
franchise or M.S. § 216B.34, as it may be amended from time to time, or
unless existing above-ground facilities are repair or replaced, new
construction and the installation of new facilities and replacement of old
facilities shall be done underground or contained within buildings or other
structures in conformity with applicable codes.



   (B)   Corridors.



      (1)   The Administrator may assign specific corridors within
the right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for
each type of facility that is or, pursuant to current technology, the
Administrator expects will someday be located within the right-of-way.  All
excavation, obstruction, or other permits issued by the Administrator
involving the installation or replacement of facilities shall designate the
proper corridor for the facilities at issue.



      (2)   Any registrant whose facility is in the right-of-way in
a position at variance with the corridors established by the Administrator
shall, no later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of
the area where the facility is located, move that facility to its assigned
position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the
Administrator for good cause shown, upon consideration of the factors as the
remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs, and hardship to the registrant.



   (C)   Nuisance.



      (1)   One year after the passage of this chapter, any facility
found in a right-of-way that has not been registered shall be deemed to be a
nuisance.



      (2)   The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at
law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or
taking possession of the facility and restoring the right-of-way to a useable
condition.



   (D)   Limitation of space.  To protect health and safety, the
Administrator shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new
or additional facilities within the right-of-way if there is insufficient
space to accommodate all of the requests of registrants or persons to occupy
and use the right-of-way.  In making the decisions, the Administrator shall
strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users
of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the
public interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing equipment in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.62  RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   (1)   A registrant must promptly and at its own expense,
with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and
relocate its equipment and facilities in the right-of-way whenever the
Administrator requests the removal and relocation, and shall restore the
right-of-way to the same condition it was in prior to the removal or
relocation.



      (2)   The Administrator may make the request to prevent
interference by the company's equipment or facilities with:



         (a)   A present or future city use of the right-of-way;



         (b)   A public improvement undertaken by the city;



         (c)   An economic development project in which the city
has an interest or investment;



         (d)   When the public health, safety, and welfare
require it; or



         (e)   When necessary to prevent interference with the
safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person shall not be required
to remove or relocate its equipment from any right-of-way which has been
vacated in favor of a non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable
costs thereof are first paid to the person therefor.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.63  PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITY AND FACILITIES LOCATION.



   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. § 216D.01-09
("1-Call Excavation Notice System"), as it may be amended from time to time,
before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each registrant who has
equipment in the area to be excavated shall mark the horizontal and
approximate vertical placement of all the equipment.  Any registrant whose
equipment is less than 20 inches below a concrete or asphalt surface shall
notify and work closely with the excavation contractor to establish the exact
location of its equipment and the best procedure for excavation.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.64  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   (A)   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it
necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant's equipment to protect
it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is reasonably
possible.  The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant
and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.



   (B)   (1)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any equipment in the right-of-way which it or its equipment damages.



      (2)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of
repairing any damage to the equipment of another registrant caused during the
city's response to an emergency occasioned by that registrant's equipment.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



§ 94.65  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   (A)   Reservation of right.  If the city vacates a right-of-way
which contains the equipment of a registrant, and if the vacation does not
require the relocation of registrant or permittee equipment, the city shall
reserve, to and for itself and all registrants having equipment in the
vacated right-of-way, the right to install, maintain, and operate any
equipment in the vacated right-of-way and to enter upon the right-of-way at
any time for the purpose of reconstructing, inspecting, maintaining, or
repairing the same.



   (B)   Relocation of facilities.  If the vacation requires the
relocation of registrant or permittee facilities; and if the vacation
proceedings are initiated by the registrant or permittee, the registrant or
permittee must pay the relocation costs; or if the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the city, the registrant or permittee must pay the relocation
costs unless otherwise agreed to by the city and the registrant or permittee;
or if the vacation proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other
than the registrant or permittee, the other person or persons must pay the
relocation costs.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.66  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   (A)   By registering with the Administrator, or by accepting a
permit under this chapter, a registrant or permittee agree as follows.



   (B)   (1)   Limitation of liability.  By accepting a
registration or granting a right-of-way permit, the city does not assume any
liability for injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service
claims by parties other than the registrant, or for claims or penalties of
any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance, or operation
of equipment by registrants or activities of registrants.



      (2)   Indemnification.



         (a)   A registrant or permittee shall indemnify, keep,
and hold the city free and harmless from any and all liability on account of
injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by the issuance of permits
or by the construction, maintenance, repair, inspection, or operation of
registrant's or permittee's facilities located in the right-of-way.



         (b)   1.   The city shall not be indemnified for
losses or claims occasioned through its own negligence except for losses or
claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence as to the issuance of
permits or inspections to ensure permit compliance.



            2.   The city shall not be indemnified if the
injury or damage results from the performance of a proper manner of acts
which the registrant or permittee reasonably believes will cause injury or
damage, and the performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by the city
after receiving notice of the registrant's or permittee's determination.



      (3)   Defense.



         (a)   If a suit is brought against the city under
circumstances where the registrant or permittee is required to indemnify, the
registrant or permittee, at its sole cost and expense, shall defend the city
in the suit if written notice of the suit is properly given to the registrant
or permittee within a period in which the registrant or permittee is not
prejudiced by the lack or delay of notice.



         (b)   If the registrant or permittee is required to
indemnify and defend, it shall thereafter have control of the litigation, but
the registrant or permittee may not settle the litigation without the consent
of the city.  Consent will not be unreasonably withheld.



         (c)   This part is not as to third-parties, a waiver of
any defense, immunity, or damage limitation otherwise available to the city.



         (d)   In defending an action on behalf of the city, the
registrant or permittee is entitled to assert in an action every defense,
immunity, or damage limitation that the city could assert in its own behalf.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.67  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Discontinued operations.  A registrant who has determined to
discontinue its operations in the city must either:



      (1)   Provide information satisfactory to the Administrator
that the registrant's obligations for its equipment in the right-of-way under
this chapter have been lawfully assumed by another registrant; or



      (2)   Submit to the Administrator a proposal and instruments
for transferring ownership of its equipment to the city.  If a registrant
proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option:



         (a)   Purchase the equipment;



         (b)   Require the registrant, at its own expense, to
remove it; or



         (c)   Require the registrant to post a bond in an amount
sufficient to reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be
incurred in removing the equipment.



   (B)   Abandoned equipment.  Equipment of a registrant who fails to
comply with § 94.68, and which, for 2 years, remains unused shall be deemed
to be abandoned.  Abandoned equipment is deemed to be a nuisance.  The city
may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including,
but not limited to, abating the nuisance taking possession of the equipment
and restoring it to a useable condition; or requiring removal of the
equipment by the registrant, or the registrant's successor in interest.



   (C)   Removal.  Any registrant who has unusable and abandoned
equipment in any right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way during
the next scheduled excavation, unless this requirement is waived by the
Administrator.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.68  APPEALS.



   (A)   A right-of-way user that:



      (1)   Has been denied registration;



      (2)   Has been denied a permit;



      (3)   Has had a permit revoked; or



      (4)   Believes that the fees imposed are invalid, may have
denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request, by the
City Council.  The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting.  A decision by the City Council affirming
the denial, revocation, or fee imposition will be in writing and supported by
written findings establishing the reasonableness of the decision.



   (B)   Upon affirmation by the City Council of the denial,
revocation, or fee imposition, the right-of-way user shall have the rights to
have the matter resolved by binding arbitration.  Binding arbitration must
be before an arbitrator agreed to by both the City Council and the
right-of-way user.  If the parties cannot agree on an arbitrator, the matter
must be resolved by a 3-person arbitration panel made up of 1 arbitrator
selected by the city, 1 arbitrator selected by the right-of-way user, and 1
selected by the other 2 arbitrators.  The costs and fees of a single
arbitrator shall be shared equally by the city and the right-of-way user. 
In the event there is a third arbitrator, each party shall pay the expense of
its own arbitrator and shall jointly and equally share with the other party
the expense of a third arbitrator and of the arbitration.



(Ord. 9756, passed 6-20-2000)



CHAPTER 95:  ANIMALS



Section



General Provisions



   95.001   Purpose and intent



   95.002   State code adopted



   95.003   Construction and application



   95.004   Definitions



   95.005   Care of domesticated animals



   95.006   Number of dogs and cats limited



   95.007   Rabies shots required



   95.008   Dog licensing required



   95.009   Offenses involving tags



   95.010   Tags not transferable; refunds



   95.011   Prohibition of kennels; private kennels



   95.012   Prohibition of dogs or cats running at large



   95.013   Unreasonable disturbance prohibited



   95.014   Dogs or cats which are public nuisances



   95.015   Interference with enforcement



   95.016   Investigation



   95.017   Quarantine



   95.018   Muzzling proclamation



   95.019   Required removal of animal excreta



   95.020   Animals on owners property



   95.021   Animal control officer



   95.022   Animal control agency



   95.023   Impounding of dogs or cats



   95.024   Impoundment charges



   95.025   Disposition of unclaimed dogs or cats



   95.026   Proceedings for destruction of certain dogs



   95.027   Prohibition of unsecured female dogs or cats in heat



   95.028   Liability



Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Dogs



   95.040   Dangerous dogs; reporting and notification



   95.041   Dangerous dogs; registration requirement



   95.042   Dangerous dogs; containment requirements



   95.043   Potentially dangerous dogs; reporting and notification



   95.044   Potentially dangerous dogs; containment requirements



   95.045   Confiscation



   95.046   Exceptions



Horses



   95.060   Horses; requirements



Dangerous Animals



   95.075   Keeping of animals



   95.076   Other animals



   95.077   Dangerous animals prohibited



   95.078   Exceptions



Livestock



   95.090   Livestock



Keeping of Chickens



   95.105   Definitions



   95.106   Purpose



   95.107   Investigation and enforcement



   95.108   Keeping of chickens



   95.109   Permit required; term, consent, fee



   95.110   Application



   95.111   Permit conditions



   95.112   Violations



   95.113   Issuance, revocation



Keeping of Bees



   95.125   Definitions



   95.126   Purpose



   95.127   Standards of practice



   95.128   Colony density



   95.129   Permit required



 



   95.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.001  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and general
welfare of animals and the people around them by requiring animals be cared
for in such a manner that they will not become a public nuisance, requiring
animals be properly fed, sheltered and cared for, requiring the removal of
animal defecation from public property and to ensure licensing of dogs and
rabies vaccination of all dogs and cats within the City of Lake Elmo.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.002  STATE CODE ADOPTED.



   All of the relevant provisions of Minnesota Statutes Chapter 343, as
amended, are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter with the same
force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.003  CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall not be interpreted as covering any law regulating
the trapping of animals, the use of live animals in dog trials or in training
of hunting dogs, or the slaughter of animals by persons acting under state
and federal law, or taking of animals through hunting or fishing as permitted
by law.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT DOG.  A dog over 4 months of age.



   ANIMAL.  Any live vertebrate or invertebrate creature either domestic
or wild, except a human being.



   ANIMAL, DANGEROUS.  Any animal that is declared to be dangerous by the
animal control officer after a temperament test has been conducted on the
animal or as defined by § 11.01 of this code.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person designated by the city to enforce
state statutes, adopted by reference, and local ordinances as they pertain to
animal control.



   ANIMAL SHELTER, PUBLIC.  A facility operated by a humane society, or a
governmental agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or
caring for animals.



   ANIMAL, WILD OR EXOTIC.  Apes, coyotes, foxes, wolves, bears, cougars,
lynx, bobcats, wild boars, cheetahs, jaguars, lions, tigers, leopards,
panthers, ocelots, monkeys, elephants or other similar animals as determined
by the humane officer.



   AT LARGE.  To be off the premises of the owner and not under the
control of some person, either by leash or otherwise, but a dog or cat within
an automobile of its owner or in an automobile of any other person with the
consent of the dog’s or cat’s owner, shall be deemed to be upon the
owner’s premises.



   CAT.  A domesticated animal of the feline type (Felis domesticus),
except for a feral cat.



   CAT, ALTERED.  A cat which has been certified in writing by a
veterinarian as being nonreproductive.



   CAT, FERAL.  A cat without owner identification of any kind whose
usual and consistent temperament is extreme fear and resistance to contact
with people. A FERAL CAT is unsocialized to people.



   CIRCUS.  A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.



   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any pet shop, grooming shop or
boarding kennel and shall exclude any city pound, humane society, animal
shelter or veterinary facility.



   CRUEL.  Causing unnecessary and excessive pain or suffering or
unjustifiable pain, injury or death to an animal.



   DOG.  A domesticated animal of the canine type (Canis familiaris);
young animals (puppies) of this type are considered dogs.  It shall not
include any animal which is in whole or in part of the canis lupus or wolf
species.



   DOG, ALTERED.  A dog which has been certified in writing by a
veterinarian as being nonreproductive.



   DOG, SERVICE.  Any dog individually trained to do work or perform
tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not
limited to, minimal protection work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair or
fetching dropped items.



   DOG, UNLICENSED.  A dog for which a required license fee has not been
paid, or to which the license tag required by this chapter is not attached.



   FOSTER PARENT, ANIMAL.  A person who provides temporary care for
kittens, puppies, cats and dogs in their homes for 6 months or less at a
time. Animals which are in temporary foster care are not required to be
licensed.



   GROOMING SHOP.  A commercial establishment where animals are bathed,
clipped or otherwise groomed.



   KENNEL.  A facility where dogs, cats or other animals are kept for 24
hours or more for boarding, training or similar purposes for compensation.
This does not include animal shelters or a facility owned or operated by a
veterinarian where animals are boarded only in conjunction with the provision
of veterinary care.



   OWNER.  Any individual, partnership or corporation that has the right
of property in an animal or who keeps, harbors, cares for or acts as its
custodian or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about or return
to his/her property/premises for 5 or more consecutive days is presumed to be
harboring or keeping the animal within the meaning of this chapter.



   PERMANENT ANIMAL EXHIBITION.  Any spectacle, display, act or event
other than circuses, in which animals perform or are displayed, with the
exception of education programs presented by persons or organizations with
proper state and federal education permits, as required, and which are
perpetual in nature and in a stationary location.



   PERSON.  Includes all natural persons and any firm, sole
proprietorship, limited liability corporation (LLC), partnership,
corporation, trust and any association of persons, government agency or
political subdivision.



   PET.  An animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, which may/may
not be susceptible to rabies.



   PET SHOP.  Any person, sole proprietorship, limited liability
corporation (LLC), partnership or corporation, whether operated separately or
in connection with another business enterprise, except for a kennel, that
buys, gives away, sells or takes on consignment any species of animal.



   TEMPERAMENT TESTING.  Evaluating an individual dog’s temperament
through a series of tests that measure traits including stability,
confidence, shyness, friendliness, aggressiveness, protectiveness, prey
instincts, play drive, and self-defense instincts, and the ability to
distinguish between threatening and nonthreatening situations.



   TRANSIENT ANIMAL EXHIBITION.  Any spectacle, display, act or event
other than circuses, in which animals perform or are displayed, with the
exception of education programs presented by persons or organizations with
proper state and federal education permits, as required, and which are
traveling shows of a temporary duration.



   VETERINARIAN.  Has the meaning as defined in Minnesota Administrative
Rules, Chapter 9100.0100.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL OR CLINIC.  Any establishment maintained and
operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of
disease and injuries in animals.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



Cross References



   Definitions generally, § 11.01.



§ 95.005  CARE OF DOMESTICATED ANIMALS.



   All domesticated animals shall be cared for, maintained and handled in
a humane and sanitary manner and in such a way as to prevent noises such as
barking, fighting or howling or other disturbance of the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood. No domestic animal shall be abandoned or turned loose by
its owner. No animal shall be inhumanely confined in a manner which causes or
is likely to cause pain, suffering, injury or death. No person who owns,
harbors, or keeps any animal shall fail to provide proper medical attention
to such animal when and if such animal becomes sick or injured.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.006  NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS LIMITED.



   (A)   The keeping of a large number of dogs or cats poses health,
safety and public welfare risks and is deemed a public nuisance.



   (B)   Cats.  Unless the property owner has an authorized kennel, no
individual or family unit living together, firm or corporation shall keep
more than 3 cats over the age of 4 months on any parcel not zoned RT, A, or
RR.



   (C)   Dogs. Unless the property owner has an authorized kennel, no
individual or family unit living together, firm or corporation shall keep
more than 3 dogs over the age of 4 months on any parcel not zoned RT, A, or
RR.



   (D)   Cats and dogs.  Unless the property owner has an authorized
kennel, no individual or family unit living together, firm or corporation
shall keep more than a combination of 3 cats and dogs over the age of 4
months on any parcel not zoned RT, A, or RR.



   (E)   Grandfather clause.



      (1)   Any person who owned, possessed, kept or harbored dogs
and/or cats on or before October 15, 2013, in excess of the above allowed
number of dogs and/or cats shall be permitted to continue ownership or
possession as long as they meet all the requirements set forth under state
and federal law in addition to those set forth in this chapter.



      (2)   Anyone whose animals fall under the grandfather clause
shall have obtained license for the dogs within 60 days of the effective date
of the original ordinance (October 15, 2013).



         (a)   Any person who successfully obtains license within
60 days of the adoption of the ordinance codified herein shall be permitted
to hold, keep, harbor or maintain the number of animals that person had as of
the date of the adoption of the ordinance but shall not be permitted to
increase the number of animals. Following death of the licensed animal, the
property owner shall not acquire more animals until they have brought the
number of animals down to legal limits through attrition.



         (b)   Any person who has not successfully obtained
license for their animal within 60 days of the adoption of the ordinance
codified herein shall forfeit the right to keep the animal under the
grandfather clause and be deemed to unlawfully possess the animal.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.007  RABIES SHOTS REQUIRED.



   At the time of application for registration, the applicant shall
present to the city a written statement from a licensed veterinarian or other
satisfactory evidence that a rabies shot has been administered, within the
previous 24 months, to the dog or dogs being registered.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.008  DOG LICENSING REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog over the age of 4
months, within the city, unless a dog license has first been secured. Dog
licenses shall be issued by the city for a fee as set by resolution of the
Council. It shall be the duty of each person owning, keeping, or harboring a
dog to pay the license fee imposed by §§ 95.008et seq. to the city on or
before the first day of January of each year, or upon establishing residence
in the city to immediately pay the license fee. The city may cause a notice
of the necessity of the license fee to be printed in the official newspaper
in December prior to each license year. The license fees are provided for in
the city fee schedule for the following:



      (1)   Altered dogs;



      (2)   Unaltered dogs; and



      (3)   Service dogs.



   (B)   All licenses shall be valid for 1 year from each January 1 to
the following December. License applications may be made from January 1
through January 31 each year without penalty. When application is made after
January 31 for any animal subject to licensing prior to that date, an
additional fee shall be charged for the license. The additional fee herein
prescribed is assessed to cover the additional costs of the administration
and not as a penalty, and the payment of such a fee shall not exempt any
owner from any penalties imposed for any violation of this subchapter.



   (C)   A license will be one-half of the amount set out in the fee
schedule if properly obtained after June 30 of the license year.



   (D)   The city shall deliver 1 appropriate tag to the owner when the
fee is paid. The owner shall cause the tag to be affixed by a permanent metal
fastener to the collar of the dog registered in a manner that the tag may be
easily seen. The owner shall ensure that the tag is constantly worn by the
dog. In case any dog tag is lost, a duplicate may be issued upon verification
of the licensure for the current year. A charge of $1 shall be made for the
duplicate tag.



   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply
to domestic animals brought into the city for the purpose of participating in
any domestic animal show or for less than 30 days.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.009  OFFENSES INVOLVING TAGS.



   It shall be unlawful to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit the tag
provided for in § 95.008 or take from any dog a tag legally placed upon by
its owner with the intent to place it upon another dog.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.010  TAGS NOT TRANSFERABLE; REFUNDS.



   Dog tags shall not be transferable. No refunds shall be made on any dog
registration fee because of leaving the city or death of the dog before the
expiration of the registration period.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.011  PROHIBITION OF KENNELS; PRIVATE KENNELS.



   (A)   No commercial kennels may be established in the city unless a
special use permit has been issued for the kennel as provided by the city
ordinances regulating land use.



   (B)   An individual or family unit living together, firm, or
corporation may keep a private kennel consisting of a combination of  no
more than 6 domestic pets over the age of 4 months on any parcel 5 acres or
greater in size and located in zoning districts RT, A, or RR.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013; Am. Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Definitions, § 11.01



   Zoning use types and classifications, § 154.012



§ 95.012  PROHIBITION OF DOGS AND CATS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, harbors or keeps a dog or
cat to allow the dog or cat to run at large in the city.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.013  UNREASONABLE DISTURBANCE PROHIBITED.



   The following are prohibited:



   (A)   The keeping or harboring of any animal or fowl, whether
licensed or not, which by frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking,
crowing or making of other noises shall greatly annoy or disturb a
neighborhood or any considerable number of persons within the city which
tends to cause or create a disturbance is prohibited and is a public
nuisance. An animal is considered to be in violation of this section when
written complaints from 2 or more adults living in separate residences within
audible distance of the noisy animal are filed with the law enforcement or
the city within a 4-week period. No prosecution shall be commenced, except
upon the request of the law enforcement or city, following a written petition
signed by 2 or more adult persons residing at different residences.  Failure
to correct the disturbance within 24 hours of written notification from law
enforcement or other designee of the city shall constitute a violation of
this section and will subject the owner or occupant of the premises to the
penalties set forth in § 10.99, Penalty.  Each day that such nuisance
exists constitutes a separate offense.



   (B)   The phrase “unreasonable disturbance” shall include, but
is not limited to, the creation of any noise by any animal which can be heard
by any person, including a law enforcement officer or animal control officer,
from a location outside of the building or premises where the animal is being
kept and which animal noise occurs repeatedly over at least a 30 minute
period of time with a 5 minute or less lapse of time between each animal
noise during the 30 minute period.



   (C)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
animal veterinary hospitals or clinics operated for the treatment of animals
or to permitted kennels.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.014  DOGS OR CATS WHICH ARE PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   Every unlicensed dog, unsecured female dog or cat in heat, and every
dog or cat that runs at large or causes disturbance, or noise, in violation
of the provisions of §§ 95.008et seq. is declared a public nuisance.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.015  INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to take or attempt to
take from any officer any animal taken up by the officer in compliance with
§§ 95.008et seq. or in any manner to interfere with or hinder the officer
in the discharge of official duties under §§ 95.008et seq.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.016  INVESTIGATION.



   Any agent of the Council may enter the premises where any animal is
kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner, after obtaining required
warrant or legal consent, and demand to examine the animal and to take
possession of the animal when in the agent’s opinion it requires humane
treatment.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.017  QUARANTINE.



   (A)   Whenever any person owning, possessing, or harboring any dog
within the corporate limits of the city shall learn that the dog has bitten
any human being, the person shall immediately impound the dog in a place of
confinement where it cannot escape or have access to any human being or other
animal. The person shall also immediately notify either the Animal Control
Officer or Agency, who shall ascertain the identity of the dog and the person
owning, possessing, or harboring it. The Officer or Agency shall immediately
direct the person to impound the dog as required. Any dog so impounded shall
be kept continuously confined for a period of 10 days from the day the dog
bit a human being. The person owning, possessing, or harboring the dog shall
also notify the Minnesota Department of Health Infectious Disease
Epidemiology, Prevention and Control Division.



   (B)   Upon learning that a dog has bitten a human being, the city
shall immediately notify the Animal Control Officer and inform Animal Control
Officer of the place where the dog is impounded. If the animal is current on
its rabies vaccination with proof provided by a rabies certificate, then the
animal is safe to be quarantined in the owner’s home. If no proof of a
current rabies vaccine is able to be provided the animal must be impounded at
the current impound facility. When an animal is impounded at home, the animal
should be required to be inspected by a licensed veterinarian at the
beginning of the rabies quarantine and at the end of the rabies quarantine.
The Animal Control Officer will inspect the animal as needed during the 10
day quarantine only when the animal is kept in the home of the owner. For
this purpose, the Animal Control Officer shall have access to the premises
where the dog is kept at all reasonable hours and may take possession of the
dog and confine it in a suitable place at the expense of the owner. In the
circumstance that the animal is impounded at the impound facility it is the
duty of the licensed veterinarian on staff to inspect the animal during the
rabies quarantine.



   (C)   The owner or person in possession or harboring the dog shall
immediately notify the Animal Control Officer of any evidence of sickness or
disease in the dog during its period of confinement. In the case that an
animal dies during this period when the animal is kept in the owner’s home,
the animal is to be brought to the impound facility where it will then be
transported to the U of MN for diagnostic testing. If the animal dies while
being impounded at the impound facility, then the impound facility will be
responsible for diagnostic rabies testing.



   (D)   In the case that the owner of the animal that has bitten does
not have a current rabies vaccine and it is impounded at the impound
facility, and if the owner decides not to reclaim the animal from the impound
facility, the impound facility can then humanely euthanize the animal and
send it for diagnostic testing without holding the animal for a 10 day
quarantine.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.018  MUZZLING PROCLAMATION.



   Whenever the prevalence of hydrophobia renders action necessary to
protect the public health and safety, the Mayor shall issue a proclamation
ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to confine it securely on the
owner’s or keeper’s premises unless it is muzzled so that it cannot bite.
Any unmuzzled dog running at large during the time fixed in the proclamation
shall be killed by law enforcement without notice to the owner.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.019  REQUIRED REMOVAL OF ANIMAL EXCRETA.



   The owner or person having immediate care, custody or control of any
animal shall promptly remove and dispose of, in a sanitary manner, any
excreta left or deposited by the animal upon any public or private property.
Failure to do so shall be a violation of this section and will subject the
owner or occupant of the premises to the penalties set forth in § 10.99
Penalty. Each day that such act exists shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.020  ANIMALS ON OWNERS PROPERTY.



   The accumulation of dog feces or wastes upon private property in the
city is declared to be a public nuisance. The owner or occupant of property
upon which there exists any accumulation of dog feces or waste shall remove
all such waste from his premises and dispose of the wastes in a safe and
sanitary manner within 24 hours of written notification from law enforcement
or the city to remove the wastes. Failure to do so shall be a violation of
this section and will subject the owner or occupant of the premises to the
penalties set forth in § 10.99 Penalty. Each day that such act exists shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.021  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   The Council may appoint a person, persons, or firm as the Council may
deem necessary and advisable as Animal Control Officer for the city. The
Animal Control Officer shall be charged with the duty of enforcement of §§
95.008 et seq. and shall be vested with all the authority conferred by §§
95.008et seq., including the power to issue a summons requesting a violator
to appear in court. The Council may provide for compensation for the Animal
Control Officer as it may deem reasonable. The Animal Control Officer shall
file a monthly report with the Council relating to the operation of the
Animal Control Officer as it applies to the city.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.022  ANIMAL CONTROL AGENCY.



   The city may contract with or enter into an agreement with such person,
persons, organization or corporation to provide for the operation of an
animal shelter, impoundment of stray animals, confinement of certain animals,
disposition of impounded animals, and for assisting in the administration of
rabies vaccinations programs.



§ 95.023  IMPOUNDING OF DOGS OR CATS.



   The Animal Control Officer may take up and impound any dog found in the
city without the tags provided in § 95.008 or any dogs which are in
violation of any other provisions of §§ 95.008et seq. To enforce §§
95.008et seq., the Animal Control Officer is empowered and instructed to go
upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog or cat that may lawfully be
seized and impounded when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such
animals where the officer has reasonable cause to believe there is an
unlicensed dog, a dog or cat which has been at large during the same day, or
an unsecured female dog or cat in heat, except upon the premises of the owner
of the dog or cat if the owner is present and forbids the same; in that case,
or for entry into premises, the officer must obtain required warrant or legal
consent to do so. Animals will not be impounded with any facility that sells,
trades, or deals animals for licensed educational or scientific institution
purposes.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.024  IMPOUNDMENT CHARGES.



   (A)   Redemption. Any dog or cat may be redeemed from the impound
facility  by the owner within 5 days after impoundment by payment of a fee
as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Council for each day the
dog or cat is confined in the pound, as well as the cost of boarding,
feeding, and required vet charges. The city may recover, from the owner,
impoundment fees charged to it by the impound facility.



   (B)   Additional impoundment charge. An additional fee, set forth
from time to time by resolution of the Council, shall be charged for any dog
or cat that has been impounded more than once each year.



   (C)   Unlicensed additional charge. In the case of unlicensed or
untagged dog, an additional fee, set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Council, shall be charged due to the special handling required on an
unlicensed or untagged dog.



   (D)   If the owner does not pay fees, expenses, license and reclaim
the animal within 5 days of being notified of the impoundment, the animal
will be put up for adoption without further notification, at the owner’s
expense. If the animal is adopted, the expenses and fees may be paid by the
new owner through adoption fees.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.025  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS OR CATS.



   Any dog or cat which is not claimed as provided for in § 95.024 or
sold through a standard adoption process, shall be painlessly put to death
and the body properly disposed of by the poundkeeper.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.026  PROCEEDINGS FOR DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS.



   (A)   Upon sworn complaint to district court that any one of the
following facts exist:



      (1)   That any dog at any time has attacked or bitten a person
outside the owner’s or custodian’s premises;



      (2)   That any dog is vicious or shows vicious habits, or
molests pedestrians;



      (3)   That any dog is a public nuisance as defined in M.S. §
561.01, as it may be amended from time to time; and/or



      (4)   That any dog violates its quarantine contrary to the
provisions of the chapter.



   (B)   The district court shall issue a summons directed to the owner
or person having possession of the dog commanding the owner or person in
possession to appear before the court and show cause why the dog should not
be disposed of as authorized in this code. The summons shall be returnable
not less than 2 nor more than 6 days from the date of delivery and shall be
served at least 2 days before the time to appear mentioned in the summons.
If, at the hearing, the district court finds that the facts stated in the
complaint are true, the judge may either order: the owner or custodian to
keep the dog confined to a designated place; the owner or custodian to remove
the dog from the city; or humanely euthanized by certified veterinary staff.
If the owner or custodian disobeys the order, the owner or custodian shall,
upon the filing of a complaint and after a hearing and conviction before a
district court, be liable to the punishment provided for violation of this
chapter. Any Animal Control Officer may, upon disobedience of the order,
impound and order the humane euthanasia of any dog describe in the order of
the district court. The provisions of this section are in addition to and
supplemental to other provisions of this code. Costs of the proceeding
specified by this section shall be assessed against the owner or custodian of
the dog.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.027  PROHIBITION OF UNSECURED FEMALE DOGS OR CATS IN HEAT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, keep, or
have in their possession or on their premises any unsecured female dog or cat
in heat.



   (B)   Any unsecured female dog or cat in heat shall be deemed to be
any female dog or cat which is not confined in a building or secured in a
manner that the dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal
except for planned breeding.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.028  LIABILITY.



   The city and/or its animal control agents shall not be liable to any
person for the death, destruction, damage, injury or disease caused to any
animal that has been impounded pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS



§ 95.040  DANGEROUS DOGS; REPORTING AND NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Incident report.  The Animal Control Officer shall complete
an “incident report” on any incident listed in the definition for
“dangerous dog” in § 11.01.



   (B)   Notice declaring a dangerous dog.  The Animal Control Officer
shall provide the animal owner with a “notice to declare dog dangerous”
for any incident listed in the definition for “dangerous dog” in §
11.01.  The Animal Control Officer shall provide written notice to the City
Clerk/Administrator that a “notice to declare dog dangerous” has been
issued to an animal owner.



      (1)   Every reasonable attempt should be made by the Animal
Control Officer to deliver the “notice declaring a dangerous dog” to the
animal owner in person.



      (2)   If the “notice to declare dog dangerous” cannot be
delivered to the animal owner, the Animal Control Officer shall provide the
“notice” to the City Clerk/Administrator for mailing.  The “notice
declaring dog dangerous” shall be mailed to the animal owner by certified
mail.



      (3)   Dogs may not be declared dangerous if the threat,
injury, or damage was sustained by a person:



         (a)   Who was committing, at the time, a willful
trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the dog;



         (b)   Who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or
assaulting the dog or who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past,
provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog; or



         (c)   Who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.041  DANGEROUS DOGS; REGISTRATION REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall obtain a certificate of
registration from Washington County.



   (B)   Washington County regulations indicate that a certificate of
registration will be issued if:



      (1)   Registration.  The county shall issue a certificate of
registration to the owner of a dangerous dog if the owner presents sufficient
evidence that:



         (a)   A proper enclosure exists for the dangerous dog
and a posting on the premises with a clearly visible warning sign, including
a warning symbol to inform children, that there is a dangerous dog on the
property; and



         (b)   A surety bond issued by a surety company
authorized to conduct business in this state in a form acceptable to the
county in the sum of at least $50,000, payable to any person injured by the
dangerous dog, or a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance
company authorized to conduct business in this state in the amount of at
least $50,000, insuring the owner for any personal injuries inflicted by the
dangerous dog.



      (2)   Fee.  The county may charge the owner an annual fee, in
addition to any regular dog licensing fees, to obtain a certificate of
registration for a dangerous dog under this section.



      (3)   Law enforcement exemption.  The provisions of this
section do not apply to dangerous dogs used by law enforcement officials for
police work.



      (4)   Tag. A dangerous dog registered under this section must
have a standardized, easily identifiable tag identifying the dog as dangerous
affixed to the dog’s collar at all times.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.042  DANGEROUS DOGS; CONTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   An owner of a dangerous dog shall keep the dangerous dog, while on the
owner’s property, in a proper enclosure.  If the dog is outside the proper
enclosure, the dog must be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or
leash and under the physical restraint of a responsible person.  The muzzle
must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog from biting any person or
animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision
or respiration.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.043  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; REPORTING AND NOTIFICATION.



   (A)   Incident report.  The Animal Control Officer shall complete
an “incident report” on any incident listed in the definition for
“potentially dangerous dog” in § 11.01.



   (B)   Notice declaring a potentially dangerous dog.  The Animal
Control Officer shall provide the animal owner with a “notice to declare
dog potentially dangerous” for any incident listed in the definition for
“potentially dangerous dog” in § 11.01.  The Animal Control Officer
shall provide written notice to the City Clerk/Administrator that a”notice
to declare dog potentially dangerous” has been issued to an animal owner.



      (1)   Every reasonable attempt should be made by the Animal
Control Officer to deliver the “notice to declare a potentially dangerous
dog” to the animal owner in person.



      (2)   If the “notice” cannot be delivered to the animal
owner, the Animal Control Officer shall provide the “notice” to the City
Clerk/Administrator for mailing.  The “notice to declare a potentially
dangerous dog” shall be mailed to the animal owner by certified mail.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.044  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; CONTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   An owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall keep the
dangerous dog, while on the owner’s property, in a proper enclosure.



   (B)   If the dog is outside the proper enclosure, the dog must be
muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the physical
restraint of a responsible person.



   (C)   The muzzle must be made in a manner that will prevent the dog
from biting any person or animal but that will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.045  CONFISCATION.



   (A)   Seizure.



      (1)   The Animal Control Officer shall immediately seize any
dangerous dog if:



         (a)   After 14 days after the owner has notice that the
dog is dangerous, the dog is not validly registered under § 95.041;



         (b)   The dog is not maintained in the proper enclosure;
or



         (c)   The dog is outside the proper enclosure and not
under physical restraint of a responsible person as required under § 95.042.



      (2)   If an owner of a dog is convicted of a crime for which
the dog was originally seized, the court may order that the dog be
confiscated and destroyed in a proper and humane manner, and that the owner
pay the costs incurred in confiscating, confining, and destroying the dog.



   (B)   Reclaimed.  A dangerous dog seized under division (A) above
may be reclaimed by the owner of the dog upon payment of impounding and
boarding fees, and presenting proof to the Animal Control Officer, and the
city that the requirements of §§ 95.041 and 95.042, as they may be amended
from time to time, will be met. A dog not reclaimed under this subdivision
within 7 days may be disposed of as provided in § 95.026, and the owner is
liable to the city for costs incurred in confining and disposing of the dog.



   (C)   Subsequent offenses; seizure.



      (1)   If a person has been convicted of a misdemeanor for
violating a provision of §§ 95.041 and 95.042, and the person is charged
with a subsequent violation relating to the same dog, the dog must be seized
by the city’s Animal Control Officer.



      (2)   If the owner is convicted of a crime for which the dog
was seized, the court shall order that the dog be destroyed in a proper and
humane manner and the owner pay the cost of confining and destroying the
animal.



      (3)   If the person is not convicted of the crime for which
the dog was seized, the owner may reclaim the dog upon payment to the city of
a fee for the care and boarding of the dog.



      (4)   If the dog is not reclaimed by the owner within 5 days
after the owner has been notified that the dog may be reclaimed, the dog may
be disposed of as provided under § 95.045, and the owner is liable to the
city for the costs incurred in confining, impounding, and disposing of the
dog.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.046  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This section does not apply to animals which are temporarily
brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any circus or show;
nor does it apply to any public zoo, or persons keeping animals for a public
zoo as volunteers, docents or otherwise; nor to any bona fide research
institution, or veterinary hospital, provided protective devices adequate to
prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public are provided.



   (B)   In the case of regulated animals, those exemptions listed in
M.S. § 346.155, subd. 7 shall apply.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



HORSES



§ 95.060  HORSES; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall ride, drive, lead, or otherwise allow any
horse or pony to directly travel over and in contact with any street or
public road in the city which is hard surfaced or which has been ready for
hard surfacing to the extent that the base for the hard surface has been
applied, except the horses, ponies, and horse drawn vehicles shall be allowed
on unpaved shoulders of the street or public road.



   (B)   No horse, pony, mule or other beast of burden shall be allowed
on any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way or upon
public property unless the animal is properly attired to prevent animal waste
from being deposited upon such public property or the owner of the animal
shall be otherwise responsible for cleanup of all animal waste deposited upon
public property by the animal.



   (C)   The restrictions of this section do not apply to animals that
are part of a parade or other legally sanctioned event held in the city;
however, all animals participating in such events are still subject to waste
and cleanup requirements.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DANGEROUS ANIMALS



§ 95.075  KEEPING OF ANIMALS.



   The keeping of animals except for domesticated pets inside of the
dwelling unit shall be prohibited.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.076  OTHER ANIMALS.



   No person who owns or who has custody of any horse, mule, sheep, goat,
swine, fowl, poultry, cattle, monkey, domesticated snake, cat, or any other
animal shall permit the same to run at large in the city.  Any animal or
fowl found running at large shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer
who will then proceed, pursuant to §§ 95.043 through 95.046.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.077  DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall harbor, maintain, or control any dangerous
animal within the city.



   (B)   A dangerous animal is one which is capable of inflicting
severe bodily harm to humans, and shall include but not be limited to the
following species:



      (1)   Class Mammalia.



         (a)   African buffalo (Syncerus caffer);



         (b)   Hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibious);



         (c)   Wolves, dingoes, jackals, all species except foxes
(Family Canidae);



         (d)   Hyenas, all species except aardwolves (Proteles
cristatus)(Family Hyaenidae);



         (e)   Wolverine (Gulo gulo);



         (f)   Honey badger or ratel (Mellivora campensis);



         (g)   Old World badger (Meles metes);



         (h)   Bears (Family Ursidae);



         (i)   Lions, jaguars, leopards, tigers (Genus Panthera);



         (j)   Clouded leopard (Neofelis nebulosa);



         (k)   Cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus);



         (l)   Cougar or mountain lion (Felis concolor);



         (m)   Elephants (Family Elephantidae);



         (n)   Rhinoceroses (Family Rhinocerotidae);



         (o)   Gibbons, siamangs (Family Hylobatidae);



         (p)   Orangutans, chimpanzees, gorillas (Family
Pongidae);



         (q)   Baboons, drills, mandrills (Genus Papio);



         (r)   Macaques (Genus Macaca); and



         (s)   Gelada baboon (Theropithecus gelada).



      (2)   Class Repitilia.



         (a)   Gavials (Family Gavialidae);



         (b)   Crocodiles (Family Crocodylidae);



         (c)   Alligators, caimans (Family Alligatoridae);



         (d)   Cobras, coral snakes (Family Elapidae);



         (e)   Sea Snakes (Family Hydrophidae);



         (f)   Adders, vipers (Family Viperidae);



         (g)   Pit Vipers (Family Crotalidae); and



         (h)   All venomous rear-fanged species (Family
Colubridae).



      (3)   The following species of constricting snakes over 8 feet
in length.



         (a)   Boa constrictor (Boa constrictor), all subspecies;



         (b)   Anaconda (Eunectes murinus);



         (c)   Indian python (Python molurus);



         (d)   Reticulate python (Python reticulatus); and



         (e)   Rock python (Python sebae).



      (4)   Other.



         (a)   Gila monsters and beaded lizards (Family
Helodermatidae); and



         (b)   Komodo dragon (Varanus komodoensis).



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 95.078  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   This section does not apply to animals which are temporarily
brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any circus or show;
nor does it apply to any public zoo, or persons keeping animals for a public
zoo as volunteers, docents or otherwise; nor to any bona fide research
institution, or veterinary hospital, provided protective devices adequate to
prevent such animal from escaping or injuring the public are provided.



   (B)   In the case of regulated animals, those exemptions listed in
M.S. § 346.155, subd. 7 shall apply.



(Ord. 08-088, passed 10-15-2013)



LIVESTOCK



§ 95.090  LIVESTOCK.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote and
preserve the natural resources within the City of Lake Elmo by regulating the
keeping of livestock. Erosion as a result of overgrazing and leeching of
manure into groundwater have adverse and potentially irreversible impacts on
water quality and environmentally sensitive lands.



   (B)   Prohibition of manure deposition without safeguards. No manure
or livestock waste shall be deposited, stored, kept, or allowed to remain
upon any site without reasonable safeguards adequate to prevent the escape or
movement of the manure or wastes or a solution of the manure or wastes from
the site which may result in pollution of any public waters or any health
hazard.



   (C)   Pollution Control Agency standard minimum requirement.  All
regulations imposed by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency relating to
keeping of livestock shall be adhered to and the regulations shall be
considered the minimum safeguard necessary to prevent pollution of public
water or creation of a health hazard.



   (D)   Inadequate safeguards. In case the Zoning Administrator shall
find that any manure is stored or kept on any lot or storage site without a
safeguard, or that any existing safeguard is inadequate, the Zoning
Administrator may order the owner or other responsible person to immediately
remove the manure from the storage site and refrain from further storage or
keeping of any manure at the site unless and until an adequate safeguard is
provided.



   (E)   Hazards and nuisances.  On parcels of less than 40 acres
which are not part of a larger crop-producing commercial agricultural farm,
the keeping of horses, cattle, or other grazing animals on a site with less
than 2 acres of existing grazable land per animal is, by this section,
declared to be a nuisance. No domestic farm animals, or livestock, other than
chickens or bees, shall be allowed on any parcel of less than 5 acres. No
commercial kennels shall be placed on any site of less than 10 acres.



   (F)   Grazable acres. Grazable acreage shall be defined as open,
non-treed acreage exclusive of the homesite and yard that is currently
providing enough pasture or other agricultural crops capable of supporting
summer grazing at a density of 1 animal unit per 2 acres. Grazable acreage
shall not include non-jurisdictional wetlands or slopes over 12%. There is a
presumption that 0.5 acres of site are dedicated to the homesite and yard, or
considered ungrazable. This presumption is subject to rebuttal if a different
calculation can be established by owner and city.



   (G)   The number of permitted animals shall be determined by the
following table:



 


Type of Animal

 

Animal Units






One slaughter steer, heifer, or mature dairy cow

 

1.4




One horse, mule, donkey

 

1.0




One hog/swine

 

0.5




One sheep or goat, llama, or alpaca

 

0.2




One turkey or goose

 

0.1




One duck or other fowl

 

0.04




One chicken, 5 acres or more

 

0.02





 



      (1)   For all other animals, the number of animal units shall
be defined as the average weight of the animal divided by 1,000 pounds.



      (2)   The number of animal units allowed per parcel is
cumulative. The animal density per parcel shall not exceed 1 animal unit
equivalency per 2 grazable acres.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



KEEPING OF CHICKENS



§ 95.105  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BROODING.  the period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be
provided, due to the bird’s inability to generate enough body heat.



   CHICKEN.  a domesticated bird that serves as a source of eggs or meat
(Gallus gallus domesticus).



   COOP.  The structure for the keeping or housing of chickens permitted
by the subchapter.



   EXERCISE YARD.  A larger fenced area that provides space for exercise
and foraging for the birds when supervised.



   HEN.  A female chicken.



   OFFICER.  Any person designated by the city as an enforcement officer.



   ROOSTER.  A male chicken.



   RUN.  A fully-enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the
chickens can roam unsupervised.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.106  PURPOSE.



   It is recognized that the ability to cultivate one’s own food is a
sustainable activity that can also be a rewarding pastime. Therefore, it is
the purpose and intent of this subchapter to permit the keeping and
maintenance of hens for egg and meat sources in a clean and sanitary manner
that is not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public health, safety, and
welfare of the community.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.107  INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Officers designated by the city shall have authority in the
investigation and enforcement of this subchapter, and no person shall
interfere with, hinder or molest any such officer in the exercise of such
powers. The city shall make investigations as is necessary and may grant,
deny, or refuse to renew any application for permit, or terminate an existing
permit under this subchapter.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.108  KEEPING OF CHICKENS.



   (A)   Chickens on less than 5 acres.



 


Lot Size (Acres)

 

Chickens Allowed






0.00 - 0.49

 

0




0.50 - 0.99

 

4




1.00 - 1.49

 

6




1.50 - 1.99

 

8




2.00 - 2.49

 

10




2.50 - 2.99

 

12




3.00 - 3.49

 

14




3.50 - 3.99

 

16




4.00 - 4.49

 

18




4.50 - 4.99

 

22





 



   (B)   Chickens on 5 acres or more. Chickens maintained on parcels of
5 acres or more are restricted to 0.02 animal units per acre. A permit is not
required for keeping chickens on a parcel size of 5 acres or more. For
reference, see “Animal Unit Equivalency” chart in § 95.090.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.109  PERMIT REQUIRED; TERM, CONSENT, FEE.



   (A)   No person shall (without first obtaining a permit in writing
from the City Clerk) own, keep, harbor, or have custody of any live chicken
on a lot less than 5 acres.



   (B)   The first permit is valid for up to 2 years beginning on the
date of issuance and ending on December 31 of the following year. Subsequent
permits are valid from January 1 to December 31.



   (C)   Prior to issuance of a permit, notices must be mailed to all
homes within 150 feet of the applicant’s property lines.



   (D)   The fee for a permit may be imposed, set, established and
fixed by the city council, by ordinance, from time to time.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.110  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring a permit required under the provisions of this
subchapter shall make written application to the City Clerk upon a form
prescribed by and containing such information as required by the city. Among
other things, the application shall contain the following information:



   (A)   A description of the real property upon which it is desired to
keep the chickens.



   (B)   The breed and number of chickens to be maintained on the
premises.



   (C)   A site plan of the property showing the location and size of
the proposed chicken coop and run, setbacks from the chicken coop to property
lines and surrounding buildings (including houses and buildings on adjacent
lots), and the location, type, and height of fencing proposed to contain the
chickens in a run or exercise area. Portable coops and cages are allowed, but
portable locations must be included with the site plan.



   (D)   Statements that the applicant will at all times keep the
chickens in accordance with all of the conditions prescribed by the officer,
or modification thereof, and that failure to obey such conditions will
constitute a violation of the provisions of this article and grounds for
cancellation of the permit.



   (E)   Such other and further information as may be required by the
officer.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.111  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   Each person keeping chickens within the City of Lake Elmo shall comply
with the following:



   (A)   No person may keep a rooster or crowing hen.



   (B)   No person may allow chickens to range freely without fencing
or without a mobile pen.



   (C)   No person may keep chickens inside the house or attached
garage.



   (D)   Chickens must be provided a secure and well ventilated roofed
structure (“chicken coop”).



   (E)   The roofed structure and required fencing for the chickens may
only be located in a rear yard and must meet setback and building separations
as established in city zoning and building codes, except that the roofed
structure and fencing must maintain a 20 foot separation from dwellings on
adjacent properties.



   (F)   The roofed structure shall be fully enclosed, wind proof, and
have sufficient windows for natural light.



   (G)   Chickens, coops, and/or runs shall not be kept in such a
manner as to constitute a nuisance.



   (H)   The chicken coop and run shall be kept in good repair as to be
in compliance with the property maintenance regulations elsewhere in the code.



   (I)   All chicken coops must have a minimum size of 4 square feet
per bird and must be at least 4 feet in height.



   (J)   Fenced in chicken runs must have a minimum of 10 square feet
per bird and must be at least 4 feet in height.



   (K)   All butchering waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner.



   (L)   Dead chickens must be disposed of according to the Minnesota
Board of Animal Health rules which require chicken carcasses to be disposed
of as soon as possible after death, usually within 48 to 72 hours. Legal
forms of chicken carcass disposal include burial, off-site incineration or
rendering, or composting.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014; Am. Ord. 08-177, passed 6-20-2017)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 95.112  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the sections of this article shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be penalized in
accordance with § 10.99.



   (B)   If any person is found guilty by a court for violation of this
section, their permit to own, keep, harbor, or have custody of chickens shall
be deemed automatically revoked and no new permit may be issued for a period
of 1 year.



   (C)   Any person violating any conditions of this permit shall
reimburse the city for all costs borne by the city to enforce the conditions
of the permit including, but not limited to, the pickup and impounding of
chickens.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.113  ISSUANCE, REVOCATION.



   (A)   If granted, the permit shall be issued by the city and shall
state the conditions, if any, imposed upon the permitted for the keeping of
chickens under this permit. The permit shall specify the restrictions,
limitations, conditions and prohibitions which the city deems reasonably
necessary to protect any person or neighboring use from unsanitary
conditions, unreasonable noise or odors, or annoyance, or to protect the
public health and safety. Such permit may be modified from time to time or
revoked by the city for failure to conform to such restrictions, limitations,
or prohibitions. Such modification or revocation shall be effective after 10
days following the mailing of written notice thereof by certified mail to the
person or persons keeping or maintaining such chickens.



   (B)   The city may revoke any permit issued under this subchapter if
the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this
subchapter, with any regulations promulgated by the city council pursuant to
this article, or with any state or local law governing cruelty to animals or
the keeping of animals. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within 10
days thereafter, humanely dispose of all chickens being owned, kept or
harbored by such person, and no part of the permit fee shall be refunded.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



KEEPING OF BEES



§ 95.125  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APIARY.  The assembly of1 or more colonies of bees at a single
location.



   BEEKEEPER.  A person who owns or has charge of 1 or more colonies of
bees.



   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT.  Anything used in the operation of an apiary,
such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.



   COLONY.  An aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, 1 queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and honey.



   HIVE.  The receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for
that  purpose.



   HONEY BEE.  All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis
mellifera (African subspecies and Africanized hybrids are not allowed).



   LOT.  A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.126  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish certain requirements for
beekeeping within the city, to avoid issues that might otherwise be
associated with beekeeping in populated areas.



   (A)   Compliance with this subchapter shall not be a defense to a
proceeding alleging that a given colony constitutes a nuisance, but such
compliance may be offered as evidence of the beekeeper’s efforts to abate
any previous nuisance.



   (B)   Compliance with this section shall not be a defense to a
proceeding alleging that a given colony violates applicable ordinances
regarding public health, but such compliance may be offered as evidence of
the beekeeper’s compliance with acceptable standards of practice among
hobby beekeepers in the State of Minnesota.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.127  STANDARDS OF PRACTICE.



   These standards of practice apply only to lots smaller than 5 acres.



   (A)   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
frames, which must be kept in sound and usable conditions.



   (B)   Each beekeeper must ensure that a convenient source of water
is available within10 feet of each colony at all times that the colonies
remain active outside the hive.



   (C)   Each beekeeper must ensure that no wax comb or other material
that might encourage robbing by other bees that are left upon the grounds of
the apiary lot. Such materials once removed from the site shall be handled
and stored in sealed containers, or placed within a building or other
vermin-proof container.



   (D)   Each beekeeper shall maintain his or her beekeeping equipment
in good condition, including keeping the hived painted if they have been
painted but are peeling or flaking, and securing unused equipment from
weather, potential theft or vandalism and occupancy by swarms.



   (E)   Honey bee colonies may only be kept on lots three-quarters of
an acre or larger.



   (F)   Each beekeeper is allowed to make in person sales of honey
from the beekeeper’s residence as long as the following standards are met:



      (1)   The beekeeper must live on the apiary lot;



      (2)   All honey sold in person on the residential premise must
be produced by the beekeeper’s hives that are located on the subject
residential premise;



      (3)   No products may be sold in person at the residence
except honey and honey related products produced from hives on the premise;



      (4)   No outside storage or display of products or merchandise;



      (5)   No traffic that is greater than the residential level of
the neighborhood;



      (6)   No separate business entrance;



      (7)   All signage must comply with city sign regulations;



      (8)   Not more than 15% of the total gross floor area of the
residence or 200 square feet, whichever is less is devoted to making,
storing, and selling honey;



      (9)   No activity or equipment may be used that creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odor, or electric or television interference is
permitted if it is detectable by adjacent neighbors; and



      (10)   No nonresident employees are permitted.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.128  COLONY DENSITY.



   (A)   No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers
of colonies on any lot within the city, based upon the size of the apiary lot:



      (1)   Lots three-quarters of 1 acre or larger but smaller than
2 and 1/2 acres: 4 colonies;



      (2)   Two and one-half acre lot or larger but smaller than 5
acres: 6 colonies;



      (3)   Five acres or larger: no restriction.



   (B)   Colonies must be setback 25 feet from the property line of an
adjacent occupied residential lot.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.129  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No beekeeping may occur on properties of less than 5 acres
unless the city issues a permit to the beekeeper on that specific property.
The permit will be valid for 2 growing seasons.



   (B)   A beekeeping permit will only be issued if:



      (1)   The permit application documents the satisfaction of all
applicable items found in §§ 95.125 through 95.130 of the City Code; and



      (2)   Notices have been mailed to all homes within 150 feet of
the applicant’s property lines.



         (a)   If there are objections received within 10 days of
mailing the notices, then the permit application must be considered by the
City Council.



         (b)   If there are no objections received within 10 days
of mailing the notices, then the permit application will be processed by city
staff. It will not be referred to the City Council for consideration.



   (C)   Permits are non-transferable and do not run with the land.



   (D)   A permit constitutes a limited license granted to the
beekeeper by the city and in no way creates a vested zoning right.



   (E)   By signing the permit, the beekeeper acknowledges that he or
she shall defend and indemnify the city against any and all claims arising
out of keeping the bees on the premises.



   (F)   Beekeeping permit fees shall be as established by the city
council.



   (G)   All standards of practice and colony density standards must be
met in order to issue a permit.



   (H)   If the standards of practice are not maintained subsequent to
issuance of a beekeeping permit, the permit may be revoked by the city.



   (I)   Beekeeping training is required for the beekeeper prior to
issuance of an initial beekeeping permit by the city.



      (1)   Either provide a certificate of completion from a
honeybee keeping course from the University of Minnesota or from Century
College;



      (2)   Request consideration for having completed a comparable
course from another institution or instructor;



      (3)   Request consideration for substituting equivalent
experience for the honeybee keeping course; or



      (4)   Provide a letter from a current beekeeping instructor at
the University of Minnesota, Century College, or other educational
institution offering similar beekeeping courses that states that the permit
applicant has gained through other means a substantially similar knowledge
base to one that could be gained through appropriate beekeeping courses at
the University of Minnesota or Century College.



   (J)   Any beekeeper wishing to make in person sales of honey from
their home according to the standards of practice section must so indicate on
the annual permit.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)  Penalty, see § 95.999



§ 95.130  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring a permit required under the provisions of this
article shall make written application to the city clerk upon a form
prescribed by and containing such information as required by the city. Among
other things, the application shall contain the following information:



   (A)   A description of the real property upon which it is desired to
keep the bees.



   (B)   A site plan of the property showing the location and size of
the proposed apiary, the number of hives, setbacks from apiary to property
lines and surrounding buildings (including houses and buildings on adjacent
lots), and the location, type, and height of any related flyways.



   (C)   Statements that the applicant will at all times keep the bees
in accordance with all of the conditions prescribed by the officer, or
modification thereof, and that failure to obey such conditions will
constitute a violation of the provisions of this article and grounds for
cancellation of the permit.



   (D)   Such other and further information as may be required by the
officer.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 95.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate the provisions of §§ 95.125 through
95.130 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be
penalized in accordance with § 10.99.



(Ord. 08-100, passed 2-18-2014)



CHAPTER 96:  NUISANCES



Section




Public Nuisances




   96.01   Generally



   96.02   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency



   96.03   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   96.04   Public nuisances affecting health, comfort, or repose



   96.05   Littering



   96.06   Dumping



   96.07   Storing



   96.08   Improper ground disposal



   96.09   Nuisance disposal



   96.10   Peddling and soliciting



   96.11   Abatement



   96.12   Assessment of costs



PUBLIC NUISANCES



§ 96.01  GENERALLY.



   No person, firm, corporation, or association shall cause, suffer, or
permit any nuisance as defined in §§ 96.01 et seq. to exist or to be
maintained upon property situated in the whole or in part within the limits
of the City of Lake Elmo.



(1997 Code, § 1335.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   (A)   The following are declared public nuisances affecting public
morals and decency.



   (B)   The looking into or peeping through doors, windows, or
openings of private homes by methods of stealth and without proper authority
and by surreptitious method, or what is commonly known as "window peeping."



(1997 Code, § 1335.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.03  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   (A)   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting peace and
safety.



   (B)   (1)   Altering drainage.  Placing entrance culverts, or
doing any act which may alter or affect the drainage of public streets or
other public property or the surface or grade of public streets or sidewalks,
without proper permit;



      (2)   Attractive dangers.  All dangerous, unguarded
machinery, equipment, or other property in any public place, or so situated
or operated on private property as to attract the public;



      (3)   Dangerous objects.  The placing or throwing on any
street, alley, road, highway, sidewalk, or other public or private property
of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles, or other nuisances which may injure any
person or animal or may cause damage to any pneumatic tire when passing over
the same;



      (4)   Environmental nuisances.  No odors, vibration, noise,
smoke, air pollution, liquid or solid wastes, heat, glare, dust, or other
sensory irritations or health hazards caused, suffered, or permitted in
excess of the minimum standards as set in §§ 96.01 et seq.  The minimum
standards shall be as follows.



         (a)   Odors.  Any land use or other activity shall be
conducted so as to prevent the emission of odorous or solid matter of the
quality and quantity as to be reasonably objectionable at any point beyond
the lot line of the site on which the use or activity is located.



         (b)   Vibration.  The following vibrations are
prohibited:



            1.   Any vibration discernible (beyond the
property line) to the human sense of feeling for 3 minutes or more duration
in any 1 hour; and



            2.   Any vibration resulting in any combination of
amplitudes and frequencies beyond the "safe" range of the most current
standards of the United States Bureau of Mines on any structure.



         (c)   Toxic or noxious matter. Any land use or other
activity shall be conducted so as to control the emission of smoke or
particulate matter to the degree that it is not detrimental to or shall
endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or general welfare of the public.



         (d)   Noise.  Any noise caused, suffered, or permitted
in violation of its provisions of §§ 96.01 et seq.



         (e)   Lighting and glare. Any lighting, lighting
fixtures, or glare caused, suffered, or permitted in violation of §§ 96.01
et seq.



         (f)   Minimum standards.  Unless otherwise stated in
this code, the minimum standards of the Pollution Control Agency as to noise,
air, and water pollution and glare, shall be the minimum standards for the
purpose of §§ 96.01 et seq.



      (5)   Explosives.  All explosives, inflammable liquids, and
other dangerous substances or materials stored or accumulated in any manner
or in any amount other than that provided by law;



      (6)   Failure to maintain improvements.  In all zoning
districts it is hereby declared necessary that all structures, landscaping,
and fences be reasonably maintained so as to avoid health or safety hazards
and prevent a degradation in the value of adjacent property.  Failure to so
maintain the improvements is declared to be a nuisance;



      (7)   Fire hazards.  Any building or structure which, by
reason of age, dilapidated condition, defective chimneys or stove pipes,
defective electric wiring, defective gas connections, defective heating
apparatus, or other defect, is susceptible to fire, and which thus endangers
life or limb or other buildings or property within the city; and any
accumulations of brush, tree trimming, fallen leaves, parts of dead trees,
timber, or other materials or substances on either vacant or improved
property, which accumulations are susceptible to fire or capable of spreading
fire to adjacent property;



      (8)   Fires.  The setting of fire prohibited under the
provisions of this code;



      (9)   Fireworks.  All use or display of fireworks except as
provided by law;



      (10)   Hazardous buildings.  Any building which because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, physical damage, unsanitary condition,
or abandonment, constitutes a fire hazard or a hazard to public safety or
health of the residents of the city;



      (11)   Junk.



         (a)   The accumulation, storing, or keeping of old
machinery, wrecked or inoperable vehicles or household appliances, and
unlicensed vehicles and other junk or debris.



         (b)   For purposes of §§ 96.01 et seq., any personal
property stored in violation of the provision of §§ 150.001 et seq.
regulating exterior storage, shall be deemed junk.



      (12)   Littering.  Causing or permitting refuse, rubbish, or
garbage to accumulate or disposing of waste in violation of the provisions of
§ 96.06;



      (13)   Low limbs.  All limbs of trees which are less than 8
feet above the surface of any public sidewalk or street. (See §§ 93.40 et
seq.);



      (14)   Low wires.  All wires which are strung less than 15
feet above the surface of any public street or alley;



      (15)   Maintenance of boulevard.  Any boulevard which is not
maintained as required by §§ 93.40 et seq.;



      (16)   Material from air.  Throwing, dropping, or releasing
printed matter, paper, or any other material or objects over the city from an
airplane, balloon, or other aircraft, or in a manner as to cause the material
to fall or land in the city;



      (17)   Obstruction and excavation.  Obstructions and
excavations affecting the ordinary use of the public streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or public grounds except under the conditions as are provided by
this code.  Any other excavation left unprotected or uncovered indefinitely
or allowed to exist in the manner as to attract people;



      (18)   Obstruction of streets.  Any use of property abutting
on a public street or sidewalk, or use of a public street or sidewalk which
causes large crowds of people to gather obstructing traffic and the free use
of public streets or sidewalks;



      (19)   Obstruction of view of traffic.  All trees, hedges,
billboards, or other obstructions which prevent persons from having a clear
view of traffic approaching an intersection from cross streets in sufficient
time to bring a motor vehicle driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop
before the intersection is reached;



      (20)   Other acts detrimental to peace and safety.  All other
conditions, acts, or things which in the determination of the Council are
likely to cause injury to the person or property of anyone;



      (21)   Repairing vehicles on streets.  Making repairs to
motor vehicles or tires in public streets or alleys, except in the case of
emergency repairs when it will not unduly impede or interfere with traffic;



      (22)   Signs over streets.  All hanging signs, awnings, and
other similar structures over public streets or sidewalks, or so situated as
to endanger public safety not constructed and maintained as provided by law,
or without proper permit;



      (23)   Snow on streets and sidewalks.  All snow and ice not
removed from public sidewalks 12 hours after the snow and ice has stopped
precipitating.  Snow plowed or shoveled into a public street shall be
declared a nuisance;



      (24)   Unauthorized signs.  Erecting, painting, or placing of
unauthorized traffic signs or advertising signs in streets or sidewalks;



      (25)   Unused refrigerators and the like.  Any unused
refrigerator or other container, with doors which fasten automatically when
closed of sufficient size to retain any person, and which is exposed and
accessible to the public, without removing the doors, lids, hinges, or
latches, or providing locks to prevent access by the public; and



      (26)   Water from buildings.  The allowing of rain, water,
ice, or snow to fall from any building on any public street of sidewalk or to
flow across any public sidewalk.



(1997 Code, § 1335.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH, COMFORT, OR REPOSE.



   (A)   The following are declared to be public nuisances affecting
health, comfort, or repose.



   (B)   (1)   Decayed food.  All decayed or unwholesome food
offered for sale to the public;



      (2)   Milk from untested cows.  Milk which is produced by
cows which have not been tested and found free of tuberculosis within the
year previous to the offering of the milk for sale to the public;



      (3)   Diseased animals.  All diseased animals running at
large;



      (4)   Carcasses.  Carcasses of animals not buried or
destroyed within 24 hours after death;



      (5)   Garbage cans.  Privy vaults and garbage cans which are
not fly-tight;



      (6)   Cesspool contents.  Causing or suffering the effluent
from any cesspool, septic tank, drainfield, or human sewage disposal system
to discharge upon the surface of the ground, or dumping the contents of it at
any place except as authorized by law;



      (7)   Accumulation of refuse and debris.  An accumulation of
refuse, rubbish, or garbage (as defined in § 96.05) or debris of any nature
or description;



      (8)   Pollution of wells or public water.  Causing or
suffering the pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal
or body of water by sewage, industrial waste, or other substances;



      (9)   Smoke and fumes.  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and
soot, or cinders in unreasonable quantities;



      (10)   Medicine samples.  The distribution of samples of
medicines or drugs unless the samples are placed in the hands of an adult
person by someone properly licensed; and



      (11)   Other acts detrimental to health.  All other acts,
omissions of acts, occupations, and uses of property which are determined by
the Council to be a menace to the health of the citizens or a considerable
number of citizens.



(1997 Code, § 1335.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.05  LITTERING.



   (A)   Unless specifically defined in §§ 96.01 et seq., words or
phrases used in §§ 96.01 et seq. shall be interpreted so as to give them
the same meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code.



   (B)   Definitions are found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 1335.04)



§ 96.06  DUMPING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit refuse, rubbish,
or garbage to be thrown or scattered upon any street, alley, highway, vacant
or occupied real estate; or to fail, neglect, or refuse to remove the same
from the real estate.



(1997 Code, § 1335.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.07  STORING.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any property in the
city to cause or permit refuse, rubbish, or garbage to accumulate or be
stored on the property, except in containers as provided by Ch. 52 relating
to solid waste disposal.



(1997 Code, § 1335.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.08  IMPROPER GROUND DISPOSAL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to pump or empty the effluent from
any sewage disposal system on to or allow the contents of it to flow on to
the surface of any public or private ground including that of the owners.



(1997 Code, § 1335.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.09  NUISANCE DISPOSAL.



   It shall be unlawful to dispose of any liquid or solid wastes when the
result of the disposal shall be a nuisance, a source of filth, a cause of
obnoxious odors, or a cause of sickness.



(1997 Code, § 1335.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.10  PEDDLING AND SOLICITING.



   (A)   Entering private property.  The practice of going in and upon
private residences or residential properties in the city by solicitors,
peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise,
not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners,
occupant or occupants, of the private residences, for the purpose of
soliciting orders for sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, or for the
purpose of disposing of or peddling the same, is declared to be a nuisance,
except as provided in §§ 96.01 et seq.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The provisions of §§ 96.01 et seq. shall not
apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for the same of milk, dairy
products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce so far
as the sale of the commodities named in §§ 96.01 et seq. is authorized by
law.



   (C)   Charitable organizations exempted.  The provisions of this
section shall not apply to any charitable, religious, patriotic, or
philanthropic organization, society, association, or corporation desiring to
sell or distribute any items of literature or to sell or distribute any
goods, wares, and merchandise, for which a fee is charged or solicited from
the persons other than members of the organization upon the streets, in
office or business buildings, by house to house canvass, or in public places,
for a charitable, religious, patriotic, or philanthropic purpose.



(1997 Code, § 1335.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.11  ABATEMENT.



   If any nuisance occurs as defined in §§ 96.01 et seq., the Council
may by majority vote order the owner, lessee, or occupant or any person
having care or control of the lot or land to abate the nuisance.  The
Council shall issue a written notice to the person allowing 5 days after the
notice is served for the person to comply.



(1997 Code, § 1335.12)



§ 96.12  ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.



   If the nuisance is not abated within 5 days in compliance with the
notice, the Council shall cause the nuisance to be abated.  The Council
shall recover the actual cost of the abatement by civil action against the
person or persons served.  Alternatively, if service has been made upon the
record owner, as shown on the records, of the County Auditor, collection may
be made by ordering the Administrator to extend the sum, plus 25% of it as a
special assessment against the property upon which the nuisance existed. 
This amount shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection in the
same manner as taxes and special assessments are certified and collected.



(1997 Code, § 1335.13)



CHAPTER 97:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




Public Parks




   97.01   Defacing or destroying property prohibited



   97.02   Parking and driving of vehicles



   97.03   Speed of vehicles



   97.04   Open fire prohibited



   97.05   Swimming or wading in certain areas prohibited



   97.06   Hours



   97.07   Glass beverage containers prohibited



   97.08   Liquor and 3.2% malt liquor prohibited




Water Surface Use




   97.20   Purpose



   97.21   Watercraft and water surface use regulations



   97.22   Winter lake use regulations



   97.23   Prohibited structures and uses



   97.24    Enforcement



   97.25    Review



Cross-reference:



   Forests and Trees, see Ch. 91



PUBLIC PARKS



§ 97.01  DEFACING OR DESTROYING PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   No person shall deface, destroy, diminish, or impair the value of
public or private property located within any public park in the city,
including buildings, structures, or trees, shrubs, or vegetation located in
the city or growing in the city.



(1997 Code, § 1355.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.02  PARKING AND DRIVING OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall drive a motorized vehicle in a public park
other than on public roads within the park.



   (B)   No person shall park a motorized vehicle in a public park in
an area not specifically posted with signs permitting parking of motorized
vehicles nor in an area posted with signs prohibiting the parking.



(1997 Code, § 1355.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.03  SPEED OF VEHICLES.



   No person shall drive or operate a motorized vehicle at a speed in
excess of 15 mph in any park unless legally signed for a higher speed.



(1997 Code, § 1355.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.04  OPEN FIRE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall build a fire in any place in any park except in
fireplaces or receptacles provided for the building of fires or in an area
specifically posted with signs permitting the building of an open fire not in
a fireplace or receptacle.



(1997 Code, § 1355.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.05  SWIMMING OR WADING IN CERTAIN AREAS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall wade or swim in an area in which signs have been posted
prohibiting swimming or wading.  In all areas where swimming and wading is
permitted, the Council shall have the authority by resolution to prohibit the
use of equipment as they deem dangerous to persons engaged in swimming or
wading, and to prohibit the activities or conduct as they deem dangerous or
hazardous to those engaging in it or to other persons in a park.  When a
sign has been posted prohibiting the use of any equipment or engagement in
any activities or conduct as may be specified in the posted sign, no person
shall use the equipment or engage in the activities or conduct.



(1997 Code, § 1355.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.06  HOURS.



   Except as hereinafter provided, all public parks shall be closed from
one-half hour after sunset until sunrise the following day.



   (A)   Park facilities with operational lighting for ice rinks,
tennis courts and ball fields may remain open until 10:00 p.m. as posted in
each park.



   (B)   A special permit may be issued by the City Administrator or
the administrator designee for park usage outside of permitted hours of
operation.



(1997 Code, § 1355.07)  (Am. Ord. 97-146, passed 2-1-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 97.07  GLASS BEVERAGE CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall bring into any park within the city any glass beverage
container.



(1997 Code, § 1355.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.08  LIQUOR AND 3.2% MALT LIQUOR PROHIBITED.



   In accordance with § 96.01, liquor and 3.2% malt liquor is prohibited
in all parks within the city unless a temporary intoxicating or
non-intoxicating liquor license is approved by the city.



(1997 Code, § 1355.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



WATER SURFACE USE



§ 97.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of §§ 97.20et seq. is to establish the rules governing
the use of the lake surfaces within the city.  It is the intent of §§
97.20et seq. to promote the health, safety, welfare, and well-being of all,
and to define the standards of behavior expected for all water users.



(1997 Code, § 1380.01) (Am. Ord. 08-074, passed 9-17-2013)



§ 97.21  WATERCRAFT AND WATER SURFACE USE REGULATIONS.



   The following regulations shall apply to the use of watercraft on lakes
entirely within the city limits, to the use of a lake entirely within the
city limits, and to the use of ice surfaces on lakes entirely within the city
limits.



   (A)   Dumping. No person shall dump or throw garbage, paper,
bottles, cans, refuse, or debris into any lake or on the shore of any lake or
in any public area around any lake in the city.



   (B)   Hours of operation.



      (1)   Normal conditions. No person shall operate any motorboat
at a speed greater than a slow, no-wake speed as defined by M.S. § 86B.005
in the following manner:



         (a)   Lake Elmo - between sunset and noon the following
day, 7 days a week.



         (b)   Olson Lake, Lake Demontreville and Lake Jane -
between sunset and sunrise, Monday through Friday; and between sunset and
9:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays.



         (c)   All other lakes within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the City of Lake Elmo - between sunset and noon, 7 days a week.



      (2)   High water conditions. No person shall operate any
motorboat at greater than a slow, no-wake speed as defined by M.S. § 86B.005
whenever the lake level of Lakes Olson and Demontreville is above 929.7 feet
above sea level (MSL). This restriction will remain in effect until the water
level drops below 929.7 feet, and remains there for 3 consecutive days.  No
person shall operate any motorboat at greater than slow, no-wake speed as
defined by M.S. § 86B.005 whenever the lake level of Lake Jane is above
924.0 feet above sea level (MSL).  This restriction shall remain in effect
until the water level drops below 924.0 and remains there for 3 consecutive
days.



   (C)   Operating regulations.  No person shall operate any
watercraft in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of
the provisions of M.S. Chapter 86B or Minnesota Boat and Water Safety Rules
(6110.0100-6110.2300) which statutes and rules are hereby adopted and
incorporated herein.



   (D)   Buoys.  No person shall place a buoy or structure on a lake
overnight unless the buoy is specifically authorized by the Washington County
Sheriff. No buoy or structure, other than shallow water marking or channel
buoys shall be left overnight or placed contrary to MN Water Safety Rules
6110.1800.



   (E)   Operation.  All motorboats, operating in excess of a slow,
no-wake speed shall operate in a counter clockwise direction on all City of
Lake Elmo lakes 7 days a week. Personal watercraft use is governed by M.S.§
86B.313.



   (F)   Non-public lake access. No person, except riparian owners,
shall launch a watercraft or gain access to or egress from a lake other than
at a designated public access point except in the case of any emergency or
except with the written permission of the riparian lot owner. A person who
has written permission to launch a watercraft from a riparian lot shall park
their vehicle(s) and trailer(s) on the lot of the riparian owner. Riparian
lot owners who grant permission to use their property as a launch site shall
otherwise comply with all of the land use regulations of the city.



   (G)   Public launching areas.  Except as noted in division (F) no
person shall launch a watercraft or gain access to or egress from a lake
except from a public right-of-way or other public park area in those
locations specifically designated and posted for the purpose.



   (H)   Non-motorized carry-on access.  A person may access any
public waters through public land with a hand-carried non-motorized
watercraft in accordance with M.S. § 86B.201, Subd. 3.



   (I)   Safe operating distance.



      (1)   No person shall operate or permit the operation of a
personal watercraft per M.S. § 86B.313, in excess of slow, no-wake speed,
within 150 feet of a shoreline.



      (2)   Launching or landing a personal watercraft or towing a
person on skis or other devices must be done by using the most direct route
to or from open water.



   (J)   Non-motorized watercraft.  A non-motorized watercraft has the
right-of-way over motor-powered watercraft except when it is the overtaking
watercraft. Motor-powered watercraft should always keep clear and pass astern
on non-motorized watercraft (Minn. Rule 6110.1200, Sub. 1, D). (1997 Code, §
1380.03)



   (K)   Permanent “slow - no wake” areas.  The channels and
narrows between Lake Olson and Lake Demontreville are hereby designated as
permanent “slow - no wake” areas and appropriate signs or buoys meeting
the specifications found in Minn. Rules 6110.1500 shall be posted.



(Am. Ord. 97-150, passed 3-1-2005; Am. Ord. 08-014, passed 5-19-2009; Am.
Ord. 08-050, passed 7-19-2011; Am. Ord. 08-50, passed 11-1-2011; Am. Ord.
2012-58, passed 7-17-2012; Am. Ord. 08-074, passed 9-17-2013)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 97.22  WINTER LAKE USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Dumping. No person shall dump or throw garbage, paper,
bottles, cans, refuse, or debris into the ice of a lake or into any lake or
on the shore of any lake or in any public area around any lake in the city.



   (B)   Clean-up.  Ice house owners are responsible for clean-up of
trash within 25 feet of the house.



   (C)   Emergency access.  No person shall gain access to or egress
from the ice of a lake other than at a designated public access point except
in the case of emergencies or except with the written permission of a
riparian lot owner.  Persons who have written permission to access or egress
the lake from a riparian lot shall park their vehicles and trailers on the
lot of the riparian owner.  Riparian lot owners who grant permission to use
their riparian property for access to or egress from a lake shall otherwise
comply with all land use regulations of the city.



   (D)   Ice fishing holes.  No person shall leave holes in the lake
larger than 1 foot in diameter unless the holes are visibly marked for day
and night.



   (E)   Size of ice fishing house. No person shall place an ice house
larger than what is allowed by Minnesota State Statutes and is regulated by
the fish and game authority.



   (F)   Fires.  No person shall have an open fire on the ice surface
of a lake.



(1997 Code, § 1380.04) (Am. Ord. 08-74, passed 9-17-2013)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 97.23  PROHIBITED STRUCTURES AND USES.



   (A)   Lake activities.  Motorboat races are prohibited. Fishing
tournaments, ski jumps, slalom courses, or other competition or exhibition
events are allowed only as specifically authorized by state statutes and
rules, the Washington County Sheriff Department. The City Clerk shall
acknowledge by signature all lake activities authorized prior to any
authorized event or installation of ski jumps or slalom courses for the
purpose of public information dissemination.



   (B)   Fee for lake use. Unless specifically authorized by the
Council, and unless consistent with the city’s zoning regulations, no
riparian lot owner shall offer the use of their property for a fee or other
consideration:



      (1)   As ingress or egress to a lake;



      (2)   For watercraft rental;



      (3)   For swimming, skiing, or watercraft lessons, unless
provided by a non-profit or water safety agency for the purpose of basic
instructions;



      (4)   For a watercraft launch site; and/or



      (5)   For any ancillary water or ice related use.



(1997 Code, § 1380.06)  (Am. Ord. 2012-58, passed 7-17-2012; Am. Ord.
08-74, passed 9-17-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.24  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Local enforcement. Pursuant to M.S. §§ 378.32, 459.20, the
City of Lake Elmo assigns by service agreement the enforcement of §§ 97.20
through 97.23 of the City Code to the Washington County Sheriff’s
Department.



   (B)   Penalties. Penalties for non-compliance shall be governed by
§ 10.99 of the City Code and prosecuted by the City of Lake Elmo Attorney.



   (C)   Exemptions. Government agencies engaged in resource
management, emergency services or enforcement activities are exempt from the
provisions of Chapter 97 when acting in the performance of their assigned
duties.



(Ord. 08-74, passed 9-17-2013)



§ 97.25  REVIEW.



   The Lake Elmo City Council, upon request, shall review the effect of
surface water use ordinances on the quality of life, water quality (including
clarity), and lake use safety prior to “ice out” or the beginning of
normal lake use season. The Lake Elmo City Council shall consult with MnDNR,
University of Minnesota Extension, and the Washington County Sheriff’s
Department as a part of this review.



(Ord. 08-74, passed 9-17-2013)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS



   111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



   112.   TARGET RANGES



   113.   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



   114.   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE



   115.   BUILDING CONTRACTORS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS




Section





General Provisions




   110.01   Licenses and permits



   110.02   Display of license



   110.03   Bond



   110.04   Procedure for issuance



   110.05   License period



   110.06   Renewal



   110.07   Duplicates



   110.08   Revocation



   110.09   Appeal




Coin-Operated Machines




   110.20   Gambling devices not permitted



   110.21   License required



   110.22   Application



   110.23   Inspection



   110.24   License fees



   110.25   Revocation of license




Bingo, Other Lawful Gambling, and Video Games of Chance




   110.40   Lawful gambling permitted



   110.41   Filing of records; inspections; access to records



   110.42   Approval of premises permit



   110.43   Locations



   110.44   Liquor sales/lawful gambling at on-sale establishments



   110.45   Gambling manager



   110.46   Contributions



   110.47   Law enforcement and administrative costs



   110.48   Trade area requirement



   110.49   Gambling exempt from state licensing requirements



Temporary Special Events



   110.70   Special event permits



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   (A)   General rule.  Except as otherwise provided in this code, all
licenses and permits granted by the city shall be governed by the provisions
of §§ 110.01 et seq.



   (B)   Acts prohibited.  No person shall conduct any activity or use
any property for which a license or permit is required by law or this code
without a currently valid license or permit for the activity or use.



   (C)   Application.  Every application for a license shall be made
to the Administrator on a form the Administrator provides.  It shall be
accompanied by payment to the Administrator of the prescribed fee.  If,
after investigation, the Administrator is satisfied that all requirements of
law and this code have been met, the Administrator shall present the
application to the Council for action or, if the license or permit does not
require Council approval, the Administrator shall issue the license or permit.



(1997 Code, § 1100.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.02  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Posting of license.  The license or licenses provided for in
§§ 110.01 et seq. shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the
location of the machine on the premises where the device is to be operated or
maintained to be operated.



   (C)   Transfer from person to person.  A license shall not be
transferable from person to person nor place to place, and shall be usable
only at the place and by the person designated in the license.



(1997 Code, § 1100.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  BOND.



   Where a bond is required for a license or permit, the bond will be a
corporate surety bond executed on a form approved by the City Attorney and
will be filed with the Administrator before the license or permit is
issued.  The bond will be in the amount and with the penalty provisions as
required by the code.



(1997 Code, § 1100.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.04  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE.



   If, after investigation, the Administrator is satisfied that all
requirements of law and this code have been met, the Administrator will
present the application and a report of the investigation and findings to the
Council for action.  If the license or permit does not require Council
approval, the Administrator may issue the license or permit.



(1997 Code, § 1100.04)



§ 110.05  LICENSE PERIOD.



   All licenses will terminate on December 31 of the year issued, unless
otherwise indicated.



(1997 Code, § 1100.05)



§ 110.06  RENEWAL.



   Applications for renewal of a license will be made to the Administrator
on forms provided.  The renewal application will contain the information
required for the original application plus any additional information
required by the Administrator.



(1997 Code, § 1100.06)



§ 110.07  DUPLICATES.



   A duplicate license certificate or tag may be issued by the
Administrator to replace any license certificate or tag previously issued
which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed, without any willful
conduct on the part of the licensee, if the licensee files an affidavit with
the Administrator attesting to the fact and pays to the Administrator a fee
as set forth in § 11.02.



(1997 Code, § 1100.07)



§ 110.08  REVOCATION.



   Any license may be revoked by the Council for a violation of the
section or chapter under which it is issued.  However, the revocation must
follow any procedure provided in the section or chapter in question.



(1997 Code, § 1100.08)



§ 110.09  APPEAL.



   Any person who has made application which has been denied or not acted
upon within 30 days after the application may apply directly to the Council
for a license.  The application to the Council shall contain the same
information required in the original application, plus any additional
information that the Council may require or that the applicant may feel is
pertinent.  The Council may grant the license, after hearing, if the
requirements of §§ 110.01 et seq. are substantially complied with, and in
the opinion of the Council, granting the license would be in the best
interests of the public.



(1997 Code, § 1100.09)



COIN-OPERATED MACHINES



§ 110.20  GAMBLING DEVICES NOT PERMITTED.



   Nothing in this section shall in any way be construed to authorize,
license, or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to
the laws of the state.



(1997 Code, § 1105.02)



§ 110.21  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person, firm, corporation, or association displaying for public
patronage or keeping for operation any cigarette vending machine, or
coin-operated, automatic machines dispensing food, soft drinks, and other
food and materials, as defined in §§ 110.20 et seq., outside a building,
shall be required to obtain an annual license from the city upon payment of a
license fee.  Application for the license shall be made to the City
Administrator upon a form to be supplied by the Administrator for that
purpose.



(1997 Code, § 1105.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.22  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for the license shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant and whether applicant
is 18 years of age or older;



      (2)   Place where machine or device is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that place; and



      (3)   Description of machine to be covered by the license,
mechanical features, name of manufacturer, serial number.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless the
applicant shall be over 18 years of age.



(1997 Code, § 1105.04)



§ 110.23  INSPECTION.



   The application for license shall be made out in duplicate, 1 copy
being referred to the Code Enforcement Officer who shall investigate the
location where the machine is proposed to be operated and ascertain if the
applicant is a person of good moral character.  The enforcement officer
shall recommend approval or disapproval of the application to the Council.



(1997 Code, § 1105.05)



§ 110.24  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Every applicant, before being granted a license, shall pay the
annual license fee as set by the Council for the privilege of operating or
maintaining for operation each cigarette vending machine, or coin-operated
machine, as defined in § 11.01.



   (B)   Each license shall expire on December 31 next after its
issuance.



(1997 Code, § 1105.06)



   (C)   The license may be transferred from 1 machine or device to
another similar machine upon application to the Administrator.  The
application must give a description and the serial number of the new machine
or device.  Not more than 1 machine shall be operated under 1 license.  The
applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and
every machine displayed or operated by the applicant or licensee.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.25  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The license may be revoked by the Council after written notice to the
licensee.  The notice shall specify the ordinance or law violation with
which the licensee is charged.  Ten-days notice of the hearing shall be
given the licensee.  At the hearing, the licensee and licensee's attorney
may present and submit evidence in applicant's or licensee's defense.



(1997 Code, § 1105.07)



BINGO, OTHER LAWFUL GAMBLING, AND VIDEO GAMES OF CHANCE



§ 110.40  LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.



   Lawful gambling, as defined in M.S. § 349.12, Subd. 24, as it may be
amended from time to time, is permitted in the city if the organization
conducting the gambling meets the following criteria.



   (A)   It is licensed by the Minnesota Gambling Control Board, and is
in compliance with M.S. § 349, as it may be amended from time to time;



   (B)   It is a tax exempt organization pursuant to § 501(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code, as it may be amended from time to time;



   (C)   Maintains an address within the city;



   (D)   It has been in existence as a non-profit corporation or as a
§ 501(c) tax exempt organization for at least 3 consecutive years prior to
the date the gambling operation begins;



   (E)   Charitable gambling is limited to fraternal, religious,
veterans or other non-profit organizations; and permanent, year-round
licensed liquor establishments, fraternal organizations, or churches all
which are currently established and operating in the city; and



   (F)   Complies with all of the provisions of §§ 110.40 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 1110.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.41  FILING OF RECORDS; INSPECTIONS; ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   (A)   Reports.  Every organization licensed to conduct gambling in
the city shall file with the Administrator copies of all records and reports
required to be filed with the Minnesota Lawful Gambling Control Board
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time, and the
rules and regulations promulgated by M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from
time to time.  The records and reports shall be due at the same time they
are due to the Board.



   (B)   Inspection.  Every gambling event in the city conducted by an
organization under M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
shall be open to inspection by officers of the Police Department.



   (C)   Inspection of records.  Employees of the city's Police
Department may inspect, at any reasonable time, without notice or search
warrant, all records of a licensed organization, including gambling accounts
and other bank records which are required, by the Minnesota Lawful Gambling
Board, to be maintained and preserved.



(1997 Code, § 1110.02)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.42  APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMIT.



   (A)   Notification of application.  The Minnesota Lawful Gambling
Control Board shall notify the Council in writing in the manner required by
law of each pending application for a premises permit at least 60 days before
issuing or renewing the license.  Each pending application for a premises
permit shall be approved or disapproved by resolution of the Council.



   (B)   Filing.  Any organization applying to the Gambling Control
Board for a premises permit, bingo hall license, or for the renewal of the
premises permit to conduct lawful gambling in the city shall, within 10 days
of making the application, file the following with the Administrator.



      (1)   A duplicate copy of the Gambling Control Board
application along with all supporting documents submitted to the Gambling
Control Board;



      (2)   A copy of the articles of incorporation and bylaws of
the organization;



      (3)   The names and addresses of all officers and directors of
the organization;



      (4)   A copy of the organization's written procedures and/or
criteria for distribution of funds derived from lawful gambling, its
standardized application form, and its written fiscal control procedures; and



      (5)   A copy of the Internal Revenue Service's tax exempt
letter.



   (C)   Investigation.  Upon receipt of the materials required by
division (B) above and not later than 60 days from receipt of notice from the
Gambling Control Board, city staff shall investigate the applicant and, based
upon the investigation, the Council shall act on the application.



   (D)   Approval; denial.  The action of the Council to approve an
application for a premises permit or a bingo hall license within the city
shall be by resolution.  Failure to receive three  affirmative votes of the
City Council shall constitute a denial of the application.



   (E)   Resolution.  A copy of the Council resolution will be sent to
the license applicant upon request.



   (F)   Copies.  Copies of any other reports or documents which are
required to be subsequently filed by the organization with the Gambling
Control Board, including monthly financial statements, shall be filed with
the city within 10 days of filing the materials with the Gambling Control
Board.



(1997 Code, § 1110.03)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.43  LOCATIONS.



   (A)   Maximum number.  The maximum number of locations where lawful
gambling may be conducted within the city is 10.



   (B)   Allotment to single organization.  No single organization may
conduct lawful gambling at more than 3 locations within the city.



   (C)   Compliance.  No location shall be approved for gambling
unless it complies with the applicable zoning, building, fire, and health
codes of the city.



(1997 Code, § 1110.04)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.44  LIQUOR SALES/LAWFUL GAMBLING AT ON-SALE ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   Prohibition.  No sale, consumption, or possession of liquor,
wine, or 3.2% malt liquor shall be permitted during gambling conducted by a
licensed organization, except as permitted under a valid on-sale liquor,
wine, or 3.2% malt liquor license, or a bottle club permit; provided further
that no sale, consumption, or possession of liquor, wine, or 3.2% malt liquor
shall be permitted in the room where a bingo session is taking place.



   (B)   Regulations.  Lawful gambling at on-sale liquor, wine, and
3.2% malt liquor establishments shall be conducted in compliance with the
following regulations:



      (1)   Only licenses for pull tabs and raffles may be issued
except where the licensed gambling organization also holds the on-sale
liquor, wine, or 3.2% malt liquor licenses for the premises, in which case
any lawful gambling license may be issued;



      (2)   On-sale establishments shall be limited to 1 licensed
gambling organization at any 1 time in the licensed premises or any rooms
adjoining the premises under the same management.  No lease shall be
effective between an on-sale establishment and a gambling organization while
there is still a lease in effect between the on-sale establishment and
another gambling organization.



      (3)   Every agreement between a non-profit organization and an
on-sale premises for gambling shall be in the form of a written lease.  The
written lease shall be filed with the Administrator along with the gambling
license application, and there shall be no unwritten terms or conditions. 
The lease shall specifically provide that the lessee shall operate only after
issuance of a license and shall be subject to the terms of §§ 110.40 et
seq.;



      (4)   A copy of any lease agreement between a non-profit
organization and an on-sale licensee shall be filed with the Administrator
with the gambling license application;



      (5)   A lease agreement between a non-profit organization and
an on-sale establishment shall not provide for rental payments based on a
percentage of receipts of profits from lawful gambling.  There shall be no
other compensation paid to the on-sale establishment, directly or indirectly,
other than the rental fee provided in the lease agreement.  The maximum
rental fee shall be $600 per month or $24 per square foot of the leased
premise, whichever is less.



      (6)   (a)   All gambling shall be conducted from a booth or
other area properly segregated from the rest of the licensed premises.



         (b)   The physical layout of the area set aside for
gambling shall be subject to the approval of the city's Police Department;



      (7)   The gambling booth shall be constructed and maintained
by the organization licensed to conduct gambling and shall be under the
exclusive control of that organization.  The organization licensed to
conduct gambling shall prominently display its name and license number at its
gambling booth and shall indicate that all profits from gambling are for the
benefit of the organization;



      (8)   No employees or agents of the on-sale establishment
shall handle gambling devises, gambling money, prizes, or gambling records,
nor shall they record winners, replays, or free games, nor shall they
otherwise conduct or assist the licensed gambling organizations in conducting
the gambling operation;



      (9)   The gambling booth or area shall be separate from the
liquor service bar area.  No gambling shall be conducted from the liquor
service bar area;



      (10)   The organization licensed to conduct gambling shall
have exclusive control over all gambling devices, money, and records. 
Whenever the organization is not present, all gambling devices, money, and
records shall be securely locked and shall be inaccessible to employees of
the on-sale establishment;



      (11)   No gambling employee may use intoxicating beverages
while working on the sale of games;



      (12)   No gambling funds shall be commingled with funds of the
on-sale establishment;



      (13)   No food, drink, or entertainment discounts or other
promotions shall be offered in conjunction with the sale of gambling devices
or chances;



      (14)   The on-sale establishment shall allow the organization
to conduct gambling at any time during its lawful business hours and shall
prohibit gambling at any time other than its lawful business hours;



      (15)   The on-sale licensee shall make no agreements with any
gambling equipment distributor requiring the use of the distributor's
gambling equipment in the establishment;



      (16)   Divisions (B)(6) through (B)(11) above shall not apply
when the licensed gambling organization is also the holder of the on-sale
license for the establishment where the gambling is conducted;



      (17)   The Council may disapprove a premises permit
application for an on-sale establishment in which gambling violations have
previously occurred.



(1997 Code, § 1110.05)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.45  GAMBLING MANAGER.



   Before any person may serve as a gambling manager for any organization
licensed to conduct gambling in the city, that person must have
satisfactorily completed a course of instruction conducted by the Minnesota
Lawful Gambling Control Board on the duties and responsibilities of the
gambling manager.



(1997 Code, § 1110.06)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.46  CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Percentage.  Each organization conducting lawful gambling
within the city shall contribute 10% of its net profits derived from lawful
gambling in the city to a fund administered and regulated by the city without
cost to the fund for disbursement by the city for lawful purposes as defined
by M.S. § 349.12, Subd. 24, as it may be amended from time to time, the
city's use of the funds shall be determined at the time of adoption of the
city's annual budget or at the time of amendments to the budget.



   (B)   Reporting requirement.  The 10% contribution imposed by §§
110.40 et seq. shall be reported on a duplicate copy of the gambling tax
return filed with the Minnesota Lawful Gambling Control Board each month. 
The report shall be an exact duplicate of the report filed with the Minnesota
Lawful Gambling Control Board without deletions or additions, and must
contain the signatures of organization officials as required on the report
form.



   (C)   Reporting deadline.



      (1)   The contribution and the report due must be postmarked
or, if hand-delivered, received in the office of the Administrator on or
before the last business day of the month following the month for which the
report is made.



      (2)   An incomplete report will not be considered timely filed
unless corrected and returned by the due date for filing. Delays in the
mailing, mail pick-ups, and postmarking are the responsibility of the
organization.



      (3)   The report and contribution shall be delivered to:



         City of Lake Elmo



         3800 Laveme Avenue North



         Lake Elmo, MN  55042



   (D)   Payment.  Checks shall be made payable to: "City of Lake
Elmo."



   (E)   Interest.  There shall be an interest charge of 8% per annum
on the unpaid balance of all overdue contributions owed by an organization
under §§ 110.40 et seq.



   (F)   Delinquencies.



      (1)   The Council shall disapprove any pending application for
renewal or original issue of a lawful gambling license for any organization
which owes delinquent gambling contributions to the city.  Further, the
Council or Administrator may notify the Minnesota Lawful Gambling Control
Board of any organization owing delinquent gambling taxes to the city and may
request that the Council revoke or suspend the organization's license during
the license year.  The Council shall not issue or renew any on-sale or
off-sale alcoholic beverage license, bottle club permit, or food license to
any organization which owes delinquent gambling contributions to the city.



      (2)   The above remedies are not exclusive and shall be in
addition to any other powers and remedies provided by law.



   (G)   Exemption.  The receipts from lawful gambling of an
organization that is exempt from licensing under M.S. § 349.166, as it may
be amended from time to time, are not subject to the contribution imposed by
this section.



   (H)   Evaluation of purpose of funds.  City will evaluate yearly
the purposes for which the funds will be used.



(1997 Code, § 1110.07)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.47  LAW ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.



   All organizations conducting lawful gambling within the city shall,
within 30 days of the end of each month, pay to the city an amount equal to
3% of the gross receipts from lawful gambling conducted in the city in that
month, less amounts actually paid for prizes, to cover the city's law
enforcement and administrative costs in regulating lawful gambling.



(1997 Code, § 1110.08)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.48  TRADE AREA REQUIREMENT.



   Every organization conducting lawful gambling within the jurisdiction
of the city shall expend all of its expenditures for lawful purposes on
lawful purposes conducted or located within the city's trade area.



(1997 Code, § 1110.09)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 110.49  GAMBLING EXEMPT FROM STATE LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Organizations which conduct lawful gambling which are exempt
from state gambling licensing requirements (pursuant to M.S. § 349.166, as
it may be amended from time to time) may conduct the gambling within the city
upon receipt of a permit from the city; except that a permit is not required
if the organization awards$5,000 or less in prizes in a calendar year.



   (B)   (1)   Application.  An application for the permit shall be
made at least 30 days prior to the date the gambling shall be conducted. 
The application shall contain the following:



         (a)   The name of the organization;



         (b)   The address of the organization;



         (c)   The place where the gambling will occur; and



         (d)   The total prizes to be awarded.



      (2)   Permit fee.  The organization shall pay a permit fee of
$10 for each day the gambling is conducted;



      (3)   Permitted classes of gambling.  Permits for all classes
of gambling activities may be approved;



      (4)   On-sale premises.  Lawful gambling by an organization
exempt from licensing may be conducted on the premises of a licensed on-sale
liquor, wine, or beer establishment or a bottle club, subject to the
restrictions in §§ 110.40 et seq. relating to the conduct of gambling in
on-sale establishments and bottle clubs;



      (5)   Consumption; possession; 3.2% malt liquor.



         (a)   Except as provided in this division (B)(5), the
sale, consumption, and possession of intoxicating liquor at a gambling event
by an exempt organization shall be prohibited.



         (b)   However, 3.2% malt liquor may be served and
consumed, but only under a valid temporary on-sale beer license;



      (6)   Compliance; notice.  The organization shall comply with
all statutory requirements for an exempt organization, including the 30-day
notice requirement to the city, pursuant to M.S. § 349.166, Subd. 2(4), as
it may be amended from time to time.



      (7)   Filing of report.  Within 30 days after filing any
reports with the Gambling Lawful Control Board, the organization shall file a
copy of the reports with the city.



      (8)   Law enforcement and administrative costs.  The
provisions relating to "law enforcement and administrative costs" set forth
in § 110.47 shall not apply to gambling permitted pursuant to §§ 110.49. 
All other provisions of §§ 110.40 et seq. apply to the organizations.



(1997 Code, § 1110.10)  (Am. Ord. 97-106, passed 4-26-2002)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



TEMPORARY SPECIAL EVENTS



§ 110.70  SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this subchapter is to
promote the orderly, compatible and safe use of property for temporary
special events and to assure adequate provision of parking, traffic, sanitary
facilities, utilities, peace and tranquility of residential neighborhoods and
safety services.



   (B)   A special event shall include the following:



      (1)   Any temporary, privately-sponsored event, typically
conducted outdoors, open to the general public, held on public or privately
owned property that will be attended by over 100 people within a 24-hour
period where such event would not otherwise be permitted under the city’s
zoning regulations.



      (2)   An agricultural sales business as defined in § 11.01
that is conducted for less than three months in any calendar year. A special
event permit for an agricultural sales business may be issued once per year
and for no more than two consecutive years.



   (C)   Exceptions: “special event” shall not apply to the
following:



      (1)   Any permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field,
arena, theatre, auditorium, or fairs conducted pursuant to M.S. Chapter 38.



      (2)   Special events or activities permitted or permitted by
other state laws or regulations of the City of Lake Elmo, including
publicly-sponsored activities in the local park system and any other lawfully
established event for which the City Council has expressly granted approval
prior to adoption of this subchapter, unless said event is expanded or
enlarged, in which case a special event permit will be required.



      (3)   Family gatherings, including family reunions, graduation
parties, baptisms, confirmations, weddings and the like.



      (4)   Garage sales.



      (5)   National night-out or night-to-unite established through
the City of Lake Elmo.



   (D)   Permit required.  No person on or after the effective date of
this subchapter shall conduct or allow to be conducted any special event as
defined in this subchapter without first obtaining a special event permit.



   (E)   Requirements for issuance of a permit.



      (1)   The following standards shall apply to all special
events:



         (a)   Maximum number of people. The permitee shall not
sell tickets to nor permit attendance at the permit location of more than the
maximum number of people stated in the special event permit.



         (b)   Sound equipment. Sound producing equipment,
including but not limited to public address systems, radios, amplifiers,
musical instruments and other recording and playback devices, shall not be
operated on the premises of the special event so as to be unreasonably loud
or be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the citizens
of Lake Elmo.



         (c)   Sanitary facilities. In accordance with Minnesota
State Board of Health regulations and standards and local specifications,
adequate sanitary facilities must be provided which are sufficient to
accommodate the projected number of persons expected to attend the event.



         (d)   Security. The permitee shall employ at his/her own
expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide
for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of persons in
attendance at the special event and for the preservation of order and
protection of property in and around the event site. No permit shall be
issued unless Washington County Sheriffs Department is satisfied that such
necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the permitee
for the duration of the event.



         (e)   Food service. The operator of the special event
shall be responsible for securing any permits, if necessary, from the
Washington County Health Department for any food services that are made
available on the premises.



         (f)   Fire protection. The permitee shall, at his/her
own expense, take adequate steps to insure fire protection as determined by
the City of Lake Elmo Fire Chief.



         (g)   Duration of special event. The permitee shall
operate the special event only on those days and during the hours specified
on the permit.  The maximum duration of a special event shall be three
consecutive days in each calendar year.  Events that occur for a longer
duration or more than once each year shall only be allowed if permitted under
the zoning requirements for the site.



         (h)   Cleanup plan. The special event applicant is
responsible for clean up of the site upon completion of the special event,
and shall specify the amount of time anticipated to restore the site to its
pre-event condition as part of an application. Any clean up or restoration
work required by the city may be charged to the applicant. Any city service
that requires overtime will be at the expense of the applicant.



         (I)   Waiver. The City Council may grant a waiver from
the requirements of this subchapter in any particular case where the
applicant can show that strict compliance with this subchapter would cause
exceptional and undue hardship by reason of the nature of the special event
or by reason of the fact that the circumstances make the requirement of this
subchapter unnecessary. Such waiver must be granted without detriment to the
public health, safety or welfare and without impairing the intent and purpose
of these regulations.



         (j)   Insurance.  Before the issuance of a permit, the
permitee shall obtain public liability insurance and property damage
insurance with limits determined by the City Council if reasonably determined
necessary. Such insurance shall remain in foil force and effect in the
specified amounts for the duration of the permit. Evidence of insurance shall
include an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company will notify
the City Clerk in writing at least ten days before the expiration or
cancellation of said insurance.



         (k)   Miscellaneous.  Prior to the issuance of a
permit, the City Council, may impose any other conditions reasonably
calculated to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons, attendant or
of the citizens of the City of Lake Elmo including, but not limited to,
restrictions on parking and vehicle access, lighting, litter and noise.



      (2)   In addition to the requirements listed above, the
following shall also apply to a special event permit for an agricultural
sales business:  All performance standards as specified in the zoning code.
The City Council, may exempt the applicant from any of these standards that
are deemed unnecessary given the nature or duration of the event.



   (F)   Application procedures.  A written application for a special
event permit shall be filed on forms provided by the city with the City
Administrator not less than 30 days before the date proposed for holding the
special event. The written application shall be signed by the person,
persons, or parties conducting the event and the property owner, if
different, and shall be accompanied by the fee payable hereunder. Upon
submission of an application for a special event permit, city staff will
review the request and advise the applicant of the need for additional
information, if any.



   (G)   Fees.  The fee for a special event permit shall be as
established by the City Council.



   (H)   Granting a permit.  The City Council, in its sole discretion,
reserves the right to review and determine whether or not a request for a
special event and/or street closing is acceptable. In the event the City
Council determines the activity does not meet these criteria, such
applications shall be denied.



   (I)   Denial of permit.  The City Council shall have the right to
deny the permit if. in the judgment of the City Council, the granting of a
permit would adversely affect the safety, health and welfare of the citizens
of Lake Elmo or if other criteria herein are not met. The applicant shall be
notified of such denial and may appeal - before the City Council to appeal
such denial.



   (J)   Transferability.  No permit granted under this subchapter
shall be transferred to any other person or place without consent of the City
Council, upon written application made therefore.



   (K)   Enforcement and penalties. 



      (1)   The City Administrator and other such officers,
employees, or agents as the City Council or City Administrator may designate,
shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter in accordance with § 10.99
of the City Code.



      (2)   The holding of a special event in violation of any
provision of this subchapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be
abated as such.



      (3)   Any person violating any provision of this subchapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in Minnesota Statutes.



   (L)   Revocation of permit.  The permit for a special event may be
revoked by the City Council at any time if any of the conditions necessary
for the issuing of or contained in the permit are not complied with or if any
of the provisions of this subchapter are violated.



(Ord. 08-054, passed 11-1-2011; Am. Ord. 08-055, passed 11-15-2011)



CHAPTER 111:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES




Section





General Provisions




   111.01   Open bottles




Intoxicating Liquor




   111.15   Definitions



   111.16   License required



   111.17   Kinds of licenses



   111.18   Application for license



   111.19   License fees



   111.20   Granting of license



   111.21   Persons ineligible for license



   111.22   Places ineligible for license



   111.23   Conditions of license



   111.24   Restrictions on purchasing/consumption



   111.25   Suspension and revocation



   111.26   Hours of sale



   111.27   Restrictions



   111.28   Revocation



   111.29   Administrative fines, suspension, revocation for sale of
intoxicating liquor to minors




3.2% Malt Liquor




   111.40   Definitions



   111.41   License required



   111.42   License application procedure



   111.43   License fees; generally



   111.44   Fee refund



   111.45   Granting of licenses



   111.46   Duration of license



   111.47   Transfer of licenses



   111.48   License renewals



   111.49   Revocation or suspension of license



   111.50   Ineligible persons and places



   111.51   Conditions of license



   111.52   Hours of sale



   111.53   Minors



   111.54   Administrative fines, suspension, revocation for sale of
3.2% malt liquor to minors



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  OPEN BOTTLES.



   (A)   Definitions.



      (1)   Unless specifically defined in this section, words or
phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the same
meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code.



      (2)   Definitions are found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 1210.01)



   (B)   Open bottle prohibited.



      (1)   Possession in public place prohibited.  It shall be
unlawful to be in the possession of an open bottle of intoxicating liquor in
a public place.



      (2)   Consumption.  It shall be unlawful to consume
intoxicating liquor in any motorized vehicle or any passenger-carrying
appurtenance, including but not limited to trailers or campers attached to
pickup trucks or any other motorized vehicle, while the vehicle is parked in
a public place.



(1997 Code, § 1210.02)



   (C)   Special permit.



      (1)   Intent.  The Council may issue a special permit not to
exceed 90 days waiving any provisions of this section when it deems the
waivers to be consistent with public welfare and safety.



      (2)   Conditions of permit.  The permit must describe with
specificity the conditions under which the permit is issued, including:



         (a)   Public place which is covered by the permit;



         (b)   The person to whom the permit is issued; and/or



         (c)   Any other conditions or restrictions that the
Council deems necessary to adequately provide for the public welfare and
safety, including restrictions as to the type of intoxicating liquor which
may be consumed and the hours in which the liquor may be served.



      (3)   Violation.  Any violation of the conditions imposed on
the permit under division (C)(2) above shall result in an automatic
revocation of the permit.



(1997 Code, § 1210.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



INTOXICATING LIQUOR



§ 111.15  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined in §§ 111.15 et seq., words or phrases
used in §§ 111.15 et seq. shall be interpreted so as to give them the same
meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code.  Definitions are
found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 1200.01)



§ 111.16  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Except as provided in §§ 111.15 et seq., no persons shall sell
intoxicating liquor without first obtaining a license from the city.



(1997 Code, § 1200.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.17  KINDS OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Intoxicating liquor licenses shall be of 6 kinds.



   (B)   (1)   On-sale licenses.  On-sale licenses shall be issued
only to hotels, clubs, restaurants, and exclusive liquor stores and shall
permit "on-sale" of intoxicating liquor only.



      (2)   On-sale wine licenses.  On-sale wine licenses shall be
issued only to restaurants having facilities for seating at least 25 guests
at 1 time and shall permit only the sale of wine not exceeding 14% alcohol by
volume, for consumption on the licensed premises only, in conjunction with
the sale of food.



      (3)   Temporary on-sale licenses.  Temporary on-sale licenses
shall be issued only to clubs or charitable, religious, or other non-profit
organizations in existence for at least 3 years and shall authorize the
on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event sponsored by
the licensee and subject to the restrictions imposed by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time.  No more than 3 temporary on-sale licenses
may be issued to any 1 organization or for any 1 location, within a 12-month
period.



      (4)   Off-sale licenses.  Off-sale licenses shall be issued
only to exclusive liquor stores and shall permit "off-sale" of intoxicating
liquor only.



      (5)   Special club licenses.  Special club licenses shall be
issued to incorporated clubs or congressional chartered veterans
organizations which have been in existence for at least 3 years.



      (6)   Special licenses for Sunday sales.  Sunday on-sale
licenses shall be issued only to a hotel, restaurant, or club which has
facilities for serving at least 30 guests at 1 time and which has a regular
on-sale license.



(1997 Code, § 1200.03)



§ 111.18  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form.  Every application for a license to sell liquor shall
include applicant's name, age, representations as to character (with the
references as the Council may require), citizenship, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the
business, how long applicant has been in that business at that place, and the
other information as the Council may require from time to time.  Every
application shall also include a copy of each summons received by the
applicant under M.S. § 340A.802, as it may be amended from time to time,
during the preceding year.  The application shall be in the form prescribed
by the Commissioner and shall be verified and filed with the Administrator. 
No person shall make a false statement in an application.



   (B)   Bond.  Each application for an on-sale, on-sale wine, or
off-sale license shall be accompanied by a surety bond in the amount of
$1,000 or, in lieu of the surety bond, cash or United States government bonds
of equivalent value.



   (C)   Financial responsibility.  No liquor license may be issued,
maintained, or renewed unless the applicant demonstrates proof of financial
responsibility with regard to liability imposed by M.S. 340A.801, as it may
be amended from time to time.  The proof shall be filed with the
Commissioner.  Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it
may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Approval of security.  Security bonds or evidence of
financial responsibility shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
Operation of a licensed business without having on file with the city at all
times evidence of required bonds or insurance coverage shall be cause for
revocation of the liquor license.



(1997 Code, § 1200.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.19  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Fees.  The annual fee for liquor licenses shall be set from
time to time by ordinance of the Council.



   (B)   Waiver of fee.  The Council can, at its discretion, waive the
fee for a temporary on-sale license.



   (C)   Payment.  Each application for a license shall be accompanied
by a receipt from the City Treasurer for payment in full of the license fee
and the fixed investigation fee required pursuant to § 111.20(A).  All fees
shall be paid into the general fund.  If an application for a license is
rejected, the Treasurer shall refund the amount paid as the license fee.



   (D)   Term; pro rata fee.  Each license shall be issued for a
period of 1 year except that, if the application is made during the license
year, a license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro rata
fee, with any unexpired fraction of a month being counted as 1 month.  Every
license shall expire on the last day of December.



   (E)   Refund.  No refund of any license fee shall be made except as
provided in §§ 111.15 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 1200.05)



§ 111.20  GRANTING OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Preliminary investigation.



      (1)   On an initial application for an on-sale license and on
application for transfer of an existing on-sale license, the applicant shall
pay with the application an investigation fee as set forth from time to time
by resolution of the Council.



      (2)   The city shall construct a preliminary background and
financial investigation of the applicant.



      (3)   The application in this case shall be made on a form
prescribed by the Commissioner and with the additional information as the
Council may require.



      (4)   If the Council deems it in the public interest to have
an investigation made on a particular application for renewal of an on-sale
license, it shall so determine.



      (5)   In any case, if the Council determines that a
comprehensive background and financial investigation of the applicant is
necessary, it may conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
Commissioner for the investigation.



      (6)   No license shall be issued, transferred, or renewed if
the results show, to the satisfaction of the Council, that issuance would not
be in the public interest.



      (7)   If the investigation is required beyond state
boundaries, the applicant shall pay for the actual cost of the investigation
but in no event an amount in excess of $10,000.



      (8)   The estimated amount of the investigation shall be paid
at the time of application.



      (9)   The remaining amount due for investigative costs shall
be paid prior to final review of the license application by the Council.



      (10)   The full amount of the license investigation fee is
payable regardless of whether the liquor license is granted.



   (B)   Hearing and issuance.  The Council shall investigate all
facts set out in the application and not investigated in the preliminary
background investigation.  Opportunity shall be given to any person to be
heard for or against the granting of the license.  After the investigation
and hearing, the Council shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the
application.  No license shall become effective until it, together with the
security furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the Commissioner.



   (C)   Person and premises license; transfer.  Each license shall be
issued only to the applicant and for the premises described in the
application.  No license may be transferred to another person or place
without Council approval.  Any transfer of stock of a corporate license is
deemed a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior
Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license.



(1997 Code, § 1200.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.21  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for the
license by state law.



(1997 Code, § 1200.07)



§ 111.22  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   General prohibition.  No license shall be issued for any
place or any business ineligible for the license under state law.



   (B)   Delinquent taxes.  No license shall be granted for operation
on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
city are delinquent and unpaid.



(1997 Code, § 1200.08) (Am. Ord. 08-081, passed 6-4-2013)



§ 111.23  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   General.  Every license is subject to the conditions in this
section and all other provisions of §§ 111.15 et seq. and of any other
applicable ordinance, state law, or regulation.



   (B)   Insurance.  Every licensee shall comply with the financial
responsibility requirements of state law and of §§ 111.15 et seq. is a
continuing condition of any license granted pursuant to §§ 111.15 et seq.



   (C)   Licensee responsibility.  Every licensee is responsible for
the conduct in the licensed establishment, and any sale of alcohol beverages
by any employee authorized to sell the beverages in the establishment is the
act of the licensee for purposes of license suspension or revocation.



   (D)   Inspections.  Every licensee shall allow any peace officer,
health officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to
enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours
without a warrant.



   (E)   Display during prohibited hours.  No "on-sale" establishment
shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is
prohibited.



(1997 Code, § 1200.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.24  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASING/CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   Liquor in unlicensed places.  No person shall purchase liquor
for consumption in any public place or place of business unless it has a
license to sell liquor "on-sale" or a permit from the Commissioner, and no
person shall consume liquor in that place.



   (B)   Consumption in public places.  No person shall consume liquor
in a public park, or other public place, except for those temporary licenses
granted pursuant to § 111.17(B)(3).



(1997 Code, § 1200.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.25  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke
any liquor license, or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000 for each
violation, upon the finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, regulation, or ordinance relating to alcohol beverages. 
Except in case of failure of financial responsibility, no suspension or
revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an
opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69 of the
Administrative Procedure Act, as they may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Lapse of required dram shop insurance or bond, or withdrawal
of a required deposit of cash or securities, shall effect an immediate
suspension of any license issued pursuant to §§ 111.15 et seq. without
further action of the Council.  Notice of cancellation, lapse of a current
liquor liability policy or bond, or withdrawal of deposited cash or
securities shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending
suspension of the license.  The holder of a license who has received notice
of lapse of required insurance or bond, or withdrawal of a required deposit,
or of suspension or revocation of a license, may request a hearing and, if
the request is made in writing to the Administrator, a hearing shall be
granted within 10 days or the longer period as may be requested.  Any
suspension under this section shall continue until the Council determines
that the financial responsibility requirements of §§ 111.15 et seq. have
again been met.



(1997 Code, § 1200.11)



§ 111.26  HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   Intoxicating liquor on-sale.  No sale of intoxicating liquor
for consumption on the licensed premises may be made by an on-sale licensee:



      (1)   Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the day of Monday
through Saturday;



      (2)   After 1:00 a.m. on Sundays, except that a restaurant,
club, or hotel with a seating capacity for at least 30 persons which holds an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license may sell intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises in conjunction with the sale of food between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. Sunday and 1:00 a.m. on Monday; and/or



(Am. Ord. 9768, passed 1-2-2001)



      (3)   Between 8:00 p.m. on December 24 and 8:00 a.m. on
December 25, except that a restaurant, club, or hotel with a seating capacity
for at least 30 persons which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
may sell intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction
with the sale of food between the hours of 12:00 a.m. on Sundays and 1:00
a.m. on Mondays.



   (B)   Intoxicating liquor off-sale.  No sale of intoxicating liquor
may be made by an off-sale licensee:



      (1)   On Sundays;



      (2)   Before 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday;



      (3)   After 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday;



      (4)   On Thanksgiving Day;



      (5)   On Christmas Day, December 25; or



      (6)   After 8:00 p.m. on Christmas Eve, December 24.



(1997 Code, § 1200.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.27  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   All sales shall be made in full view of the public.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix or prepare liquor
for consumption or to consume liquor or to permit the consumption of the
liquor in any public place or place of business except on premises for which
an "on-sale" license has been issued.



(1997 Code, § 1200.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.28  REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any license granted under §§ 111.15 et seq. may be revoked
by the Council.



   (B)   A hearing shall first be held by the Council and the
revocation then made for cause.



   (C)   Any violation of any provision or condition of §§ 111.15 et
seq. or the state licensing law or any falsification of any statement in the
application shall be ground for revocation.



   (D)   Any license shall be revoked automatically upon the conviction
of the licensee of a felony.



   (E)   No portion of the license fee paid to the Administrator shall
be returned upon revocation.



(1997 Code, § 1200.14)



§ 111.29  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION FOR SALE OF
INTOXICATING LIQUOR TO MINORS.



   (A)   Administrative fines, suspension, revocation.



      (1)   (a)   Any violation of the city's regulations
relating to the issuance of an intoxicating liquor license or any
conditions/restrictions attached to the issuance of the license shall be
cause for the imposition of an administrative fine, the suspension of the
license, and/or the revocation of the license.



         (b)   A licensee whose license has been revoked shall
not be eligible for another intoxicating liquor license for 1 year from the
date of license revocation.



      (2)   No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been given an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§
14.57 through 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, provided that
the city shall not be required to conduct the hearing before an employee of
the Office of Administrative Hearings.



      (3)   If the violation relates to the sale of intoxicating
liquor to minors by licensee's employees, the following administrative fines,
suspension, or revocations may be imposed.



         (a)   After the first violation, if an affidavit of
training is on file with the city for the employee who made the illegal sale,
the City Administrator shall provide licensee with a notice that a sale to a
minor has been documented and shall include a copy of the city's
administrative fine regulations with the city; or, if an affidavit of
training is not on file, with the city, for the employee who made the illegal
sale, the City Administrator shall notify licensee that a sale to a minor has
been documented, shall include a copy of the city's administrative fine
regulations with the notice, and shall impose an administrative fine of $200.



         (b)   The second violation within 12 months shall
require the licensee to pay an administrative fine of $200 if an affidavit of
training is on file, with the city, for the employee who made the illegal
sale; or shall require the licensee to pay an administrative fine of $400 if
no affidavit of training is on file, with the city, for the employee who made
the illegal sale.



         (c)   The third violation within 24 months shall require
the licensee to pay an administrative fine of $400 and shall result in a
license suspension of 7 business days if an affidavit of training is on file,
with the city, for the employee who made the illegal sale; or shall require
licensee to pay an administrative fine of $800 and shall result in a license
suspension for 7 business days if an affidavit of training is not on file,
with the city, for the employee who made the illegal sale.



         (d)   The fourth violation within 24 months shall result
in license revocation.



   (B)   Compliance checks.  The city or its law enforcement agencies
shall conduct compliance checks at least once each calendar year at each
location where an intoxicating liquor license has been issued to test
compliance with the provisions of the city's regulations.  Compliance checks
shall utilize minors over the age of 18, but under the age of 21, who attempt
to purchase intoxicating liquor under the direct supervision of a law
enforcement officer.



(Ord. 97-102, passed - -)



3.2% MALT LIQUOR



§ 111.40  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined in §§ 111.40 et seq., words or phrases
used in §§ 111.40 et seq. shall be interpreted so as to give them the same
meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code.  Definitions are
found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 1205.01)



§ 111.41  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Types of licenses.  Except as provided in §§ 111.40 et
seq., no person shall sell 3.2% malt liquor without first obtaining a license
from the city.  Licenses shall be of 3 kinds:



      (1)   On-sale;



      (2)   Off-sale; and



      (3)   Temporary on-sale.



   (B)   On-sale licenses.  On-sale licenses shall be granted only to
bona fide clubs, drug stores, restaurants, hotels, and establishments for the
sale of 3.2% malt liquor, cigars, cigarettes, all forms of tobacco,
beverages, and soft drinks at retail.  On-sale licenses shall permit the
sale of 3.2% malt liquor for consumption on the premises only.



   (C)   Off-sale.  Off-sale licenses shall permit the sale of 3.2%
malt liquor at retail, in the original package for consumption off the
premises only.



   (D)   Temporary license.  A club or charitable, religious, or
non-profit organization may be issued a temporary on-sale license for the
sale of 3.2% malt liquor on or off school grounds, and in and out of school
houses and school buildings and in or outside of public parks.  No more than
3 temporary on-sale licenses may be issued to any 1 organization or for 1
location, within a 12-month period.



(1997 Code, § 1205.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.42  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   General.



      (1)   Every application for a license to sell 3.2% malt liquor
shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall state the name of the
applicant, applicant's age, representations as to applicant's character with
the references as may be required, applicant's citizenship, whether the
application is for on-sale or off-sale, the business in connection with which
the proposed license will operate and its location, whether the applicant is
the owner and operator of the business, how long applicant has been in that
business at that place, the amount and nature of any dancing, singing,
vaudeville performance, or other entertainment to be provided for guests, and
the other information as the Council may require from time to time.



      (2)   Except for resorts, a scale drawing of the floor plan of
the proposed licensed premises shall be attached to each application.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in the
application.  Applications shall be filed with the City Administrator.



   (B)   Corporations.  In addition to the previous provisions, an
application for an on-sale or off-sale license on behalf of a corporation
shall include complete information as to the names and addresses of the
officers of the corporation and other information required by the Council. 
Corporate officers shall notify the Council whenever any change is made in
the officers of the corporation.



(1997 Code, § 1205.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.43  LICENSE FEES; GENERALLY.



   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the Administrator for payment in full of the required fee for
the license.



   (B)   All fees shall be paid into the general fund of the
municipality.



   (C)   Fees shall be set by ordinance of the Council.



(1997 Code, § 1205.04)



§ 111.44  FEE REFUND.



   No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this code shall be
refunded except:



   (A)   Rejected application.  Upon the rejection of an application
for a license, the Administrator shall refund the amount paid; and



   (B)   Death of licensee.  Upon the death of a licensee, provided
that the application for refund be made to the Council within 90 days of the
date of licensee's death, there shall be refunded a pro rata portion of the
fee computed on a monthly basis for any unexpired period of the license that
exceeds 1 month.



(1997 Code, § 1205.05)



§ 111.45  GRANTING OF LICENSES.



   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application. 
Opportunity shall be given for any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license.  After the investigation and hearing, the Council
may grant or refuse the application in its discretion.



(1997 Code, § 1205.06)



§ 111.46  DURATION OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on the first day of
January of each year.  Each license shall be issued for a period of 1 year,
except that if a portion of the licensed year has elapsed when the
application is made, a license shall be issued for the remainder of the
year.  In case of death of any licensee of any off-sale or on-sale
non-intoxicating malt beverages, licensee's personal representative is, by
§§ 111.40 et seq., authorized to continue operating the business for not
more than 90 days after the death of the licensee.



(1997 Code, § 1205.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.47  TRANSFER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Generally.  Each license shall be issued only to the
applicant and only for the premises described in the application.  No
license may be transferred to another person or place without the approval of
the Council.



   (B)   Corporations.  The transfer of control in any corporation
holding an on-sale or off-sale license shall be deemed a transfer within the
meaning of this chapter, and no transfer of stock shall be made without the
consent of the Council.



(1997 Code, § 1205.08)



§ 111.48  LICENSE RENEWALS.



   Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be filed with the
Administrator on or before the first day of December.



(1997 Code, § 1205.09)



§ 111.49  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Generally.  The Council may revoke a 3.2% malt liquor license
for violation of any statute or ordinance relating to the sale of 3.2% malt
liquor.  The following shall be deemed sufficient cause for revocation:



      (1)   If the officers of a corporation licensee fail to notify
the Council of a proposed sale or transfer of control or of a change in the
corporate officers;



      (2)   If any 3.2% malt liquor licensee is the owner and holder
of a federal retail liquor dealer's special tax stamp and does not have a
license to sell intoxicating liquors pursuant to the laws of this state for
the place, the licensee's 3.2% malt liquor license shall be revoked by the
Council without notice and without a hearing on the revocation; and/or



      (3)   If any dancing, singing, vaudeville performance or other
entertainment is provided for guests other than that stated in the
application for the license.



   (B)   Hearing.  Licensee shall be granted a hearing upon at least
10-days notice before revocation or suspension is ordered by the Council,
where mandatory revocation is not provided by law.



   (C)   Length of suspension.  No suspension shall exceed 60 days.



(1997 Code, § 1205.10)



§ 111.50  INELIGIBLE PERSONS AND PLACES.



   (A)   Persons.  No license shall be granted to a person who is:



      (1)   Not of good moral character and repute;



      (2)   Not at least 18 years of age;



      (3)   Not the proprietor of the establishment for which the
license is issued;



      (4)   A person convicted of violating any law relating to the
sale of 3.2% malt liquor or of intoxicating liquor within a period of 5 years
prior to the date of the application; and/or



      (5)   The owner or holder of, or to whom there is subsequently
issued, a federal liquor dealer's special tax stamp for the sale of
intoxicating liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to the
person a license to sell intoxicating liquor at the place.



   (B)   Places.



      (1)   No license of any kind shall be granted for any premises
where a licensee, or licensee's agent, servant, or employee, has been
convicted of a violation of this code or applicable state law, or where any
license under §§ 111.40 et seq. has been revoked for cause, until 1 year
has elapsed after the conviction or revocation, or the shorter period of time
as the Council, in its discretion, may establish.



      (2)   No license shall be granted within 600 feet of the
property line of any school, church, playground, or public park, except for
those temporary licenses granted pursuant to § 111.41(D).



      (3)   No license shall be granted for operation of any
premises upon which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
operation are delinquent and unpaid.



(1997 Code, § 1205.11)



§ 111.51  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Every license shall be granted subject to the following
paragraphs and all the provisions of this code and any other applicable law.



   (B)   (1)   Posting license.  All licensed premises shall have
the license posted in a conspicuous place at all times.



      (2)   Intoxicated persons.  3.2% malt liquor shall not be
sold or served to any intoxicated person.



      (3)   Gambling prohibited.  No gambling or any gambling
device shall be permitted on any licensed premises.



      (4)   Retail.  No manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2% malt
liquor shall have any ownership of or interest in an establishment licensed
to sell at retail contrary to the provisions of M.S. § 340A.301, as it may
be amended from time to time.  No retail licensee and manufacturer or
wholesaler of 3.2% malt liquor shall be parties to any exclusive purchase
contract.  No retail licensee shall receive any benefits contrary to law
from a manufacturer or wholesaler of 3.2% malt liquor, and no manufacturer or
wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary to law upon a retail licensee.



      (5)   Display.  No licensee who is not also licensed to sell
intoxicating liquor shall sell or permit the consumption or display of
intoxicating liquors on the licensed premises or serve any liquids for the
purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor.  This division (B)(5) shall not
apply to any place licensed as a bottle club, pursuant to the applicable
Minnesota Statutes.  The presence of intoxicating liquors on the premises of
a licensee shall be prima facie evidence of possession of intoxicating
liquors for the purpose of sale.



      (6)   Conduct.  Every licensee shall be responsible for the
conduct of licensee's place of business and shall maintain conditions of
sobriety and order.



      (7)   Prohibitions.  No tobacco products or soft drinks shall
be sold in any saloon or tavern during the hours when the sale of 3.2% malt
liquor is prohibited.



      (8)   Consumption.  No person shall consume or display any
intoxicating liquor on the premises of the licensee, provided that division
(B)(8) shall not apply to any place licensed as a bottle club, pursuant to
the applicable Minnesota Statutes.



      (9)   Effective boundaries.  No license shall be effective
beyond the compact and contiguous space named in the license for which it was
granted, provided that the premises of a result include the land upon which
the result is located.



(1997 Code, § 1205.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.52  HOURS OF SALE.



   No sale of 3.2% malt liquor shall be made between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Saturday, inclusive. 
Neither shall any sale of the liquor be made on any Sunday between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. noon.



(1997 Code, § 1205.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.53  MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any:



   (A)   Licensee or licensee's employee to sell or serve 3.2% malt
liquor to any minor or to permit any minor to consume 3.2% malt liquor on the
licensed premises or to permit any minor to loiter or to remain in the room
where 3.2% malt liquor is being sold or served unless accompanied by
licensee's parent or legal guardian;



   (B)   Person to induce a minor to purchase or procure 3.2% malt
liquor;



   (C)   Minor to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
obtaining 3.2% malt liquor; and/or



   (D)   Minor to have in his or her possession any 3.2% malt liquor.



(1997 Code, § 1205.14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.54  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION FOR SALE OF 3.2%
MALT LIQUOR TO MINORS.



   (A)   3.2% malt liquor.



      (1)   Any violation of the city's regulations relating to the
issuance of a 3.2% malt liquor license or any conditions/restrictions
attached to the issuance of the license shall be cause for the imposition of
an administrative fine, the suspension of the license, and/or the revocation
of the license.  A licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be
eligible for another 3.2% malt liquor license for 1 year from the date of
license revocation.



      (2)   No suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been given an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§
14.57 through 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, provided that
the city shall not be required to conduct the hearing before an employee of
the Office of Administrative Hearings.  If the violation relates to the sale
of 3.2% malt liquor to minors by licensee's employees, the following
administrative fines, suspension, or revocations may be imposed.



         (a)   After the first violation, if an affidavit of
training is on file with the city, for the employee who made the illegal
sale, the City Administrator shall provide licensee with a notice that a sale
to a minor has been documented and shall include a copy of the city's
administrative fine regulations with the city; or, if an affidavit of
training is not on file, with the city, for the employee who made the illegal
sale, the City Administrator shall notify licensee that a sale to a minor has
been documented, shall include a copy of the city's administrative fine
regulations with the notice, and shall impose an administrative fine of $200.



         (b)   The second violation within 12 months shall
require the licensee to pay an administrative fine of $200 if an affidavit of
training is on file, with the city, for the employee who made the illegal
sale; or, shall require the licensee to pay an administrative fine of $400 if
no affidavit of training is on file, with the city, for the employee who made
the illegal sale.



         (c)   The third violation within 24 months shall require
the licensee to pay an administrative fine of $400 and shall result in a
license suspension of 7 business days if an affidavit of training is on file,
with the city, for the employee who made the illegal sale; or shall require
licensee to pay an administrative fine of $800 and shall result in a license
suspension for 7 business days if an affidavit of training is not on file,
with the city, for the employee who made the illegal sale.



         (d)   The fourth violation within 24 months shall result
in license revocation.



   (B)   Compliance checks.  The city or its law enforcement agencies
shall conduct compliance checks at least once each calendar year at each
location where a 3.2% malt liquor license has been issued to test compliance
with the provisions of the city's regulations.  Compliance checks shall
utilize minors over the age of 18, but under the age of 21, who attempt to
purchase 3.2% malt liquor under the direct supervision of a law enforcement
officer.



(Ord. 97-101, passed - -)



CHAPTER 112:  TARGET RANGES



Section



   112.01   Scope



   112.02   Permit



   112.03   Inspection



   112.04   Application



   112.05   Insurance



   112.06   Club or organization



   112.07   Construction



   112.08   Warning signs



   112.09   Time open signs



   112.10   Hours of shooting



   112.11   Shooting safety signs



   112.12   Supervision



   112.13   Safety rules and regulations



§ 112.01  SCOPE.



   (A)   This chapter shall apply to existing and future outdoor target
ranges within the city.



   (B)   A conditional use permit shall be required to construct,
maintain, or operate an outdoor target range.



(1997 Code, § 1305.01)



§ 112.02  PERMIT.



   The conditional use permit may be rescinded, after a 2-week notice and
a public hearing, if the Council finds that the public health, safety, or
welfare is jeopardized.



(1997 Code, § 1305.02)



§ 112.03  INSPECTION.



   The range and range area shall be subjected to inspection prior to
issuance of the permit and at any other time as the Council may feel
necessary without any notification.



(1997 Code, § 1305.03)



§ 112.04  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The individual or organization requesting a permit for the
construction of a new outdoor target range shall submit an application for
the permit to the Administrator.



   (B)   The application shall include the following:



      (1)   A plan for adequate sewage treatment, a safe water
supply, and the disposal of solid wastes;



      (2)   A letter outlining the proposed hours of operation,
range etiquette, range rules to be posted, and provisions for emergency
preparedness;



      (3)   A noise abatement plan;



      (4)   Photos of the property and all ranges and facilities;



      (5)   A site plan at a scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet which
gives the legal description of the property, north point, location of all
ranges to scale with distances to property lines, proposed fencing along all
developed property lines; topographic information at 2 foot intervals showing
all berms, noise barriers, drainage, and elevations of buildings; location
and dimensions of all buildings, parking areas, and accesses; the type and
nature of equipment to be installed; the type of range to be constructed; and
adjacent property uses; and



      (6)   A list of range officers in charge for the Police
Department.



   (C)   The application will be reviewed by the Building Official, the
City Engineer, the City Administrator and the other officials or consultants
as the Council may require; and their findings and recommendations shall be
forwarded to the Council and the applicant.



(1997 Code, § 1305.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.05  INSURANCE.



   Public liability and property damage insurance, the minimum limits of
coverage to be not less than $300,000, shall be provided.  The city shall be
named as an additional insured and be furnished with evidence of the coverage.



(1997 Code, § 1305.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.06  CLUB OR ORGANIZATION.



   In the case of a club or organization, a list of officers is to be
filed with the Administrator.  The Council is to be notified of any change
in writing to the City Administrator.



(1997 Code, § 1305.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.07  CONSTRUCTION.



   Construction of the range shall be of a permanent nature and must meet
all safety standards as set up by the National Rifle Association.  Any
expansion of the range will require an amended conditional use permit.



(1997 Code, § 1305.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.08  WARNING SIGNS.



   The entire outer area of the property for which a permit is granted
shall be posted with warning signs advising the public of possible danger. 
The signs shall be of a permanent nature and posted at intervals of not less
than 200 feet apart.  Lettering shall be as follows:



 

Sign Type
 
Letter Size
 
Color


DANGER
 
4 inch
 
Red


TARGET RANGE
 
2 inch
 
Black


NO TRESPASSING
 
2 inch
 
Black



 



(1997 Code, § 1305.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.09  TIME OPEN SIGN.



   The entrance to the range area must be posted as to the time the range
is open for public use.



(1997 Code, § 1305.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.10  HOURS OF SHOOTING.



   A firearm may not be discharged prior to 8:00 a.m. and not after 1/2
hour before dusk of each day or at any other time that for any reason
whatsoever would create a danger either to the general public or users of the
range.



(1997 Code, § 1305.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.11  SHOOTING SAFETY SIGNS.



   A sign shall be displayed at the entrance to the range area and at each
firing point stating club rules and N.R.A. rules for range and gun safety.



(1997 Code, § 1305.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.12  SUPERVISION.



   (A)   Position of supervision.  When a range is open to the public,
there is to be a minimum of 1 qualified range supervisor in charge at all
times during the operation of a range.  A holder of a firearm safety
instructor certificate of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or an
N.R.A. firearms instruction certificate or having completed a range safety
program inspected and endorsed by the D.N.R., shall constitute a qualified
supervisor.



   (B)   Persons under age 18.  No one under the age of 18 years old
shall be on the range, unless:



      (1)   Participating in a firearm safety training program;



      (2)   Accompanied by responsible adult; and/or



      (3)   That person has received thorough indoctrination in
range safety procedures and range etiquette, if pulling targets.



(1997 Code, § 1305.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.13  SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   All target ranges shall follow reasonable safety procedures.  Prima
facie evidence of reasonable safety procedures shall be those procedures set
forth in the National Rifle Association Manual.



(1997 Code, § 1305.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   113.01   Findings and recitals



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Regulation



   113.04   Means of enforcement



   113.99   Penalty



§ 113.01  FINDINGS AND RECITALS.



   (A)   (1)   On February 20, 2007, the City Council enacted an
interim ordinance (Ord. 97-189) creating a moratorium on the establishment of
adult uses within the city and directing the city staff to conduct a study to
determine how best to regulate such uses. The scope of the study was to
include, but not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   The particular zoning districts in which adult
establishments should be allowed as either permitted or conditional uses;



         (b)   The density and concentration of adult uses; and



         (c)   The effect of adult uses on other uses in the
surrounding area.



      (2)   Upon completion of the study, the matter was to be
considered by the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation to
the City Council.



      (3)   The study has been completed and the Planning Commission
has reviewed the study and has passed its recommendation to the City Council
for review. The City Council has also reviewed the staff’s study and duly
considered the recommendation of the Planning Commission.



   (B)   The staff’s study contained copies of certain reports
specifically including a report which was prepared by the State Attorney
General entitled "Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses", dated June 6, 1989 (the
"report"). The report considered evidence from studies conducted in
Minneapolis, St. Paul, and many other cities throughout the country relating
to sexually-oriented businesses. The city staff, Planning Commission, and
City Council have reviewed the report.



   (C)   The report, based upon the above referenced studies and the
testimony and evidence it concluded, among other things, " . . . that
sexually-oriented businesses are associated with high crime rates and
depression of property values. . . ." Prior to the issuance of the report,
the State Attorney General's Working Group also heard testimony that " . . .
the character of a neighborhood can dramatically change when there is a
concentration of sexually-oriented businesses adjacent to residential
property." The report found and concluded that:



      (1)   Adult uses have an impact on the neighborhoods
surrounding them, which is distinct from the impact caused by other
commercial uses;



      (2)   Residential neighborhoods located within close proximity
to adult theaters, bookstores and other adult uses experience increased crime
rates (sex-related crimes in particular), lowered property values, increased
transiency, and decreased stability of ownership;



      (3)   The adverse impacts which adult uses have on surrounding
areas diminish as the distance from the adult uses increases;



      (4)   Studies of other cities have shown that among the crimes
which tend to increase either within or in the near vicinity of adult uses
are rapes, prostitution, child molestation, indecent exposure and other lewd
and lascivious behavior;



      (5)   The City of Phoenix, Arizona study confirmed that the
sex crime rate was on the average 500% higher in areas with sexually-oriented
businesses;



      (6)   Many members of the public perceive areas within which
adult uses are located as less desirable than other areas which do not have
such uses;



      (7)   Studies of other cities have shown that the values of
both commercial and residential properties either are diminished or fail to
appreciate at the rate of other comparable properties when located in
proximity to adult uses; and



      (8)   The Indianapolis, Indiana study established that
professional real estate appraisers believe that an adult bookstore would
have a negative effect on the value of both residential and commercial
properties within a 1- to 3-block area of the store.



   (D)   The City Council finds the characteristics of the city are
substantially similar to those of the cities cited by the report when
considering the affects of adult uses.



   (E)   The City Council finds, based upon the report and the studies
cited therein, that adult uses may have adverse secondary effects upon
certain preexisting land uses within the city, and that the public health,
safety, and general welfare will be promoted if the city adopts regulations
regarding adult uses.



   (F)   The City Council finds that the adverse secondary effects tend
to diminish if adult uses in the city are regulated by locational and
licensing requirements.



   (G)   It is not the intent of the city to prohibit adult uses from
having a reasonable opportunity to locate within the city.



   (H)   The city's current zoning ordinance does not address such
adult uses, which have been found by other municipalities to cause similar
adverse secondary effects. Specifically, the City Council is concerned that
the city's zoning ordinance may be inadequate in its scope and in its
restrictions to accomplish the purpose for which it was intended.



    (I)   In addition to the proper zoning classification of such uses,
there are a number of significant planning and land use issues pertaining to
the regulation of such uses, including the following:



      (1)   The particular zoning districts in which such uses
should be allowed as either permitted or conditional uses;



      (2)   The concentration and density of such uses in the city
and its neighborhoods; and



      (3)   The effect of such uses on other uses in the surrounding
area.



(Ord. 97-198, passed 8-21-2007)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined
as set forth below.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENT.



      (1)   ADULT PATRONAGE.  Any business that is conducted
exclusively for the patronage of adults and that excludes minors from
patronage, either by operation of law or by the owners of the business;



      (2)   ADULT USAGE.  Any business that engages in any adult
use; or



      (3)   RECEIPTS; FLOOR AREA; TYPES OF MERCHANDISE.  Any
business that:



         (a)   Derives 25% or more of its gross receipts during
any calendar month from; or



         (b)   Devotes 25% or more of its floor area (not
including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of
the business not open to the public) to items, merchandise, devices or other
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on material
depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT USES, GENERALLY.  Include adult book stores, adult motion
picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors,
adult steam room/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship parlors,
adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult
motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult
body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, or establishments,
businesses or places open to some or all members of the public at or in which
there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which are
capable of being seen, heard, or smelled by members of the public. Activities
and matters classified as obscene as defined by M.S. §6 17.241 are not
included as an adult use and are prohibited in the City. ADULT USES include
but are not limited to the following:



      (1)   ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or
business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance,
whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when
such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  A building or portion of a building
used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of printed matter,
specifically included, but not limited to, greeting cards, pictures, slides,
records, audio tape, videotape or motion picture film if such building or
portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to 1 or
more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age or if a
substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET.  A building or portion of a building
used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or
portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing or
other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (4)   ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A companionship
establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the
service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion
between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



      (5)   ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A conversation/rap
parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service
of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion, if such
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (6)   ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club which
excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (7)   ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL.  Adult hotel or motel means a
hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage by
reason of age and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (8)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB.  A massage parlor or
health club which restricts minors by reason of age, or which provides the
services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (9)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or portion of
a building used for presenting material if such building or portion of a
building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by reason of age, or if
such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons
therein.



      (10)   ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  A modeling studio which
restricts minors by reason of age, or whose major business is the provision,
to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of
providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, or
who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical
areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn,
sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.



      (11)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the
public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated, still or
motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices
(including, but not limited to images from CD-ROM and/or the Internet) are
maintained to show images to 5 or few persons per machine at any one time,
and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (12)   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS. An establishment or business
engaged in the sale of novelty items which:



         (a)   Restricts minors by reason of their age; or



         (b)   Has as its principal activity the sale of devices
and other products which:



            1.   Stimulate human genitals or devices which are
designed to create sexual stimulation or excitement;



            2.   Are otherwise designed to stimulate or arouse
sexual excitement in any manner whatsoever, specifically including, but not
limited to, items such as inflatable dolls or similar devices; and/or



            3.   Is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (13)   ADULT SAUNA.  A sauna which excludes minors by reason
of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the
purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing utilizing steam or hot
air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the
sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (14)   ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building or
portion of building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used
for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building
or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service
provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Defined as follows:



      (1)   FEMALE.  Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; and



      (2)   MALE.  Human male genitals even if completely and
opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Defined as follows:



      (1)   General sexually-oriented acts.  Actual or simulated:



         (a)   Sexual intercourse;



         (b)   Oral copulation;



         (c)   Anal intercourse;



         (d)   Oral-anal copulation;



         (e)   Bestiality;



         (f)   Direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals
or the female breast;



         (g)   Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship;



         (h)   The use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship; or



         (i)   Any of the following sexually-oriented acts or
conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;



      (2)   Genitalia.  Any clear depiction of human genitals in
the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;



      (3)   Certain uses and activities.  Use of human or animal
ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation;



      (4)   Touching.  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals,
public region, buttocks, or female breast;



      (5)   Nature of clothing, or lack thereof. Situations
involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or
in sexually revealing costumes and who are engaged in activities involving
the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of
any such person;



      (6)   Animals.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being;



      (7)   Irrigation.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation,
vaginal irrigation;



      (8)   Minor.  An individual under 18 years of age.



(Ord. 97-198, passed 8-21-2007)



§ 113.03  REGULATION.



   (A)   Location restrictions. The restrictions set forth below shall
apply to the location of adult establishments.



      (1)   No adult establishment shall be operated or maintained
except within the BP Commercial Zoning District pursuant to a conditional use
permit.



      (2)   No adult establishment shall be operated or maintained
on a parcel within 1350 feet of any residential district, public or private
school with students primarily under the age of 18, or public facilities, or
religious place of worship, or within 500 feet of another adult
establishment. Distance shall be measured from the closest point of the lot
lines of subject uses.



      (3)   No adult establishment incorporating live performances
shall be operated or maintained on a parcel within 50 miles of another adult
establishment that provides space for live performances. Distance shall be
measured from the closest point of the lot lines of subject uses.



   (B)   Sign requirements.  In addition to the requirements of sign
regulations of the development ordinance (and as subsequently amended), all
businesses regulated under this chapter shall comply with the following sign
requirements:



      (1)   All signs shall be wall signs.



      (2)   No merchandise or pictures of the products or
entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or in any
area where they can be viewed from a public street or sidewalk in front of
the building.



      (3)   Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any
way.



      (4)   No sign shall be placed in any window.



      (5)   A 1 square-foot sign shall be placed on the door of the
establishment to state hours of operation and admittance is limited to adults
only.



      (6)   Sign content shall be limited to text only. Text is
limited to the name of the business and its address.



      (7)   Where any provisions of this section conflict with sign
ordinance, the provision that is more stringent shall be applied.



   (C)   Physical layout of business.  Any adult establishment having
available for customers, patrons or members, a booth, room or cubicle for the
private viewing of any specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities must comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible
to and from aisles and public areas of the adult establishment and shall be
unobstructed by any door, lock or other control type devices.



      (2)   Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:



         (a)   Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated
from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any non-public areas by a wall.



         (b)   Have at least 1 side totally open to a public
lighted aisle so there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone
occupying the area.



         (c)   All walls shall be solid and without any openings,
extended from the floor to a height of not less than 6 feet and be
light-colored, non-absorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable.



         (d)   The floor must be light-colored, non-absorbent,
smooth-textured and easily cleanable.



         (e)   The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle
when not in use shall be a minimum of 10 foot candles at all times, as
measured from the floor.



      (3)   Only 1 individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle
at any time. No occupant of a booth, room or cubicle shall engage in any type
of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth.
No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth.



   (D)   License required.



      (1)   From and after the effective date of this chapter no
adult establishment shall be operated or maintained in the city without first
obtaining a license to operate issued by the city.



      (2)   A license may be issued for only 1 adult establishment
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership or corporation
which desires to operate more than 1 adult establishment shall have a
separate license for each such business.



      (3)   No license or interest in a license may be transferred
to any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity.



      (4)   Only 1 licensed adult establishment may be operated:



         (a)   Within a single building; or



         (b)   Upon a single tax parcel.



      (5)   No liquor license shall be issued for an adult
establishment.



   (E)   Application for license.



      (1)   Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to
secure a license shall make application to the City Clerk.



      (2)   The application for a license shall be upon a form
provided by the city.



      (3)   An applicant shall furnish the following information:



         (a)   Names, addresses and dates of birth of applicant
and spouse if any;



         (b)   Written proof that the applicant is at least 18
years of age;



         (c)   Address of the adult establishment to be operated
by the applicant;



         (d)   The name of the city, county and state, if any,
where the applicant previously operated an adult establishment;



         (e)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony involving sexual conduct, the use or distribution of controlled
substances or the use or distribution of a dangerous weapon. If the answer to
the last is yes, state the jurisdiction in which the offense or offenses
occurred. The applicant may attach any explanation he or she deems
appropriate; and



         (f)   If the applicant is a corporation
(partnership/limited liability company/trust or other business entity which
is not a natural person), the name of the corporation, the date and state of
incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and the name and
address of all shareholders owning more than 5% of the stock in said
corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation.



      (4)   Within 60 days of receiving a completed application for
a license, the City Clerk shall submit the application to the City Council
for approval or denial.



      (5)   Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any
information relative to the investigation of the application shall constitute
grounds for denial of the license.



   (F)   Standards for issuing licenses.



      (1)   To receive a license to operate an adult establishment,
an applicant must meet the following standards:



         (a)   The applicant must be 18 years of age or older.



         (b)   The applicant or his or her spouse has not been
denied a similar license by any other city, county or state within the
preceding 12 months or has not had such a license revoked or suspended within
the preceding 12 months.



         (c)   All current real estate taxes have been paid on
the licensed premises.



         (d)   The licensed premises meets all the provisions of
this chapter as well as all building and fire codes.



         (e)   The applicant or spouse has not been convicted of
any felony involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime
of a sexual nature or involving the use or distribution of a controlled
substance as defined by state laws, or the use or distribution of a dangerous
weapon. The fact that a conviction may be under appeal shall not affect the
disqualification of the applicant.



         (f)   All license and investigation fees required by
this chapter have been paid.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section the term APPLICANT
shall include an individual, all persons having a financial interest in a
partnership or joint venture, and, in the case of a corporation
(partnership/limited liability company/trust or other business entity which
is not a natural person), all officers, directors and stockholders required
to be named in the application.



      (3)   All police, fire and building code investigations shall
be completed within 21 days after the date the completed application is filed
with the City Clerk. Upon a showing of good cause and reasonable diligence on
the part of an investigator, the City Council may extend the investigation
period for a reasonable time. Any investigation not completed within the
allotted time period shall be deemed to be waived.



   (G)   License fees.



      (1)   The annual license fee to operate an adult establishment
shall be determined by the City Council by resolution.



      (2)   In addition to the annual license fee, an investigation
fee in an amount determined by the City Council by resolution shall be paid
at the time of the initial license application.



      (3)   All appropriate fees shall be submitted along with the
application for a new or renewal license.



      (4)   If an application is denied, the license fee, but not
the investigation fee, shall be refunded to the applicant.



   (H)   Display of license. The license shall be displayed in a
conspicuous public place in the adult establishment.



   (I)   Renewal of license.



      (1)   Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of each year unless sooner revoked by
the City Council, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the
following year.



      (2)   Applications for renewal must be submitted with the
annual license fee to the City Clerk not later than 60 days before the
license expires.



      (3)   Renewal of a license may be issued by the City Clerk
unless the Clerk finds cause for not renewing the license in which case the
Clerk shall submit the renewal application to the City Council prior to the
expiration of the license.



      (4)   No license for which application for renewal has been
timely made shall be deemed to expire until the City Council has rendered its
decision not to renew a license. No application for renewal of a license may
be denied by the City Council until after the applicant has received 10
days’ written notice of a public hearing before the Council. The applicant
may appear with or without counsel at that public meeting and may present
such evidence and witnesses, as he or she deems appropriate.



   (J)   Revocation of license.



      (1)   The City Council shall revoke a license for any of the
following reasons:



         (a)   Discovery that false or misleading information or
data was given on any initial or renewal application or material facts was
omitted from any such application;



         (b)   The operator or an employee of the operator
violates any provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted by
the Council pursuant to this chapter, provided, however, that in the case of
a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an
employee the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of 30 days if the Council
finds that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such
violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual
or constructive knowledge;



         (c)   The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a
license;



         (d)   Any cost or fee required to be paid by this
chapter is not paid; and/or



         (e)   Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is
served or consumed on the premises of the adult establishment.



      (2)   The Council, before revoking or suspending any license,
shall give the operator 10 days’ written notice of the charges against him
or her, and an opportunity for a public hearing before the Council at which
time the operator may appear with or without counsel and may present such
evidence and witnesses as he or she deems appropriate.



      (3)   The transfer of a license or any interest in a license
shall automatically and immediately revoke the license.



      (4)   Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be
eligible to receive a license for 1 year from the date of revocation. No
location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an
adult establishment for 6 months from the date of revocation of the license.



   (K)   Responsibilities of operator.



      (1)   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or
omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the
authorization, knowledge or approval of the operator, or as a result of the
operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the
operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as
if the operator committed the act or caused the omission.



      (2)   Any act or omission of any employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or
omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's
license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed.



      (3)   No employee of an adult establishment shall allow any
minor to loiter around or to frequent the adult establishment or to allow any
minor to view specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity at the
adult establishment.



      (4)   The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and
sanitary manner at all times.



      (5)   The operator shall maintain at least 10 foot-candles of
light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all
times. However, if a lessor level of illumination in the aisles shall be
necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room
or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be
maintained in such aisles, provided, however, at no time shall there be less
than 1 foot-candle of illumination in said aisles as measured from the floor.



      (6)   All business transactions shall occur within the
licensed building.



      (7)   No employee shall have been convicted of any felony
involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual
nature or involving the use or distribution of a controlled substance as
defined by state laws, or the use or distribution of a dangerous weapon. The
fact that a conviction may be under appeal shall not affect the
disqualification of the employee.



      (8)   No minor may be employed by or work at an adult
establishment.



      (9)   The operator shall ensure and be responsible for the
compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (L)   Exclusions.  All public and private schools or churches
located within the city are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when
instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum.



   (M)   No minors.  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted
to be present in an adult establishment.



   (N)   Hours of operation.  The hours of operation for any business
licensed under this chapter shall be between 9:00 a.m. to midnight.



   (O)   Enforcement.  Members of the law enforcement agency providing
service to the city, the Fire Marshal, or designee, the Building Official or
designee and the Zoning Administrator or designee, shall have authority to
enter any adult establishment at all reasonable times to inspect the premises
for the purposes of enforcing this chapter and all other applicable state
laws, fire codes and building codes.



(Ord. 97-198, passed 8-21-2007)



§ 113.04  MEANS OF ENFORCEMENT.



   The city may enforce any provision of this chapter by mandamus,
injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The chapter may also be enforced by appropriate criminal
prosecution.



(Ord. 97-198, passed 8-21-2007)



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any individual, partnership or corporation
(partnership/limited liability company/trust or other business entity which
is not a natural person) who is found to have violated the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall also be subject to
revocation of any license.



   (B)   Each violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate
offense and any violation continuing more than 1 day shall be considered a
separate offense.



(Ord. 97-198, passed 8-21-2007)



CHAPTER 114:  THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE



Section



   114.01   Purpose



   114.02   Definitions



   114.03   License required



   114.04   Licensing exceptions



   114.05   Persons and locations ineligible for a license



   114.06   Fees



   114.07   General license restrictions



   114.08   Restrictions regarding license transfer



   114.09   Suspension or revocation of license



   114.10   Prohibited acts



   114.11   Application content



   114.12   Application execution



   114.13   Application verification



   114.14   Application consideration



   114.15   Expiration of license; prorating



   114.16   Renewal application



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that therapeutic massage and bodywork
establishments potentially provide an opportunity for the commission of
crimes, including but not limited to, prostitution. The purpose of this
chapter is therefore to prevent businesses from being used as facilities for
commission of crimes and to assure that such businesses comply with basic
consumer protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCREDITED INSTITUTION.  An educational institution currently holding
accredited status from the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools
(NCA) or another regional accrediting agency approved by the United States
Department of Education or is licensed or registered by the state agency
having jurisdiction over the school. The ACCREDITED INSTITUTION must also be
in compliance with the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage
and Bodywork or other nationally recognized certification licensing
organizations.



   ACCREDITED PROGRAM.  A professional massage program currently holding
accredited status by the Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation (COMTA),
or a comparable national or regional organization which is approved by the
United States Department of Education for its accrediting program for
compliace with quality and competency standards through a process of periodic
peer review and self-study. The accredited program must also be in compliance
with the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork or
other nationally recognized certification licensing organization.



(Ord. 08-067, passed 2-5-2013)



§ 114.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall exercise, carry on, or be engaged in the trade
or business of providing massage therapy or bodywork or operating a massage
therapy or bodywork establishment unless such person is currently licensed
under this chapter. The application and licensing process are described in
§§ 114.11 through 114.14. This section is intended to require the licensing
of the business as an entity, as well as each person employed by the business
for the purpose of providing therapeutic massage or bodywork therapy.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the licensing requirements detailed under
division (A) of this section, therapeutic massage premises license holders
allowing persons to provide therapeutic massage or bodywork services at a
therapeutic massage establishment without a current license may be held
responsible and charged with a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   Persons or businesses currently engaged in the practice of
therapeutic massage or bodywork at the time of enactment of this section
shall be in full compliance with the terms and conditions of the section no
later than ten days following publication of the section. The exception to
the compliance requirement shall be the required educational standards.
Specifically, those persons employed in the practice of therapeutic massage
or bodywork within the City of Lake Elmo prior to the enactment of this
section shall be allowed to continue in such practice without meeting the
required minimum standard of 500 formal training hours until January 1, 2014.
Persons or businesses engaging in the practices described in this section
after the enactment of this ordinance shall be in full compliance prior to
engaging in such practices.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.04  LICENSING EXCEPTIONS.



   The following persons or places, as described, shall be exempt from the
licensing requirements of this chapter.



   (A)   Persons duly licensed by this state to practice medicine,
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry, provided
the massage is administered in the regular course of the medical business and
not provided as part of a separate and distinct massage or bodywork business.



   (B)   Persons duly licensed by this state as beauty culturists or
barbers, provided such persons do not hold themselves out as giving massage
treatments and provided that massages provided by beauty culturists are
limited to the head, hand, neck and feet, and that massages provided by
barbers are limited to the head and neck.



   (C)   Students participating in an educational massage therapy
program at an accredited college providing therapeutic massage therapy under
the direct supervision of a licensed massage therapist/bodyworks therapist,
or licensed health professional under which massage is within the scope of
their practice.



   (D)   Off-site locations at which a client receives therapeutic
massage or bodywork services from a licensed massage or bodywork therapist,
licensed pursuant to the terms of this chapter.



   (E)   As described in M.S. § 471.709: a massage therapist who is
working for or an employee of a medical professional licensed under M.S.
Chapter 147 or 148.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.05  PERSONS AND LOCATIONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.



   (A)   No license under this chapter shall be issued to an applicant
who is a natural person if such applicant:



      (1)   Is a minor at the time the application is filed;



      (2)   Has been convicted of or entered a plea of guilty within
the previous three years to a violation of this chapter or of any other law
regulating the practice of therapeutic massage, or of any law prohibiting
criminal sexual conduct, prostitution, pandering, indecent conduct, or
keeping of a disorderly house;



      (3)   Is not of good moral character or repute;



      (4)   Holds an intoxicating liquor license under Chapter 111
of this code; or



      (5)   Provides any false, fraudulent, or deceptive information
in the required application.



   (B)   The provisions of this section as described in division(A)(1)
through (5), shall also apply to any partnership if such applicant has any
general partner or managing partner meeting any of the described criteria;
and shall also apply to any corporation or other organization if such
applicant has any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business
meeting any of the described criteria.



   (C)   The following locations shall be ineligible for a license
under this chapter:



      (1)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on
any property on which taxes, assessments, or other financial claims of the
state, county, school district, or city are due, delinquent, or unpaid. In
the event a suit has been commenced under M.S. §§ 278.01 through 278.03,
questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the City Council may on
application waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be
granted, however, for taxes or any portion thereof which remain unpaid for a
period exceeding one year after becoming due.



      (2)   No license shall be granted or renewed if the property
on which the business is to be conducted is owned by a person who is
ineligible for a license under the requirements of any chapter of this code.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.06  FEES.



   (A)   Application fee.



      (1)   The license application fee shall be as determined by
the City Council, and should, as closely as possible, reflect the actual cost
of processing, verifying, and approving the application. An applicant for any
license under this Chapter shall be responsible for the payment of all actual
expenses related to the background investigation conducted by the city, up to
a maximum cost of $250 per person employed or contracted with as a massage or
body works therapist. The intent of this section is to require a background
investigation for all persons employed by or contracting with any massage
therapy or bodywork business operating within the city. These costs shall be
paid to the city prior to the issuance of an individual or business license.



      (2)   In the event that the licensed premises defines a
structure not ready for occupancy, the time fixed for computation of the
license fee for the initial license period shall be 90 days after approval of
the license by the City Council or upon the date the building is ready for
occupancy, whichever is sooner.



      (3)   When a new license application is submitted as a result
of incorporation by an existing licensee and the ownership, control, and
interest in the license are unchanged, no additional fee shall be required.



   (B)   Annual license renewal fee. The annual license renewal fee
shall be determined by the City Council and should, as closely as possible,
reflect the actual cost of processing, verifying and approving the renewal
application. For the purpose of establishing an initial licensing fee, the
annual renewal fee shall be calculated at the rate of $50 for the business
entity and $25 per massage therapy or body works practitioner employed by or
contracting with the business entity.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.07  GENERAL LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Educational requirements. Persons applying for a license under
this chapter shall provide, in addition to the general application described
later in this chapter:



      (1)    One of the following:



         (a)   Proof of successful completion of a minimum of 500
hours of therapeutic massage training/coursework that includes subjects of
anatomy, physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory and research, and
massage practice from an accredited institution or program; or



         (b)   A diploma or certificate of graduation from a
comprehensive massage therapy program consisting of the course work stated
above in division (A)(1)(a) of this section, issued to the applicant from an
accredited institution or an accredited program; or



         (c)   Proof of passing the National Certification Exam
offered by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork or proof of passing the Federation of State Massage Therapy Boards
(FSMTB) Massage and Bodywork Licensing Examination (MBLEx); or



         (d)   Proof of having completed at least 100 hours of
therapeutic massage training/course work that includes subjects of anatomy,
physiology, hygiene, ethics, massage theory and research, and massage
practice from an accredited institution or program, as defined in § 114.02,
Definitions, of this chapter, and has practiced massage therapy in the City
of Lake Elmo, for compensation for at least five years immediately preceding
the date of the application. This form of eligibility will be accepted until
January 1, 2014; and



         (e)   Such other information as the city shall require;
and



      (2)   Proof of current certification in the administration of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). This certification must remain valid at
all times.



   (B)   Inspection of premise. During business hours, all therapeutic
massage and bodywork establishments shall be open to inspection by city
building and license inspectors, health officers, and licensed peace
officers. At the request of the described inspecting parties, any person
licensed under this chapter shall produce correct and authentic
identification that includes a true legal name and current home address.



   (C)   License display. A license issued under this chapter must be
posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used. The
license issued is only effective for the compact and contiguous space
specified in the approved license application. In addition to the license
issued to the business establishment, the licenses issued to individual
persons employed by the business shall be displayed in a similar manner.



   (D)   Maintenance of order. A licensee under this chapter shall be
responsible for the conduct of the business being operated and shall maintain
conditions of order.



   (E)   Gambling. No licensee under this chapter may keep, possess, or
operate, or permit the keeping, possession, or operation on the licensed
premises of dice, slot machines, roulette wheels, punchboards, blackjack
tables or pinball machines which return coins or slugs, chips, or tokens of
any kind, which are redeemable in merchandise or cash. No gambling equipment
authorized under M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.60, may be kept or operated and
no raffles may be conducted on the licensed premises and/or adjoining rooms.
The purchase of lottery tickets may take place on the licensed premises as
authorized by the director of the lottery pursuant to M.S. §§ 349A.01
through 349A.15.



   (F)   Alcohol or drugs prohibited. No beer, liquor, narcotic drug,
or controlled substance, as such terms are defined by state statutes or city
code, shall be permitted on the premises.



   (G)   Building, safety and health regulations. Any establishment
licensed under this chapter shall be in full compliance with all applicable
local, state and federal building, safety and health laws and regulations.



   (H)   Locks on doors. There shall be no locks placed upon or used on
the doors of massage rooms.



   (I)   Professional liability insurance. Each business as an entity
and each practitioner individually shall obtain and keep current a
professional liability insurance policy governing the activities of the
business and practitioner.



   (J)   Minnesota Statute Chapter 146A. Each business as an entity and
each practitioner individually shall additionally comply with all of the
requirements and regulations established by M.S. Chapter 146A. This chapter
establishes the State Office of Unlicensed Complementary and Alternative
Health Care Practice and establishes additional regulations and requirements
for these businesses types.



   (K)   Appointment record requirement. All licensees shall be
responsible for keeping appointment records of all off-site therapeutic
massage/bodywork services provided. The records shall be sequential and shall
include the name of the therapist conducting the service, the name and
signature of the client, the address where the service was provided, and the
date and time of the service. Licensed therapists shall have appointment
records in possession at all off-site locations. Appointment records shall be
kept for a period of 24 months from the date of the service.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012; Am. Ord. 08-067, passed 2-5-2013) 
Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.08  RESTRICTIONS REGARDING LICENSE TRANSFER.



   Each license under this chapter shall be issued to the applicant only
and shall not be transferable to any other person. No licensee shall loan,
sell, give, or assign a license to another person.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.09  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under
this chapter upon a finding of a violation of: (1) any of the provisions of
this chapter; (2) any state statute regulating therapeutic massage or
bodywork; or (3) any state or local law relating to moral character and
repute. Any conviction by the license holder for any other law regulating the
practice of massage or bodywork, or of any law prohibiting criminal sexual
conduct, prostitution, pandering, indecent conduct, or keeping of a
disorderly house shall result in the immediate suspension pending a hearing
on revocation of any license issued hereunder.



   (B)   Except in the case of a suspension pending a hearing on
revocation, a revocation or suspension by the City Council shall be preceded
by written notice to the licensee and a public hearing. The written notice
shall give at least eight days notice of time and place of the hearing and
shall state the nature of the charges against the license holder. The Council
may, without any notice, suspend any license pending a hearing on revocation
for a period not to exceed 30 days. The notice may be served upon the license
holder by United States mail addressed to the most recent address of the
business in the license application.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.10  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   Any touching, manipulation, stimulation, or excitation of the primary
genital area of a client by a massage therapist or bodywork practitioner, or
of a massage therapist or bodywork practitioner by a client, pursuant to the
provision of a massage or bodywork technique, is expressly prohibited. The
offer or suggestion to provide any of the described acts to a client by the
massage therapist or bodywork practitioner is prohibited.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.11  APPLICATION CONTENT.



   Every application for a license under this chapter shall be made on a
form supplied by the issuing authority and shall contain the information
described below. The intent of the application process is to acquire
sufficient information on the owner of the business and each employee or
contractor with the business as to allow a thorough background investigation
and an informed decision by the city with regard to licensing. If the
applicant is employed by or contracting with a business, and is not the owner
of the business, it will not be necessary to provide information regarding
the applicant’s spouse.



   (A)   If the applicant is a natural person:



      (1)   The name, place and date of birth, street resident
address, and phone number of the applicant;



      (2)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States
or a resident alien;



      (3)   Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by
another name other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or names
used and information concerning the dates and places when used;



      (4)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted under
a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01;



      (5)   Whether the applicant will engage in off-site
massage/bodywork services;



      (6)   The street addresses at which the applicant has lived
during the preceding five years;



      (7)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five
years and the names(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years;



      (8)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance.
If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the time, place, and
offense for which convictions were had; and



      (9)   The physical description of the applicant.



   (B)   If the applicant is married:



      (1)   The name, place and date of birth, and street address of
the applicant’s current spouse;



      (2)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant’s current spouse has been engaged during
the preceding five years;



      (3)   The names and addresses of the employers or partners of
the applicant’s current spouse for the preceding five years; and



      (4)   Whether the applicant’s current spouse has ever been
convicted of any felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a
traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant shall furnish information as to the
time, place, and offense for such convictions.



   (C)   If the applicant is a partnership:



      (1)   The names(s) and address(es) of all general and limited
partners and all information concerning each general partner required in
division (A) of this section;



      (2)   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the interest
of each partner in the massage therapy business; and



      (3)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be
submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, a certified copy
of such certificate shall be attached to the application.



   (D)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:



      (1)   The name of the corporation or business form, and if
incorporated, the state of the incorporation;



      (2)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement, and by-laws shall be
attached to the application. If the application is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, shall be attached;



      (3)   The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other
agent(s) in charge of the business and all information concerning each
manager, proprietor, or agent required in division (A) of this section; and



      (4)   A list of all persons who control or own an interest in
excess of 5% in such organization or business form or who are officers of the
corporation or business form and all information concerning the persons
required in division (A) of this section.



   (E)   For all applicants:



      (1)   Whether the applicant holds a current massage therapy
license from any other governmental unit;



      (2)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied a
massage therapy license from any other governmental unit;



      (3)   The names, street resident addresses, and business
addresses of three residents of the seven-county metropolitan area, who are
of good moral character and who are not related to the applicant or not
holding any ownership in the premises or business, who may be referred to as
to the applicant’s and/or manager’s character;



      (4)   The location of the business premises;



      (5)   The legal description of the premises to be licensed;



      (6)   Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that
are due and payable to the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not
paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;



      (7)   Whenever the application is for premises either planned
or under construction or undergoing substantial alteration, the application
shall be accompanied by a set of preliminary plans showing the design of the
proposed premises to be licensed. If the plans or design are on file with the
Lake Elmo Building Department, no plans need to be submitted with the issuing
authority; and



      (8)   Such other information as the City Council or issuing
authority may require.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.12  APPLICATION EXECUTION.



   All applications for a license under this chapter shall be signed and
sworn to. If the application is that of a natural person, it shall be signed
and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof;
and if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of
an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer thereof.
Any falsification on a license application shall result in the denial of a
license.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.13  APPLICATION VERIFICATION.



   All applications shall be referred to the issuing authority for
verification and investigation of the facts set forth in the application. The
issuing authority shall make a written report and recommendation to the City
Council as to the issuance or non-issuance of the license. The City Council
may order and conduct such additional investigation, as it deems necessary.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.14  APPLICATION CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the license
application within a reasonable period following receipt of the issuing
authority’s report and recommendation regarding the application. At least
ten days in advance of the City Council hearing on an application, the
issuing authority shall cause notice of the hearing to be published in the
official newspaper of the city, setting forth the day, time, and place of the
hearing; the name of the applicant; the premises where the business is to be
conducted; and the type of license which is sought. At the hearing,
opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the
granting of the license. Additional hearings on the application may be held
if the City Council deems additional hearings necessary. After the hearing or
hearings on the application, the City Council may, in its discretion, grant
or deny the application.



   (B)   If an application is granted for a location where a building
is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the license shall not be
delivered to the licensee until a certificate of occupancy has been issued
for the licensed premises.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.15  EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; PRORATING.



   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the last
day of October of each year. Each license shall be issued for a period of one
year except that if a portion of the license year (November to October
following) has elapsed at such time as the application is filed, a license
may be issued for the remainder of the license year for a pro rata fee. For
the purpose of computing such “pro rata fee”, any fraction of a month
falling within the license period shall be counted as a full month.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.16  RENEWAL APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applications for the renewal of an existing license shall be
made at least 30 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and
shall be made in such form as the issuing authority requires. If, in the
judgment of the issuing authority, good and sufficient cause is shown by an
applicant for the applicant’s failure to submit a renewal application
before the expiration of the existing license, the issuing authority may, if
the other provisions of this chapter are complied with, grant the renewal
application.



   (B)   A license under this chapter will not be renewed:



      (1)   If the issuing authority determines that the licensee
has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter in preceding license
years;



      (2)   If the licensee, or if the licensee does not manage the
establishment, the manager of the licensed premises is not a resident of the
seven-county metropolitan area on the date that the renewal takes effect;



      (3)   If in the case of a partnership, the managing partner or
other person who manages the establishment is not a resident of the
seven-county metropolitan area on the date the renewal takes effect; or



      (4)   If in the case of a corporation, or other organization,
the manager, a proprietor, or agent in charge of the establishment is not a
resident of the seven-county metropolitan area on the date the renewal takes
effect.



   (C)   The time for establishing residence in the seven-county
metropolitan area may, for good cause, be extended by the City Council.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor under Minnesota law.



(Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)



CHAPTER 115:  BUILDING CONTRACTORS



Section



   115.01   Policy



   115.02   License and permit required



   115.03   Application for license; insurance requirements; issuance
or denial



   115.04   Standards for license issuance; term



   115.05   License fee; exemption



   115.06   Suspension or revocation of license



   115.07   Exemptions from provisions



   115.08   Effect on liability



§ 115.01  POLICY.



   It is deemed in the interest of the public and the residents of the
city that the work involved in building, alteration, construction, and the
installation of various appliances and service facilities in and for such
buildings be done only by individuals that have demonstrated or submitted
evidence of their competency to perform such work in accordance with
applicable codes and ordinances of the city regulating the same.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)



§ 115.02  LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   License required.



      (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate, maintain,
conduct or engage in the following businesses or work, except in accordance
with state statutes, this code and other applicable ordinances of the city.



         (a)   Demolition- residential dwelling, commercial
structure.



         (b)   Driveway.



         (c)   Excavation.



         (d)   HVAC.



         (e)   Irrigation.



         (f)   Sewer line installer.



         (g)   Water line installer.



         (h)   Sign installer.



         (i)   Right-of-way.



      (2)   This division shall not be construed as preventing any
such qualified licensee from performing the work by an employee under his/her
supervision and control, or by contract with another person qualified to
perform the same; provided that the contractor is subject to the control of
the licensee, and the licensee is at all times responsible for the work
performed. A contractor not subject to the control of a licensee shall be
required to obtain a license.



   (B)   Permit required. For each of the businesses or occupations
listed in division (A)(1) of this section for which the State of Minnesota
provides for the registration thereof, permits shall be granted only to
holders of a state or city license; except that the owner of any property may
perform work when work is performed in accordance with the codes and
ordinances of the city, and for such purpose, a permit may be granted to such
owner without a licensed obtained.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS; ISSUANCE OR
DENIAL.



   (A)   Contents of application; insurance.



      (1)   Applications for a license shall be made on forms
provided by the city clerk. On such form, the applicant shall state the
following information:



         (a)   His/her name, and business and home address; and
if the application is made on behalf of a partnership, association or
corporation, the name and address of such partnership, association or
corporation, and the phone number of the contact person;



         (b)   If the proposed licensee is a partnership, the
name and home addresses of all partners; or if the proposed licensee is an
association or corporation, the names and home addresses of its principal
officers and managers and of the owners (not to exceed 10) or the largest
shareholders of the business or enterprise; and



         (c)   Such information as is required to be furnished by
ordinance or is reasonably required by the city clerk or other applicable
city departments.



      (2)   The application shall include documentation indicating
insurance coverage, which shall remain in effect during the license term, and
non-cancellation provisions, which provide a minimum of 30 days’ notice to
the city prior to cancellation, as follows:



         (a)   Comprehensive general liability insurance not less
than $100,000 for injuries including accidental death to any one person, and
subject to the same limit for each person in an amount of not less than
$300,000 on account of any one accident;



         (b)   Property damage insurance not less than $50,000
for each accident and not less than $100,000 aggregated; and



         (c)   Workers compensation insurance coverage of
employees as required by state law.



   (B)   Signatures required. The proposed licensee shall sign the
application; or if the proposed licensee is a partnership, an association or
corporation, at least one person having power under its bylaws to execute
contracts of the association or corporation shall sign.



   (C)   Renewal applications. Applications for renewals of licensee
may, in the interest of brevity, substitute for any required information a
reference to statements contained in previous applications, which are on file
with the city.



   (D)   Issuance of license. The license shall be granted by the city
clerk, after positive recommendations from applicable city staff, upon proof
of the applicant’s qualifications, and compliance with § 115.04 of this
chapter.



   (E)   Denial of license; appeal. In the event the City Clerk
determines that the application does not comply with the ordinance criteria,
the report and recommendation of the City Clerk and applicable staff shall be
referred to the city council, together with the reason or reasons for the
proposed denial. A copy of the recommendation shall be supplied to the
applicant. The applicant may appear before the City Council to respond to the
recommendation of denial. The City Council shall make the appropriate
findings and either issue or deny the license application.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)



§ 115.04  STANDARDS FOR LICENSE ISSUANCE; TERM.



   (A)   Standards for issuance generally; term. Licenses and renewals
thereof shall be issued after a verification of the applicant’s
qualification and record in the performance and operation of the types of
work for which the applicant seeks a license. Licenses shall be issued for
one calendar year from January 1 through December 31. New licenses will run
from date of issuance through December 31.



   (B)   Standards for denial. Licenses and renewals therefore may be
denied by the city council for any of the following reasons.



      (1)   Failure to complete the application or file the required
license fee or insurance policy.



      (2)   Misstatement in the application.



      (3)   Failure to comply with special conditions required by
statue or ordinance for issuance of a license.



      (4)   Violations of licensing ordinances by applicant, or
suspension or revocation licenses held by the applicant in the city or
elsewhere.



      (5)   Violation of any state statute or city code provision
which creates a threat to the public peace, health, safety and welfare.



      (6)   Disregard and violation of the building, housing,
sanitary, health, and fire laws of the state, county, or city.



      (7)   Any conduct which is contrary to the public interest,
including, but not limited to, fraud, misrepresentation, or other dishonest
or deceitful conduct.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)



§ 115.05  LICENSE FEE; EXEMPTION.



   The annual fee for license shall be established by ordinance of the
city council from time to time. No license fee shall be required of any
person, firm or corporation, pursuant to this section, who, by state law, is
required to attain standards of competency or experience as a prerequisite to
engaging in such craft or profession; provided that the person shall provide
evidence to the city that the individual, firm or corporation has a license
in good standing from the state, and further provides proof of insurance in
effect through the term of license issued by the state.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)



§ 115.06  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Grounds for suspension or revocation. If any licensee violates
or is in default of complying with any condition, requirement, duty or rule
of conduct imposed on him/her by any statue or ordinance, or if any one or
more of the following conditions exist, the City Clerk may initiate
proceedings before the city council to suspend or revoke the licensee’s
license:



      (1)   If the applicant for a license or renewal thereof
knowingly made any false statements in the application for a license;



      (2)   When the applicant has violated any state statute or
city code provision which creates a threat to the public peace, health,
safety and welfare;



      (3)   When there is disregard and violation of the building,
housing, sanitary, health and fire laws of the state, county or city;



      (4)   For failure to notify the city of any change in control
of ownership, management or business name or location within 30 days of such
change;



      (5)   Conducting a building contracting business in any name
other than the one for which the contractor is licensed; or



      (6)   Any conduct which is contrary to the public interest,
including, but not limited to, fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonest or
deceitful act.



   (B)   Procedures for suspension or revocation. Procedures for
suspension or revocation shall be as follows.



      (1)   The licensee shall be provided with notice of the
reasons for any proposed suspension or revocation. The notice shall provide
the licensee with an opportunity to explain the rationale for the proposed
suspension or revocation.



      (2)   The licensee shall be notified in advance of the date,
time, place and purpose of the council meeting where the action on the
license will be considered. The licensee shall have an opportunity to be
heard at the meeting. After making appropriate findings, the council may
continue the license in effect, impose conditions on the license or revoke
the license.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)



§ 115.07  EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS.



   No license will be required under this chapter in the following
circumstances.



   (A)   For public service corporations performing work upon or in
connection with their own property, except as may be provided by other
provisions of this code.



   (B)   For manufacturers for work incorporated with equipment as a
part of the manufacturing, except as provided in other provisions of this
code.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)



§ 115.08  EFFECT ON LIABILITY.



   This chapter shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or
liability for any party owning, operating, or installing the work described
in this chapter for damages to persons or property caused by any defect
therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason
of the licensing of persons engaged in such work.



(Ord. 08-069, passed 2-19-2013)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section




General Provisions




   130.01   Conduct or acts forbidden




Weapons




   130.15   Use of firearms; hunting




Trapping




   130.30   Purpose



   130.31   Violations



   130.32   Permission




Noise Control




   130.45   Noise prohibited



   130.46   Measurement of noise



   130.47   Construction equipment



   130.48   Outdoor implement



   130.49   Special event




Curfews




   130.60   Curfews



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  CONDUCT OR ACTS FORBIDDEN.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 609, the Criminal Code, as it may be amended
from time to time, defining certain crimes, are hereby incorporated in this
code by reference to the same extent as if fully set forth in this section.



(1997 Code, § 1330.01)



WEAPONS



§ 130.15  USE OF FIREARMS; HUNTING.



   The use of firearms and hunting in the city shall be in accordance with
M.S. 97B.001.



(Ord. 08-142, passed 8-2-2016)



TRAPPING



§ 130.30  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of §§ 130.30 et seq. to preclude trapping except
where specifically approved by the landowner.



(1997 Code, § 1310.01)



§ 130.31  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to:



   (A)   Set traps within the city without the written permission of
the fee owner or contract purchaser of the real property upon which the traps
are to be set; permission from a tenant or person holding any other interest
in the real property is not valid;



   (B)   To set traps in any park or other public property except for
public purposes upon order of the governmental body responsible for or owning
the real property;



   (C)   To place any trap within 500 feet of a building occupied by
human beings, livestock, or domestic animals, without permission of the owner
of the building; to place traps within 200 feet of a public right-of-way for
roads; and/or



   (D)   To set or place traps which do not have the trapper's name and
either trapper's address or trapper's license number etched onto the trap or
onto a metal tag which is welded, brazed, or soldered to the trap or affixed
to the trap with a tightly twisted wire or solid metal ring; to set or place
traps within 50 feet of the shoreline of any lake, swamp, stream, or other
public water.



(1997 Code, § 1310.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.32  PERMISSION.



   The written permission must contain a statement allowing the trapper to
place the traps, and:



   (A)   Be signed by the fee owner or contract purchaser;



   (B)   Dated within 6 months; and



   (C)   Contain a drawing, map, or diagram showing the boundaries of
the landowner's real property.



(1997 Code, § 1310.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



NOISE CONTROL



§ 130.45  NOISE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any noise in excess of the noise levels set forth unless noise is
reasonably necessary to preserve life, health, safety, or property.



(1997 Code, § 1370.01) (Am. Ord. 08-174, passed 5-2-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.46  MEASUREMENT OF NOISE.



   Any activity not expressly exempted by this section which creates or
produces sound regardless of frequency exceeding the ambient noise levels of
the property line of any property (or if a condominium or apartment house
within any adjoining apartment) by more than 6 decibels above the ambient
noise levels as designated by Minn. Rules Ch. 7030.



(1997 Code, § 1370.02) (Am. Ord. 08-174, passed 5-2-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.47  CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Purpose. The city understands that exceeding decibels above
the ambient noise level is necessary from time to time in order to perform
construction and make necessary improvements within the city. The following
exemptions from ambient noise levels outlines specific times during which
such activity may take place.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      HEAVY EQUIPMENT. Compactors/rollers, cranes, dozers, dump trucks,
excavators, forklifts, graders, jackhammers, loaders, pavement breakers, pile
drivers, portable crushers, tractors, trenchers, or other pieces of equipment
that generate similar levels of noise.



      OPERATED. Includes engine start-up or warm-up, or any activity
involving heavy equipment that exceeds ambient noise levels.



   (C)   Heavy equipment operated the purpose of construction exceeding
ambient noise levels may be operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. on weekdays and on Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No heavy
equipment exceeding ambient noise levels at the property line may be operated
on Sundays or state and federal holidays. No equipment shall be operated at
any time if the sound level from the operation exceeds 100 decibels measured
along any property line.



   (D)   An exemption for activities which the City Administrator find
are of urgent necessity and in the interest of public health and safety may
be granted by written permission for the operation during any hour of any day
for a period not to exceed 3 days or less while the emergency continues.
Written permission may be renewed for periods of 3 days or less while the
emergency continues.



   (E)   Construction activity involving operation of equipment
producing a sound level of up to 95 decibels that takes place no less than
1,200 feet in any direction from any dwelling may be allowed, through written
permission granted by the City Administrator, for operation during any hour
of any day. Ambient noise levels must be maintained at the property line.



(1997 Code, § 1370.03) (Am. Ord. 08-174, passed 5-2-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.48  OUTDOOR IMPLEMENT.



   Outdoor implements designed primarily for outdoor use, including but
not limited to any power lawn mower, snowblower, power hedge clipper, power
saw may be operated at any time.



(1997 Code, § 1370.04) (Am. Ord. 08-174, passed 5-2-2017)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.49  SPECIAL EVENT.



   Activities which are issued a special event permit may exceed the
maximum-allowed decibel level provided sound is not unreasonably loud or
creates a nuisance of disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the
citizens.



(Ord. 08-174, passed 5-2-2017)



CURFEWS



§ 130.60  CURFEWS.



   (A)   The following curfews shall be effective within the city.



   (B)   (1)   Under 15 years of age.  Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful for any person under 15 years of age to be
present in a public place; in any private establishment which is open to the
public; or on private property other than their usual place of residence,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day.



      (2)   Fifteen years to less than 18 years.  Except as
hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person who is at least 15
years of age but less than 18 years of age to be present in a public place;
in any private establishment which is open to the public; or on private
property other than their usual place of residence, between the hours of
12:00 a.m. midnight and 5:00 a.m. the following day.



      (3)   Exceptions.  The curfew shall not apply to any person
who is accompanied by their parent, legal guardian, or other adult person in
charge of their care and custody; or who is on an emergency, errand, or other
lawful activity as directed by their parent, legal guardian, or other adult
person in charge of their care or custody; or who is employed in or on the
way to or from a legal place of employment.



      (4)   Allowing curfew violations.  It shall be unlawful for
any parent, legal guardian, or other person in charge of the care or custody
of a person under 18 years of age to allow the person to violate the curfew
regulations of the city.



      (5)   Entertainment and amusement businesses.  It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation in charge of any business
establishment to permit a person under 18 years of age to be on or in the
place of business in violation of the curfew provisions of the city.



(1997 Code, § 1375.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   151.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



   152.   FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT



   153.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



   154.   ZONING CODE



      APPENDIX A:  FEE SCHEDULE



CHAPTER 150:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




Exterior Storage




   150.001   Prohibited without screening



   150.002   All districts



   150.003   Unlicensed passenger vehicles and trucks




Screening




   150.020   Required screening




Lighting, Glare Control, and Exterior Lighting Standards




   150.035   Purpose



   150.036   Exterior lighting plan



   150.037   Prohibited lighting



   150.038   Minimum standards




Landscaping




   150.070   Landscaping requirements



   150.071   Boundary landscape requirements



   150.072   Front and side yards



   150.073   Open and unimproved areas



   150.074   Owner responsibility



   150.075   Keeping natural or existing character



   150.076   Turf established



   150.077   Commercial and industrial property maintenance



   150.078   Conservation of vegetation




Wind Generators




   150.090   Intent



   150.091   Location



   150.092   Application



   150.093   Application review



   150.094   Duration and review



Wireless Communications Facilities



   150.110   Purpose and intent



   150.111   Permit requirements



   150.112   Proof of need



   150.113   Location requirements and site ranking analysis



   150.114   Co-location requirements



   150.115   Prohibited areas



   150.116   Zoning requirements



   150.117   Application and review procedures



   150.118   Expert review



   150.119   Construction permits



   150.120   Tower standards



   150.121   Wireless communications tower agreement



   150.122   Abandonment and removal



   150.123   Minimum conditions




Alarm Systems




   150.140   Purpose and intent



   150.141   Alarm systems




Amateur Radio Tower Antenna




   150.155   Purpose and intent



   150.156   Permit required



   150.157   Amateur radio tower antenna permit



   150.158   Planning Commission review



   150.159   City Council review



   150.160   Review and revocation




Restrictive Soil Overlay District




   150.200   Legislative findings and purposes



   150.201   District boundaries



   150.202   Restrictive soils and development permit provisions



   150.203   Responsibility; effect




Wetland Protection and Preservation Overlay District (WPP)




   150.215   Legislative findings and purposes



   150.216   District boundaries



   150.217   Definitions



   150.218   Wetland permit provisions



   150.219   Responsibility; effect




Interstate Corridor Overlay District




   150.230   Purpose



   150.231   Permitted uses and structures



   150.232   Accessory uses and structures



   150.233   Conditional uses



   150.234   Minimum district requirements; interim uses



   150.235   Minimum district requirements; long-term uses



   150.236   Minimum district requirements; all uses



   150.237   Building type and construction



   150.238   S.A.C. unit determination




Shoreland District




   150.250   Purpose



   150.251   Intent



   150.252   Definitions



   150.253   Administration



   150.254   Shoreland classification



   150.255   Shoreland standards



   150.256   Non-conformities



   150.257   Subdivision/platting provisions




Storm Water and Erosion and Sediment Control




   150.270   Statutory authorization



   150.271   Findings



   150.272   Purpose



   150.273   Applicability



   150.274   Definitions



   150.275   Incorporations by reference



   150.276   Plan review procedure



   150.277   Performance and design standards



   150.278   Storm water facility maintenance



   150.279   Monitoring and inspections



   150.280   Enforcement



   150.281   Financial securities



   150.282   Storm water utility



   150.283   Lawn fertilizer regulations



   150.284   Other controls



Illicit Discharge and Connection



   150.300   Purpose



   150.301   Applicability



   150.302   Definitions



   150.303   Responsibility for administration



   150.304   Compatibility with other regulations



   150.305   Ultimate responsibility



   150.306   Discharge prohibitions



   150.307   Watercourse protection



   150.308   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   150.309   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water
pollutants by the use of Best Management Practices



   150.310   Notification of spills



   150.311   Right of entry



   150.312   Enforcement



   150.313   Severability



   150.314   Authority



International Property Maintenance Code



   150.325    Adoption by reference



   150.326    Amendments



EXTERIOR STORAGE



§ 150.001  PROHIBITED WITHOUT SCREENING.



   (A)   Storage of property in Agricultural and Residential
districts.  All personal property shall be stored within a building or fully
screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties and public
streets, except for the following:



      (1)   Laundry, drying;



      (2)   Recreational equipment commonly used in residential
yards;



      (3)   Construction and landscaping materials, and equipment
currently (within a period of 6 months) being used on the premises;



      (4)   Off-street parking of licensed operable passenger
automobiles and pick-up trucks;



      (5)   Boats and trailers less than 25 feet in length, if
stored in the rear yard more than 10 feet distant from any property line;



      (6)   Merchandise being displayed for sale in accordance with
the provisions of the zoning code;



      (7)   Farm implements in the AG Zoning District; and/or



      (8)   Firewood storage for personal use.



   (B)   In non-residential districts, exterior storage of personal
property may be permitted by conditional use permit provided the property is
so stored for purposes relating to a use of the property permitted by the
zoning code and will not be contrary to the intent and purpose of the zoning
code.



(1997 Code, § 1340.03)



   (C)   Existing uses.  Existing uses shall comply with the
provisions of §§ 150.001 et seq. within a reasonable time, not to exceed 6
months following the enactment of this code.



(1997 Code, § 1340.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.002  ALL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In all districts, all refuse, rubbish, or garbage (as defined
in § 11.01) shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a
closed container designed for the purposes.



   (B)   The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping the
land free of refuse, rubbish, or garbage.



(1997 Code, § 1340.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.003  UNLICENSED PASSENGER VEHICLES AND TRUCKS.



   Unlicensed passenger vehicles and trucks shall not be parked in
residential districts for a period exceeding 7 days.



(1997 Code, § 1340.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCREENING



§ 150.020  REQUIRED SCREENING.



   (A)   Screening.  Screening shall be required in residential
districts for any off-street parking area which contains more than 4 parking
spaces and is within 30 feet of an adjoining residential lot.



   (B)   Business, industrial screening.  Where any business or
industrial use (structure, parking, or storage) is adjacent to property zoned
or developed for residential use, that business or industry shall be screened
along the boundary of the residential property.  Screening shall also be
provided where a business, parking lot, or industry is across the street from
a residential zone, but not on the side of a business or industry considered
to be the front.



   (C)   Exterior storage.  All exterior storage shall be screened as
required by § 150.001.



   (D)   Mechanical apparatus on roofs.  All mechanical apparatus on
roofs shall be screened.



   (E)   Loading docks.  Loading docks shall be screened from all
streets and adjacent property unless they are at the rear of the building
which abuts another commercial use.  The property owner may provide a 30
foot landscaped area between the dock and the property line where screening
is not possible.



(1997 Code, § 1345.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LIGHTING, GLARE CONTROL, AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING STANDARDS



§ 150.035  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of §§ 150.035 et seq. is to regulate the spillover of
light and glare on rural areas of the community, pedestrians, and land uses
in the proximity of the light source to evaluate the impact of light source
on the safety of adjacent traffic.



(1997 Code, § 1350.01)  (Am. Ord. 97-17, passed 9-16-1997)



§ 150.036  EXTERIOR LIGHTING PLAN.



   (A)   (1)   At the time any exterior light is installed or
modified for projects, an exterior lighting plan shall be submitted to the
city in order to determine whether the purpose and requirements of §§
150.035 et seq. have been met.



      (2)   This plan will be prepared by a certified architect,
landscape architect, or lighting designer.



   (B)   (1)   The applicant must provide a plan that identifies the
location, size, and type of luminaire, and show how the applicant intends to
comply with §§ 150.035 et seq.



      (2)   A photometric plan of the site and fixture data sheet
must be submitted with a site plan for office, commercial, or any type of
industrial project in order to determine the effect of the luminaire on
surrounding properties.



      (3)   The applicant shall provide the fixture data sheet for
residential lighting proposals.



(1997 Code, § 1350.03)  (Am. Ord. 97-17, passed 9-16-1997)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.037  PROHIBITED LIGHTING.



   (A)   Public roadway or street.  No lights shall be placed in view
of any public roadway or street so that its beams or rays are directed at any
portion of the roadway when light is of the brilliance and so positioned as
to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.



   (B)   Luminaires.



      (1)   Except for "full cutoff luminaries" as defined in §§
150.035 et seq., no luminaires are allowed which do not meet the standards
outlined in §§ 150.035 et seq.



      (2)   See illustration below.



   (C)   Lighting in all zoning districts.  No direct or sky-reflected
glare, whether from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as
combustion or welding, shall be directed into any adjoining property.



   (D)   Bare light bulbs.  Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in
view of adjacent property or public right-of-way.



   (E)   Light cast.  No light or combination of lights, which cast
light on a public street, shall exceed 1 foot-candle.  Meter reading as
measured from the centerline of the street, nor shall any light or
combination of lights, which cast light on residential property, exceed 4/10
foot-candles.



(1997 Code, § 1350.04)  (Am. Ord. 97-17, passed 9-16-1997)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.038  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   Minimum standards for lighting with a total cutoff angle of
greater than 90 degrees.



      (1)   When a luminaire has a total cutoff of an angle greater
than 90 degrees (see illustration below), the maximum illumination and the
maximum permitted luminaire height is designated below.  This standard is
designed to ensure that no light is emitted above a horizontal plane parallel
to the ground.  In order to achieve a total cutoff at 90 degrees, the
luminaire will emit maximum (peak) candle power at an angle not exceeding 75
degrees.  This angel is formed by the line at which maximum candlepower is
emitted for the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the
light source.



      (2)   Illumination may exceed the stated maximums for a radius
of 20 feet measured from the center point of the light fixture, but shall not
exceed those maximums beyond the exterior property line of the site upon
which the fixture is located.



(Am. Ord. 97-104, passed 3-19-2002)



 

Use and District
 
Maximum Permitted Illumination at a Point 6 Feet Above the Ground (In Foot
Candles)
 
Maximum Permitted Height


All Residential Districts
 
0.30
 
15 feet


All Non-Residential Districts
 
1.50
 
20 feet



 



   (B)   Minimum standards for lighting with a total cutoff angle of
less than 90 degrees.



      (1)   When a luminaire has a total cutoff of light at an angle
less than 90 degrees and is located so that the bare light bulb, lamp, or
light source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer 5
feet above the ground at the point where the cutoff angle intersects the
ground, the maximum permitted illumination and the maximum permitted height
is illustrated below.  This type of light fixture may be taller and provide
greater illumination at the property line than the 1 specified above, because
the design of this fixture ensures that its light source will not be directly
visible off-site.



      (2)   Illumination may exceed the stated maximums for a radius
of 20 feet measured from the center point of the light fixture, but shall not
exceed those maximums beyond the exterior property line of the site upon
which the fixture is located.



(Am. Ord. 97-104, passed 3-19-2002)



 

Use and District
 
Maximum Permitted Illumination at a Point 6 Feet Above the Ground (In Foot
Candles)
 
Maximum Permitted Height


All Residential Districts
 
1.00
 
15 feet


All Non-Residential Districts
 
3.00
 
30 feet



 



   (C)   Minimum standards for lighting on agricultural lands.  When a
permanent outdoor luminaire is placed on agricultural land, only Mercury
lamps shall be permitted.



   (D)   Attachments.  Attachment entitled "Good Neighbor Outdoor
Lighting" is on file in the Building Official's office, and can be found in
Appendix A of this code.  This is the guide to be used for residential
lighting.



(1997 Code, § 1350.05)  (Am. Ord. 97-17, passed 9-16-1997)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



LANDSCAPING



§ 150.070  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   The landscaping required on a lot shall consist of a finish grade and a
soil retention cover such as sod, seed and mulch, plantings, or as may be
reasonably necessary to protect the soil and aesthetic values on the lot and
adjacent property.



(1997 Code, § 1365.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.071  BOUNDARY LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In all districts, all developed land shall have landscaping
from the curb and gutter to the road right-of-way lines.



   (B)   This landscaped yard shall be kept clear of all structures,
exterior storage, and off-street parking.  See also §§ 93.40 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 1365.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.072  FRONT AND SIDE YARDS.



   Landscaping shall be provided and maintained on all required front and
side yards in all developed districts except where pavement or crushed stone
is used for walkways, driveways, or parking areas.



(1997 Code, § 1365.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.073  OPEN AND UNIMPROVED AREAS.



   All open areas or any site, lot, tract, or parcel not otherwise
improved shall be graded to provide adequate drainage and shall be landscaped.



(1997 Code, § 1365.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.074  OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to see that the landscaping
is maintained in an attractive and well kept condition.



(1997 Code, § 1365.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.075  KEEPING NATURAL OR EXISTING CHARACTER.



   All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be properly maintained in accordance
with their natural or existing character.



(1997 Code, § 1365.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.076  TURF ESTABLISHED.



   Turf must be established by the use of grass seed or sod on all lots,
within 60 days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, excluding the
time between October 1 and May 1. Turf must be established on all new
developed lots by July 1, 2013. Alternate plans, other than turf, shall be
approved by city staff prior to installation.



(Ord. 08-66, passed 1-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.077  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.



   All commercial/industrial properties shall maintain trees, shrubs,
landscaping, parking lots, and exterior signage. Dead trees and shrubs are to
be replaced within four months of notice.



(Ord. 08-66, passed 1-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.078  CONSERVATION OF VEGETATION.



   No person shall make any unauthorized use of any public site or open
space which is detrimental to the turf and or soil conditions.



(Ord. 08-66, passed 1-15-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



WIND GENERATORS



§ 150.090  INTENT.



   (A)   Wind generators offer an alternative method of providing
electrical power.



   (B)   It is the intent of the city to regulate the facilities in
order to protect the safety and welfare of residents of the city and in order
to prevent wind generators from becoming a nuisance.



(1997 Code, § 1385.01)



§ 150.091  LOCATION.



   Wind generators are permitted in the Rural Residential (RR) and
Agricultural (AG) Zoning District upon issuance of a wind generator permit.



(1997 Code, § 1385.03)



§ 150.092  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applicants for a wind generator permit shall complete
application forms as provided by the City Administrator.



   (B)   The application shall include the following:



      (1)   A report from a professional engineer describing the
proposed wind generator and certifying the safety of the device;



      (2)   A site plan of the applicant's property drawn to a scale
of 1 inch equals 100 feet and illustrating the location of the wind generator
and all other buildings or structures located within 300 feet of the base of
the wind generator; and



      (3)   A statement indicating that the proposed wind generator
is in compliance with all applicable regulations of the Federal Aviation
Agency where appropriate.



(1997 Code, § 1385.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.093  APPLICATION REVIEW.



   (A)   The completed application shall be forwarded to the Building
Inspector for review and recommendation.  Within 30 days of the receipt of
the completed application, the City Administrator shall schedule a public
hearing before the City Council to review the application.  The public
hearing shall be preceded by 10-days mailed notice to all residents within
350 feet of the perimeter of the applicant's property.



   (B)   Wind generator permits shall be issued subject to the
following conditions.



      (1)   The minimum lot size requirement shall be 40 acres. 
The site must also be large enough to contain within it boundaries any debris
resulting from tower failure and/or falling ice.



      (2)   The wind generator structure shall not exceed 125 feet
in height.



      (3)   The wind generator and guy wires shall have a minimum
setback of 150 feet from any property line.



      (4)   Fencing may be required if the structure poses a safety
hazard to residents.



      (5)   Accessory buildings and guy wires must meet the setback
requirements for the underlying zoning district.



      (6)   No lighting is allowed on the wind generator.



      (7)   Wind generators are prohibited in the Lake Elmo Airport
Safety Zones.



      (8)   There shall be at least 1,000 feet between wind
generators.



      (9)   If the applicant's property is subdivided into parcels
of less than 40 acres, the wind generator shall be removed as a condition of
the subdivision approval.



      (10)   Wind generator permits are not transferable.  Upon
sale of the property, purchaser must apply for a new wind generator permit or
remove the wind generator from the property.



(1997 Code, § 1385.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.094  DURATION AND REVIEW.



   (A)   Wind generator permits shall expire upon sale or subdivision
of the property as provided above, but shall be reviewed annually.



   (B)   Wind generator permits may be revoked by an affirmative vote
of 3 Council members for noncompliance with the conditions of the permit.



(1997 Code, § 1385.06)



WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 150.110  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to allow for and regulate the design,
location, placement, construction, maintenance, and removal of wireless
communications towers and antennae and to:



   (A)   Reasonably accommodate the provision of wireless
telecommunication services to the general public;



   (B)   Provide safety/emergency service through the use of wireless
communications facilities;



   (C)   Minimize adverse visual effects of wireless telecommunication
towers, antennae, or accessory equipment through careful design and siting
standards;



   (D)   Strictly control the location and design of wireless
communications facilities so that allowed facilities will not be obtrusive or
visually unpleasant and in particular, to protect residential property and
neighborhoods from visually intrusive tower installations where reasonably
possible;



   (E)   Provide clear standards governing all aspects of such
facilities;



   (F)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failures through structural standards and setback requirements;



   (G)    Maximize the use of existing and approved towers, structures,
and/or buildings for the location of new wireless telecommunication towers in
order to reduce the number of the structures needed to accommodate wireless
telecommunication services; and



   (H)   Allow new facilities only when a documented proof of need
satisfactory to the city can be shown.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.111  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All new wireless communications facilities shall require a
conditional use permit in accordance with the zoning district requirements
specified in § 150.115 with the exception of those facilities that are
exempt from review under this chapter or that may be approved
administratively with a wireless communications permit.



      (1)   A public hearing for a new wireless communications
facility that requires a conditional use permit shall be preceded by 10 days
mailed notice to record owners of property located within 1,000 feet of the
parcel on which the tower will be located.



   (B)   Exemptions.  The following are exempt from review under this
chapter:



      (1)   Television antennas, satellite dishes 1 meter (39
inches) in diameter or less;



      (2)   Satellite dishes used commercially and 3 meters in
diameter or less;



      (3)   Receive only antennas;



      (4)   Amateur radio facilities, subject to other City Code
requirements;



      (5)   Mobile services providing public information coverage of
news events or of a temporary or emergency nature.



   (C)   Administrative review.  The following shall be allowed as a
permitted use subject to the issuance of a wireless communications permit in
accordance with § 150.115 :



      (1)   Satellite dishes more than 1 meter (39 inches) in
diameter;



      (2)   Ground mounted antennas not exceeding the maximum height
allowed for structures in the underlying zoning district;



      (3)   Building mounted antennas not exceeding 25 feet above
the highest part of the building to which they are attached;



      (4)   Utility pole mounted antennas not exceeding 25 feet
above the highest part of the utility pole to which they are attached;



      (5)   Antennas co-located on an existing wireless
communications facility structure.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.112  PROOF OF NEED.



   (A)   As part of an application for a conditional use permit or
wireless communications permit an applicant shall demonstrate proof of need
by providing a coverage/interference analysis and capacity analysis, which
indicates that the location and height of the tower or antennas as proposed
is necessary to meet the frequency plus other spacing needs of the cellular
communication system and/or to provide adequate portable radio coverage and
capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the tower or
antenna at another site.  The proof of need for the tower or antennae must
be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city by providing the city an
analysis from a qualified professional RF engineer with experience in radio
frequency analysis work, which is subject to acceptance by the city prior to
commencing the work.



   (B)   The cost of the city's review, including an analysis of the
proof of need, is the applicant's responsibility.  An escrow shall be
established in an amount required by Council resolution for this purpose.



   (C)   The analysis and the material provided by the engineer shall
include at least the following:



      (1)   Structural capacity analysis.  Provide an analysis of
the impact of the proposed facility on the tower's carrying capacity of at
least 3 antenna arrays required (using a typical maximum facility) under the
co-location provision of this subchapter.



      (2)   Coverage/interference.  Provide an analysis for:



         (a)   City property and other public property with
signal strength values (expressed in dBuy) for on street level, in vehicle,
and in building level with said interference analysis indicating the
protection afforded for all the frequencies in use or which could be in use
by the city or other public safety agencies.



         (b)   Private property with signal strength values
(expressed in dBuy) for on street level and in building level with said
analysis indicating the protection afforded property within 1/2 mile of the
proposed facility and site.



      (3)   System capacity analysis.  If the system coverage
analysis does not show a coverage need, provide a system capacity analysis.



      (4)   Radio frequency radiation hazard analysis.  The
analysis must address compliance with the most current FCC Bulletin OET 65
radiation standard.



      (5)   Map of existing and proposed facilities.  A map showing
the location of all existing and any proposed towers within 2 miles of the
site being considered.  Communications equipment and towers within this area
shall be identified by type, function, ownership/users and height.  The
capacity of existing towers located within 2 miles (the study area) to carry
additional facilities must be provided.



      (6)   Map of existing buildings and structures.  A map
showing the location of all existing buildings, water towers and structures
75 feet or more in height above the ground and within 2 miles of the site
being considered.  The potential and efforts undertaken to use these
buildings and structures as a supporting base for an antenna or
communications facility purpose must be described and analyzed.



      (7)   Other information.  Any other information deemed
necessary by the city in order to demonstrate the need for a new wireless
communications facility.



      (8)   Exception.  If the request is limited to adding an
antenna array on an existing tower without increasing the height of the tower
support structure or otherwise permitted after an administration review under
§ 150.111, the city may waive some or all of the proof of need requirements
listed above.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.113  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND SITE RANKING ANALYSIS.



   (A)   Location requirements for new facilities.  If a new wireless
communications facility is needed based on the materials and studies
submitted and reviewed by the city, the following preferences, listed in
ranked order, shall be followed and each preference shall be analyzed to
determine the most appropriate location:



      (1)   Use of existing towers.  An existing tower may be used
to support the proposed facility.  If no existing tower has additional
capacity, a determination must be made to show if and how towers in the study
area can be modified to accommodate the proposed facility.  The co-location
requirements specified in § 150.114 shall be used to help determine whether
or not an existing tower can be used to support a proposed facility.



      (2)   Use of existing structures.  An existing structure over
35 feet high may be used.  Preference shall be given to existing light
poles, high voltage utility towers and water towers.



      (3)   Use of existing building 4 or more stories in height. 
Public and commercial buildings or structures 4 or more stories high which
can more likely accommodate facilities without obstructing views or being
obtrusive to scenic views shall be given preference over shorter buildings.



      (4)   Within an existing easement that contains utility poles
over 75 feet in height or within 100 feet of said right-of-way.



      (5)   Public land and facilities.  In situations in which one
of the 4 options listed above is not feasible, land owned by the city or
other public property shall have preference to private property.



      (6)   Private property within the City of Lake Elmo subject to
the location and zoning requirements of this chapter and the following
criteria:



         (a)   Less restrictive zoning districts shall be given
preference over more restrictive zoning districts.  For example, proposed
sites in commercial or industrial districts will be given preference over
sites in residential, rural residential or agricultural zoning districts.



         (b)   Sites with the least visual impact on residential
areas and which are the most consistent with the community's rural character
shall be given preference.



   (B)   In cases where a lower ranked alternative is proposed, the
applicant shall file a written analysis demonstrating that despite diligent
efforts to adhere to the established hierarchy within the potential service
area, as determined by a qualified radio frequency engineer, higher ranked
options are not technologically feasible.  An application for a lower-ranked
site shall be considered incomplete without this written documentation.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 10-4-2009)



§ 150.114  CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   In accordance with the location requirements and site
preferential ranking found in this chapter, wireless communication services
shall be located on existing towers or structures which exceed 35 feet in
height and which are located within the potential service area for the site
being proposed by the applicant.  In the event that co-location is not
possible, the applicant must demonstrate that a good faith effort to co-
locate on existing towers and structures was made but an agreement could not
be reached.



   (B)   Exceptions to co-location requirements.  The City Council
shall waive any or all of the co-location requirements if it is determined
that:



      (1)   The antennae and/or tower accessory equipment would
cause the structural capacity of an existing or approved tower or building to
be exceeded, as documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer,
and the existing or approved tower or building cannot be reinforced,
modified, or replaced to accommodate the antennae or tower accessory
equipment at a reasonable cost;



      (2)   The antennae and/or tower accessory equipment would
cause interference materially impacting the usability of existing antennae or
tower accessory equipment as documented by a qualified radio frequency
engineer and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost, or
would otherwise prevent the use of existing antennae or related accessory
equipment and structures;



      (3)   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the
applicant’s search radius cannot or will not accommodate the antennae
and/or tower accessory equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably
as documented by a qualified radio frequency engineer; and/or



      (4)   Other unforeseen reasons make it infeasible to locate
the antennae and/or tower accessory equipment upon an existing or approved
tower or building.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.115  PROHIBITED AREAS.



   Wireless telecommunication towers shall not be allowed in the following
areas:



   (A)   Residentially zoned parcels (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and RE zoning
districts) of less than 2.5 acres or rural residential parcels of less than 5
acres unless the wireless telecommunication tower and ground facilities
accessory thereto are located within an existing public utility power line
right-of-way or other public right-of-way that contains utility poles over 75
feet in height or within 100 feet of said right-of-way;



   (B)   Open space easements or conservation easements;



   (C)   Airport impact zones without consent of the F.A.A,; and/or



   (D)   Open space preservation zoning districts.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.116  ZONING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Wireless communications facilities that require a conditional
use permit, including the installation of a new tower, shall be permitted in
the following districts and subject to the following height restrictions
provided they meet all other requirements of this subchapter.



 


Zoning District

 

Maximum Height  (in feet)

 

Minimum Parcel Area





A- Agriculture
 

125

 

10



RR - Rural Residential Zoning
 

125

 

5



R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential
 

125

 

2.5



OP - Open Space
 

125

 

2.5



RE - Residential Estates
 

125

 

2.5



GB, LB, CB, HB - Business
 

125

 

5



BP - Business Park
 

125

 

5



PF - Public Facility
 

125

 

None





 



   (B)   The City Council may increase the maximum height of a wireless
communications facility by 25 feet in all residential and open space
districts and 50 feet in agriculture, business and public facility districts
provided that an applicant is able to demonstrate a need for a higher
facility and/or that the additional height will serve a public interest in
allowing fewer towers to serve a given area.



   (C)   Regardless of zoning district, new facilities may be allowed
within an existing public utility power line right-of-way or other public
right-of-way that contains utility poles over 75 feet in height or within 100
feet of said right-of-way.



   (D)   Public land exemption.  A wireless communication facility may
be located on any parcel that is owned by the city or another public entity
regardless of the zoning district or size of the property.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.117  APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Wireless communications permit (administrative approval).  
An applicant seeking approval of a facility that can be approved
administratively with a wireless communications permit shall follow all of
the application requirements listed below for a conditional use permit but
shall be exempt from those requirements found in the zoning code including
the public hearing requirements.  An application found to comply with the
provisions of this chapter may be approved by the Planning Director. 
Approval shall be in writing , identifying the specific facility approved,
the location, mounting height, and other pertinent information and any
conditions of approval.  If the requested facility is to be located on
public property, the agreement allowing the facility shall be approved by the
City Council and executed prior to issuing the permit.



   (B)   Conditional use permit.  Wireless communications facilities
that require a conditional use permit are subject to the requirements
specified in the zoning code in addition to all requirements of § 150.110. 
Applications shall be submitted on forms provided by the city and shall
include the following information.



   (C)   A site plan drawn to scale acceptable to the Planning Director
which illustrates:



      (1)   The parcel on which the tower and accessory ground
facilities will be located;



      (2)   The existing and proposed buildings and structures on
the tower parcel;



      (3)   The buildings located within 200 feet of the perimeter
of the tower parcel; and



      (4)   Access easements as necessary to the tower parcel.



   (D)   A scaled drawing of the exterior of the proposed wireless
communications facility, clearly showing the method of fencing, coloration,
materials, and camouflage techniques being used.



   (E)   Photo-simulated post construction renderings of the proposed
wireless communications facilities, equipment enclosures, and ancillary
structures as they would look after construction from locations at the
periphery of the proposed site, which shall, at a minimum, include renderings
from the vantage point of any adjacent roadways and residential
neighborhoods.  The renderings shall also include photo- simulations of the
antenna supporting structure after it has been fully developed with antenna
structures (the applicant may assume for the purpose of  the simulation that
other antenna structures on the facility will resemble their proposed
structure size and design).  A minimum of 2 such renderings shall be
provided; additional renderings may be required if the city determines that
additional views should be considered.



   (F)   Exterior paint or finish samples of the colors to be used in
the construction of the wireless communication facility.



   (G)   A report from a qualified and licensed professional engineer
which:



      (1)   Describes the wireless communication tower height and
design including a cross-section and elevation;



      (2)   Certifies the wireless communication tower’s
compliance with structural and electrical standards;



      (3)   Documents the height above grade for the mounting
positions, which can be used for co- location and the minimum separation
distances between the co-location positions; and



      (4)   Describes the wireless communication tower’s capacity
to support antennae, including an example of the number and type of antennas
that can be accommodated on the wireless communication tower.



   (H)   In conjunction with the information required to demonstrate
the proof of need for a new facility under this subchapter, the applicant
shall submit a 5-year plan for wireless telecommunication facilities to be
located within the city.  The city acknowledges that the plans are fluid and
in all likelihood will change depending upon market demands for the
service.  The city will maintain an inventory of all existing and reasonably
anticipated cell site installations.  The applicant shall provide the
following written information in each 5-year plan and the plan must be
updated with each submittal for a new wireless communication tower permit as
necessary:



      (1)   A description of the radio frequencies to be used for
each technology;



      (2)   A list of all existing sites to be upgraded or replaced,
and proposed cell sites within the city for these services by the applicant;
and



      (3)   A presentation size map of the city, which shows the
5-year plan for cell sites, or if individual properties are not known, the
geographic service areas of the cell sites.



   (I)   An application fee in an amount prescribed from time to time
by City Council resolution as necessary to reimburse the city for costs
incurred to process the wireless communication tower permit application along
with an escrow payment as prescribed by the City Council to cover the costs
associated with the city's review of the permit.



   (J)   Confirmation that the applicant is properly licensed by the
F.C.C., or is the authorized representative of a wireless communication
provider properly licensed by the F.C.C.



   (K)   Written authorization from the property owner describing the
area which will be subject to the tower lease.



   (L)   Documentation of the steps to be taken by applicant to avoid
causing destructive interference to co-located previously established public
safety communications facilities; and



   (M)   A detailed landscape plan, which indicates how tower accessory
equipment will be screened.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.118  EXPERT REVIEW.



   (A)   Where due to the complexity of the methodology or analysis
required to review an application for a wireless communications facility, the
Planning Director may require a technical review by a third party expert. The
costs of this review shall be borne by the applicant, and shall be in
addition to applicable conditional use or wireless communications permit, and
building permit fees. The applicant shall submit an escrow deposit that may
be applied towards the cost of such technical review upon notification from
the Director that a technical review is required, and shall remit any
outstanding balance to the city for such review prior to issuance of a
building permit.  The maximum fee for such review and the required escrow
deposit shall be in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City
Council.



   (B)   The expert review may address any or all of the following:



      (1)   The accuracy and completeness of submissions;



      (2)   The applicability of analysis techniques and
methodologies;



      (3)   The validity of conclusions reached;



      (4)   Whether the proposed wireless communications facility
complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth in these regulations;



      (5)   Other matters deemed by the city to be relevant to
determining whether a proposed wireless communications facility complies with
the provisions of these regulations.



   (C)   Based on the results of the expert review, the city may
require changes to the applicant's application and submittals.



   (D)   The applicant shall reimburse the city within 15 working days
of the date of receipt of an invoice for expenses associated with the third
party expert's review of the application.  Failure by the applicant to make
reimbursement pursuant to this section shall abate the pending application
until paid in full.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.119  CONSTRUCTION  PERMITS.



   All wireless communication towers erected, constructed, or located
within the city, and all wiring therefor, shall comply with the requirements
set forth in the Uniform Building Code.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.120  TOWER STANDARDS.



   (A)   Wireless communication towers shall comply with the following
standards unless the City Council grants a variance as necessary to
reasonably accommodate the wireless communication tower.  Variance
procedures shall be processed according to the zoning code.



   (B)   Design.



      (1)   To blend into the surrounding environment through the
use of color; and architectural treatment and techniques that softens the
visual impact of the wireless communication tower on the surrounding
environment;



      (2)   To be of a monopole design unless the City Council
determines that an alternative design would better blend into the surrounding
environment;



      (3)   All proposed wireless communication tower shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate
both the applicant’s antennas and comparable antennas for at least 2
additional users if the tower is over 100 feet in height or for at least 1
additional user if the tower is less than 100 feet in height; provided that
this standard may be waived or otherwise modified by the City Council as
necessary to allow the applicant to construct a wireless communication tower
that better blends into the surrounding environment; and



      (4)   Where possible, all proposed wireless communication
towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon
the tower and to accept antennas mounted at various heights.



      (5)   All facilities shall be designed to minimize the visual
impact to the greatest extent feasible by means of placement, screening,
landscaping with native species, whenever feasible, and camouflage, and be
compatible with existing architectural element, building materials, and other
site characteristics.  The applicant shall use the least visible antennas
possible to accomplish the coverage objectives.



   (C)   Adverse effects on properties. 



      (1)   New wireless communications facilities shall be
configured and located in a manner that shall minimize adverse effects,
including visual impacts on adjacent properties.  The applicant shall
demonstrate that alternative locations, configurations, and facility types
have been examined and shall address in narrative and graphic form the
feasibility of any alternatives that may have fewer adverse effects on
adjacent properties than the facility, configuration and location proposed.



      (2)   The following attributes shall be considered from
vantage points at adjacent properties, roadways and occupied structures:
height and location, mass and scale, materials and color,existing and
proposed vegetation and intervening structures.



      (3)   An applicant shall demonstrate through the
photo-simulation requirements under § 150.114 that the project design
employs each of these attributes in a manner that minimizes adverse effects
to the greatest extent possible.



      (4)   All facilities that have the potential for high
visibility shall be sited in such a manner as to cause the least detriment to
the view shed of adjoining properties.



   (D)   Setbacks.



      (1)   No communications tower shall be located in the required
front, side or rear yard setback of any parcel.



      (2)   No freestanding communications tower shall be located
closer than 125% of the tower height from any lot lines with the following
exceptions:



         (a)   Towers in a side or rear yard that are adjacent to
parcels zoned commercial, industrial or public facility.



      (3)   Setbacks from buildings:



         (a)   In residential zoning districts, wireless
communications towers shall be set back a minimum of 100% of the tower height
from a residential dwelling except for dwellings on the subject property.



         (b)   In all other zoning districts, the minimum setback
between structures as required by the Building Code shall be observed.



      (4)   Use of existing light poles, high voltage poles or
towers and other existing structures are exempt from the setback requirements
provided that such pole, tower or structure is not increased in height.



      (5)   Wireless communications towers located within an
existing public utility power line right-of-way or other public right-of-way
that contains utility poles over 75 feet in height or within 100 feet of said
right-of-way shall be exempt from the setbacks as herein required.



      (6)   A required setback may be reduced or its location in
relation to a public street varied upon providing the city with a licensed
professional engineer’s certification that the wireless communication tower
is designed to collapse or fail within a distance or zone shorter than the
required setback distance.



   (E)   Height.



      (1)   The maximum height of a wireless communications tower
shall be determined based on the underlying zoning district and will be the
amount specified in § 150.117.



   (F)   Lighting.  At night, wireless communication towers shall not
be illuminated by artificial means, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (F.A.A.).



      (1)   White strobe lighting is prohibited.



      (2)   The applicant shall document the need for lighting as
part of a new wireless communications facility application.



      (3)   A site that requires lighting shall only be accepted
when no other suitable alternative exists.  A new tower may be rejected on
the grounds that lighting will be a visual nuisance to surrounding properties.



   (G)   Landscaping and screening.  All wireless communications
towers and related building facilities shall be landscaped and screened with
natural vegetation to lessen the visual impact.  The natural vegetation on
the site shall be documented on the site plans.  Suitable existing
vegetation shall be retained to the maximum extent possible based on an
analysis of the site.  New landscaping shall be selected that includes
coniferous and deciduous plants and trees that are hardy for conditions on
the site without the use of augmented water.



      (1)   Landscaping shall include ground cover, lower story,
mid-story and upper story plants.  Plant density shall be sufficient to
provide 80% opacity year round from the ground up to a distance of 5 feet
high for 60% or more of the site with the planting to be located based on an
analysis of the site in relation to the surrounding area.  Greater or lesser
amounts and percentages may be required or allowed based on the city's review.



   (H)   Signs and advertising.  The use of any portion of a wireless
communications tower for signs other than warning or equipment information is
prohibited.



   (I)   Interference with public safety communication.  No wireless
communication facility shall interfere with public safety communications. 
All wireless communication towers/antennas shall comply with F.C.C.
regulations and licensing requirements.



   (J)   Accessory utility buildings.  All utility buildings and
structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to blend in
with the surrounding environment and compatible with adjacent buildings, and
shall be permitted in addition to the number of accessory buildings otherwise
allowed in each zoning district.



      (1)   Ground mounted equipment shall not be visible from
beyond the boundaries of the site and shall be screened by a solid wall or
fence and dense landscaping materials described in division (G) above.



      (2)   Accessory utility buildings shall observe the minimum
setback requirements for accessory buildings in the underlying zoning
district as well as all other applicable zoning and building requirements for
accessory buildings.



   (K)   Maintenance.  All buildings and structures on the premises of
the wireless communications facility shall observe the city's property
maintenance standards of the city code.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.121  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER AGREEMENT.



   (A)   If the application is approved by the city, a wireless
communications tower permit and a building permit shall be issued upon the
execution of a wireless communication tower agreement.



   (B)   The agreement shall be signed by the applicant and property
owner and the terms of the agreement shall include the following:



      (1)   A list of the conditions of approval to the wireless
communication tower permit;



      (2)   A statement indicating that failure to comply with the
conditions of approval shall result in the removal of the wireless
communication tower, antennae, or tower accessory equipment;



      (3)   A statement indicating that the expenses incurred by the
city to enforce the provisions of the wireless communication tower agreement
shall be reimbursed by the applicant;



      (4)   A statement, which requires the applicant to utilize the
procedures established by the F.C.C. to resolve any complaints received
relating to interference allegedly caused by the wireless communication
tower; and



      (5)   A statement indicating that a wireless communication
tower which has not been used for 6 consecutive months shall be deemed
abandoned and may be required to be removed in accordance with § 150.123. 
To ensure compliance with this provision, the applicant must submit a
performance bond or letter of credit in an amount sufficient to cover the
removal or reduction costs.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.122  ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   Towers and antennae shall be removed within 6 months of
cessation of use.



   (B)   An owner wishing to extend the time for removal or
reactivation shall submit an application stating the reason for such
extension.  The Planning Director may extend the time for removal or
reactivation up to 60 days upon showing of a good cause.  If the tower or
antennae is not removed in a timely fashion, the city may give notice that it
will contract for removal within 30 days following written notice to the
owner.  Thereafter, the city may cause removal and be reimbursed for all
costs associated with said removal by drawing on the funds provided with the
financial guarantee.



   (C)   Upon removal of the wireless communication facility, the site
shall be returned to its natural state and topography and vegetated
consistent with natural surroundings.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



§ 150.123  MINIMUM CONDITIONS.



   General conditions on a wireless communications permit may include, but
not be limited to the following:



   (A)   An agreement providing for co-location and 6-month removal of
unused and/or obsolete towers shall be attached and become part of the permit.



   (B)   The tower shall be set back a distance equal to the tower
height from all property lines.  All accessory structures shall be set back
a minimum of 20 feet from all side yard and rear yard property lines.



   (C)   Zoning permits shall be applied for and issued before any
construction is started.



   (D)   Prior to application for a conditional use permit, applicant
must obtain F.A.A. approval and/or provide documentation that F.A.A. approval
is not needed.



   (E)   Applicant must obtain F.C.C. licensure and approval as
required for various communications applications.



   (F)   Applicant must submit proof of liability and worker's
compensation insurance.



   (G)   Proof that towers and their antennas have been designed by,
and following completion of construction were inspected by a qualified and
licensed professional engineer (at the applicant's expense) to conform to
applicable state structural building standards and all other applicable
reviewing agencies and to conform with accepted electrical engineering
methods and practices as specified in applicable provisions of the National
Electrical Code.



   (H)   Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with,
corrosive resistant material.



   (I)   The addition of antennas and associated equipment of an
additional provider to an existing permitted tower shall be considered
co-location and shall require a zoning permit and site plan approval.  An
amendment to a conditional use permit shall typically not be required.



   (J)   All towers shall be reasonably protected against unauthorized
climbing. The area around the base of the tower and guy wire anchors shall be
enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of 6 feet with a locked gate.



   (K)   All towers and their antennas shall utilize building
materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that effectively blend
the tower facilities within the surrounding natural setting and built
environmentally to the greatest extent possible.



   (L)   No part of any antenna or tower, nor any lines, cable,
equipment, wires or braces shall at any time extend across or over any part
of the right-of-way, public street, highway or sidewalk without approval by
the city through the zoning permit approval process.



   (M)   All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying facilities
shall be removed within 6 months of the cessation of operations at the site
unless a time extension is approved by the city.  After the facilities are
removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an improved state
which includes removal of all concrete to 6 feet below normal grade and
surrounding area returned to normal grading.  Electronic equipment shall not
be removed in advance of removal of obsolete or unused towers.  To ensure
compliance, the applicant must submit a performance bond or letter of credit
in an amount sufficient to cover all removal costs as determined by the city
prior to the issuance of a building permit for the facility.  Failure to
remove the structure shall be cause for the city to remove the tower and
associated equipment and assess the cost against the required bonding or
letter of credit instrument.



   (N)   The city shall conduct a final inspection of the site to
ensure that all requirements of the City Code and all conditions of approval
attached as part of the wireless communications permit are met prior to the
start of operation of the facility.



   (O)   For installations of a facility in an area that could
potentially be accessed by the public (including rooftop installations or
other locations that would be considered public versus occupational) a radio
frequency hazard analysis and a yearly report must be submitted before
December 31 of each year showing the results of on-site measurements at the
site.  A registered professional engineer hired by the provider must sign
these measurements and report.  At a minimum, the report must document any
changes to the site over the course of the previous year.



   (P)   All towers must be approved by the F.A.A. and registered with
the F.C.C. prior to the issuance of a building permit for a new facility.



(Ord. 08-019, passed 11-4-2009)



ALARM SYSTEMS



§ 150.140  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of §§ 150.140 et seq. is to encourage security,
fire, or medical alarm users and alarm businesses (including, but not limited
to, sales, installation, and/or monitoring) to maintain the operation
reliability and the proper use of alarm systems so as to limit unnecessary
police, fire, and emergency medical responses to false alarms and alarm
malfunctions.



   (B)   Sections 150.140 et seq. governs burglary, robbery, intrusion,
fire, and medical emergency false alarms, provides for service fees for
excessive false alarms, and provides for issuance of citations or assessment
of service fees.



(1997 Code, § 1395.01)  (Ord. passed 2-15-2000)



§ 150.141  ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   False alarm warning notice.  Each time the Washington County
Sheriffs Office and/or the Lake Elmo Fire Department responds to a false
alarm due to system malfunction or when no reason can be determined for the
false alarm, the Washington County Sheriffs Office shall issue a false alarm
warning notice.



   (B)   Service fee.  A service fee for excessive false alarms shall
be charged as follows.



      (1)   No service fee shall be charged for the first 3 false
alarms that occur within a 12-month period calculated from the date of the
first alarm.



      (2)   More than 3 false alarms and up to and including 6 false
alarms within a 12-month period shall result in a service fee.  The fee
shall be set from time to time by ordinance of the City Council.



      (3)   More than 6 false alarms within a 12-month period shall
result in a service fee.  The fee shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.



      (4)   The City of Lake Elmo based on false alarm response
records provided by the Washington County Sheriff's Office will bill the
service fee.



   (C)   Service fee exceptions.  No service fee shall be assessed if
the false alarm is:



      (1)   Caused by an electrical storm, tornado, or other act of
God where there is clear evidence of physical damage to the alarm system;



      (2)   Caused by intermittent disruption of telephone circuits
beyond the control of the alarm site owner;



      (3)   Caused by electrical power disruption or failure more
than 2 hours beyond the control of the alarm owner; and/or



      (4)   At a location where the Washington County Sheriffs
Department has installed the Varda or other similar alarms.



   (D)   Requirement of payment of service fee.  All false alarm
service fees are due and payable within 30 days from date of invoice.  In
the event that false alarm service fees are not paid as required by §§
150.140 et seq., all delinquent accounts may be certified to the City
Administrator who shall prepare an assessment roll each year providing for
assessment of the delinquent accounts against the respective property
served.  The assessment roll shall be delivered to the Council for adoption
on or before October 1 of each year.  Upon approval of the assessment roll,
the City Administrator shall certify to the County Auditor the amount due. 
The County Auditor shall then enter the amount as part of the tax levy on the
premises to be collected during the coming year.  The action may be optional
or subsequent to taking legal action to collect delinquent accounts.



   (E)   Violations.  A person commits an offense in violation of §§
150.140 et seq. if the person suffers or permits 3 or more false alarms
within a 12-month period.



(1997 Code, § 1395.03)  (Ord. passed 2-15-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



AMATEUR RADIO TOWER ANTENNA



§ 150.155  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The city's amateur radio tower antenna regulations are adopted in order
to:



   (A)   Facilitate the provision of amateur radio tower antenna
services to the residents and businesses of the city;



   (B)   Minimize adverse visual effects amateur radio tower antennas
through careful design and siting standards;



   (C)   Minimize adverse visual effects of amateur radio tower
antennas; and



   (D)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from amateur
radio tower antenna failures through structural standards and setback
requirements.



(Ord. 97-84, passed - -)



§ 150.156  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall install an amateur radio tower antenna higher that what
is permitted in the zone in which it is located without first receiving the
appropriate permit.



(Ord. 97-84, passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.157  AMATEUR RADIO TOWER ANTENNA PERMIT.



   (A)   Applications for a amateur radio tower antenna permit shall be
submitted to the City Planner, and shall include the following:



   (B)   (1)   A survey drawn to scale, which illustrates the parcel
on which the antenna will be located, buildings located on the parcel,
buildings located with 100 feet of the parcel, and the location of the
proposed amateur radio tower antenna;



      (2)   A drawing to scale, which illustrates the antenna's
relative size and visibility from adjoining property.  Amateur radio tower
antenna structures shall not exceed 120 feet in height.  The amateur radio
tower antenna must be set back from all adjoining property lines a distance
no less than the height of the amateur radio tower antenna plus 15 feet;



      (3)   Documentation from the amateur radio tower antenna
manufacturer showing construction details and construction materials;



      (4)   Mailing addresses for all property owners of record
located within 350 feet of the subject property; and



      (5)   A copy of the applicant's F.C.C. amateur radio license.



(Ord. 97-84, passed - -)



§ 150.158  PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Planner
shall schedule a hearing before the Planning Commission, which shall be
preceded by 10-days mailed notice to the record owners of property located
within 350 feet of the parcel on which the amateur radio tower antenna will
be located.



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the City
Council regarding the issuance of amateur radio tower antenna permit and, in
particular, concerning the following:



      (1)   The reasonable necessity for the amateur radio tower
antenna;



      (2)   The appropriateness of the amateur radio tower antenna
design;



      (3)   The appropriateness of the amateur radio tower antenna's
construction materials and assembly;



      (4)   Maintenance requirements; and/or



      (5)   The distance of the amateur radio tower antenna from
adjoining property lines.



(Ord. 97-84, passed - -)



§ 150.159  CITY COUNCIL REVIEW.



   (A)   Upon receipt of Planning Commission recommendations, the City
Council shall review the application.  The City Council may approve the
application subject to conditions, table its review until a date certain, or
deny the application for an amateur radio tower antenna permit.  If the
application is approved by the City Council, an amateur radio tower antenna
and a building permit shall be issued upon the execution of an amateur radio
tower antenna agreement.



   (B)   The terms of the amateur radio tower antenna agreement shall
include the following:



      (1)   A list of the conditions of approval to the amateur
radio tower antenna permit;



      (2)   A statement indicating that failure to comply with the
conditions of approval shall result in the removal of the amateur radio tower
antenna structure;



      (3)   A statement indicating that the expenses incurred by the
city to enforce the provisions of the amateur radio tower antenna agreement
shall be reimbursed by the applicant;



      (4)   A statement, which requires the applicant to use the
procedures established by the F.C.C. to resolve any complaints received
relating to interference allegedly caused by the amateur radio tower antenna;
and



      (5)   A statement indicating that the amateur radio tower
antenna permit shall be valid during the term of the amateur radio tower
antenna agreement and only while the applicant resides on the property.



(Ord. 97-84, passed - -)



§ 150.160  REVIEW AND REVOCATION.



   The City Planner shall inspect the property at least annually for
compliance with the provisions of the amateur radio tower antenna
agreement.  If the permittee does not comply with the terms of the
agreement, a hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council for
determining whether to terminate the agreement.  The hearing shall be
preceded by 10-days mailed notice to occupants of property within 350 feet of
the lot on which the amateur radio tower antenna is located.



(Ord. 97-84, passed - -)



RESTRICTIVE SOIL OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 150.200  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.



   (A)   Findings.  The city finds that certain areas within the
municipality are characterized by certain soil types, slopes, and water
levels which, without proper corrective action, are unsuitable for
development of any type; inappropriate development in these areas increases
soil erosion and sedimentation, the introduction of toxic materials into
ground water, encourages pollution, destroys ecological and natural
resources, and requires expenditures of public funds to correct deficiencies,
contributing to the detriment of the health, safety, and welfare of the
citizens of the city.



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of §§ 150.200 et seq. is to provide
for the regulation of development on restrictive soils in a way as to
minimize the risk of environmental damage and to protect private homeowners
and governmental units from incurring high maintenance and capital costs
resulting from the necessity to correct deficiencies encountered as a result
of development on poorly suited soils.



(1997 Code, § 310.01)



§ 150.201  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Sections 150.200 et seq. shall apply to areas within the city which are
delineated on the official soils maps of the city and have soil types set
forth in Table A in § 150.203(D)(2).  For purposes of determining the
application of §§ 150.200 et seq. to any particular parcel of land, the
above-referenced map shall be on file in the office of the Zoning
Administrator and shall be available for inspection and copying.



(1997 Code, § 310.02)



§ 150.202  RESTRICTIVE SOILS AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Permit.  Except as provided in §§ 150.200 et seq., no
person shall erect any structure within the restrictive soils overlay
district without having first obtained a written permit from the Zoning
Administrator authorizing erection of the structure.



   (B)   Exceptions.  The permit requirements established by §§
150.200 et seq. shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any public agency or its contractor or any person
performing work within a right-of-way of any public agency pursuant to a
permit issued by the public agency;



      (2)   Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. 
When emergency work is performed under §§ 150.200 et seq., the person
performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the
Zoning Administrator prior to the commencement of the work.  The Zoning
Administrator shall review the facts and determine whether an emergency
exists and shall, by written memorandum, authorize the commencement of the
emergency exception.  The person commencing emergency work shall, within 10
days following the commencement of that activity, apply for the issuance of a
restrictive soils development permit and on the issuance of the permit may be
required to perform the work as is determined to be reasonably necessary to
fulfill the purposes of §§ 150.200 et seq.; and/or



      (3)   Development consisting of the corrective alteration,
repair, or maintenance of any lost full use of land existing on the date of
adoption of §§ 150.200 et seq.



   (C)   Application for and processing of permit.



      (1)   A separate application for a permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator for each development for which a permit is required
except that only 1 application need be made for 2 or more acts which are to
be done on the same parcel.



      (2)   The application shall include a map of the site and a
delineation of the soils found in the site along with a plan and cost
estimate of the proposed development and the other engineering data, surveys,
and other information and material as may be required in order to determine
the effects of the development on the affected land and the suitability of
the soils for the development.  See § 150.273 to determine if a Storm Water
Management Plan or an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is required.



      (3)   When proposed work includes construction or alterations
of structures, the work shall be submitted with the application, along with
detailed drawings of any special foundation structures and/or special
provisions for on-site sewage disposal.



   (D)   Issuance of permit.  The following standards shall govern the
issuance of permits for development within restrictive soils overlay district.



      (1)   Development on restrictive soils shall not be permitted
until an investigation and subsequent report has been completed and presented
to the Zoning Administrator by a professional engineer or soil scientist
experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils and soils mechanics,
and until the recommendations of the investigation have been incorporated
into the design plan and specification.  No permit shall be issued for
development on soils deemed by §§ 150.200 et seq. to be unsuitable.



      (2)   Table A, below, is a grouping of restrictive soils which
are incorporated and made a part of §§ 150.200 et seq.  The following
soils groupings set forth in Table A are highly restrictive for residential,
commercial, industrial, or other development due to high water table (3 feet
or less), steep slope conditions, high shrink swell potential, or high frost
action potential.  No development permit shall be issued unless it has first
been demonstrated by the developer that buildings shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards found in the Minnesota State Building Code for
appropriate soil conditions, and that a soil absorption disposal system can
satisfactorily function in accordance with municipal regulations. The
standards are incorporated by reference into §§ 150.200 et seq.



 




Table A



Soil Group/Slope
 
Soil Group/Slope
 
Soil Group/Slope


2 D, E, F
 
298
 
859 D, E, F


7 D, E, F
 
301
 
860


8 D, E, F
 
302 D, E, F
 
861


12 D, E, F
 
340
 
896


49 D, E, F
 
342 D, E, F
 
1013


100
 
367
 
1027 D, E, F


132 D, E, F
 
453 D, E, F
 
1029 D, E, F


151 D, E, F
 
454 D, E, F
 
1039 D, E, F


153 D, E, F
 
460
 
1040


155 D, E, F
 
472
 
1813


158 D, E, F
 
488
 
1819 D, E, F


169 D, E, F
 
504 D, E, F
 
1820


174
 
529
 
1827 D, E, F


177 D, E, F
 
857
 
1848 D, E, F


259
 
858
 


NOTES TO TABLE:

  Letter references (A, B, C, D, E, or F) indicate a slope range.




 

Symbol
 
Slope Description


 
Simple
 
Complex




A
 
Nearly Level
 
Nearly Level


B
 
Gently Sloping
 
Undulating


C
 
Sloping
 
Rolling


D
 
Moderately Sloping
 
Hilly


E
 
Steep
 
Steep


F
 
Very Steep
 
Very Steep


NOTES TO TABLE:

  If no slope symbol is specified, the entire soil type is restricted,
regardless of slope.




 



   (E)   Conditions.  A special permit may be approved subject to
compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with
the requirements contained in the ordinance which are specifically set forth
in the permits.  The conditions may, among other matters, limit the size,
kind, or character of the proposed development, require the construction of
other structures, including special foundations and soil stabilization
structures, establish required monitoring procedures, require the alterations
of the site as may be necessary, and/or require the conveyance to the city or
other public entity of certain lands or interests in the land.



   (F)   Time of permit; extensions; renewals.



      (1)   A permittee shall begin the work authorized by the
permit within 60 days from the date of issuance of the permit unless a
different date for the commencement of work is set forth in the permit.  The
permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit which in no event
shall exceed more than 12 months from the date of issuance.  The permittee
shall notify the Zoning Administrator at least 24 hours prior to the
commencement of work.  If the work is not commenced as specified in §§
150.200 et seq., then the permit shall become void.  If, prior to the date
established for commencement of work, the permittee makes written request to
the Zoning Administrator for an extension of time to commence the work
setting forth the reasons for the required extension, the Zoning
Administrator may grant the extension.  A permit which has become void may
be renewed at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator upon payment of
renewal fee.  If the Zoning Administrator does not grant the renewal, a
permit for the work may be granted only upon compliance with the procedures
established for any original application.



      (2)   The permittee shall notify the Zoning Administrator in
writing of the termination of the work authorized and no work shall be deemed
to have been completed until approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator
following the written notification.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator may cause inspections of the
work to be made periodically during the course of the work by the Zoning
Administrator or a member of the city staff and shall cause a final
inspection to be made following the completion of the work.



   (G)   Variances and appeals.  Variances and appeals are
administered pursuant to the zoning code.



(1997 Code, § 310.04)  (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.203  RESPONSIBILITY; EFFECT.



   (A)   Responsibility.  Neither the issuance of a permit nor
compliance with the conditions of the permit, nor with the provisions of §§
150.200 et seq. shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise
imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of
any permit under this section serve to impose any liability of the city or
its officers or employees for injury or damage to persons or property.  A
permit issued pursuant to §§ 150.200 et seq. does not relieve the permittee
of the responsibility for securing and complying with any other permit which
may be required by any other law, ordinance, or regulation.



   (B)   Severability.  If any part of §§ 150.200 et seq. is held to
be unconstitutional or otherwise illegal, the remainder of §§ 150.200 et
seq. shall be deemed and held to be valid and remain in force and effect as
if the portion had not been included.  If §§ 150.200 et seq. or any
provisions in §§ 150.200 et seq. is held to be inapplicable to any persons,
property, or work, the holding shall not affect the applicability of §§
150.200 et seq. to any other person's property or work.



   (C)   Conflicts.  Whenever §§ 150.200 et seq. is in conflict with
another section, statute, or regulation, the more restrictive requirement
shall govern.



(1997 Code, § 310.05)



WETLAND PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT (WPP)



§ 150.215  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.



   (A)   Findings.  The city finds that there are many wetlands within
the municipality which, as part of the ecosystem, are critical to the health,
safety, and welfare of the land, animals, and people within the city and the
metropolitan area; that existing and potential development within the city
creates increasing ecological problems and demands upon these resources; and
that these problems and demands have the effect of disspoiling, polluting,
eliminating, or altering both the wetlands and their functions (and the
processes associated with wetlands and their functions) which if preserved
and maintained constitute important physical, aesthetic, recreational, and
economic assets of existing and future residents of the city.



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of §§ 150.215 et seq. is to provide
for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance, and use of the city's
wetlands, to minimize the disturbance to them and to prevent damage from
excessive sedimentation, eutrophication, or pollution, to prevent loss of
fish or other beneficial aquatic organisms, and/or loss of wildlife and
vegetation or the habitants of the same; to provide for the protection of the
city's probable fresh water supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft,
pollution, or mismanagement; to secure safety from floods; to reduce the
financial burdens imposed upon the communities through rescue and relief
efforts occasioned by the occupancy or use of areas subject to periodic
flooding to prevent loss of life, property damage, and the losses and risks
associated with flood conditions; to preserve the location, character, and
extent of natural drainage courses.



(1997 Code, § 315.01)



§ 150.216  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   Sections 150.215 et seq. shall apply to wetland areas within the city
which are delineated on the official wetland maps of the city and have soil
types as set forth in Table A of § 150.218(D)(1).  The purposes of
determining the application of §§ 150.215 et seq. to any particular parcel
of land or water, the above-referenced map shall be on file in the office of
the Zoning Administrator and shall be available for inspection and copying.



(1997 Code, § 315.02)



§ 150.217  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined in §§ 150.215 et seq., common
definitions, words, and phrases used in §§ 150.215 et seq. shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
throughout this code and are found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 315.03)



§ 150.218  WETLAND PERMIT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Permit.  Except as provided in §§ 150.215 et seq., no
person shall perform any of the following actions or otherwise alter the
ecological characteristics of a wetland without first having obtained a
written permit from the Zoning Administrator authorizing the alteration:
deposit or remove any material within a wetland; excavate within a wetland;
construct, alter, or remove any structure within, upon, or across a wetland;
plant or remove any vegetation within a wetland; alter any embankment within
a wetland, or change the flow of water through the wetland.  The above
actions shall be collectively referred to as "work."



   (B)   Exceptions.  The permit requirements established by §§
150.215 et seq. shall not apply to:



      (1)   Any public agency or its contractor or any person
performing work within a right-of-way of any public agency pursuant to a
permit issued by the public agency;



      (2)   Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. 
When emergency work is performed under §§ 150.215 et seq., the person
performing it shall report the pertinent facts relating to the work to the
Zoning Administrator prior to the commencement of the work.  The Zoning
Administrator shall review the facts and determine whether an emergency
exists and shall, by written memorandum, authorize the commencement of the
emergency exception.  A person commencing emergency work shall, within 10
days following the commencement of that activity, apply for the issuance of a
wetlands permit and on the issuance of the permit may be required to perform
the work as is determined to be reasonably necessary to correct any
impairment to the wetland occasioned by the work; and/or



      (3)   Work consisting of the alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any conforming use of land existing on the date of adoption of
§§ 150.215 et seq.



   (C)   Application for and processing of permit.



      (1)   A separate application for a permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator for each work activity for which a permit is required
except that only 1 application need be made for 2 or more acts which are to
be done on the same parcel.  The application shall include a map of the site
and a plan and a cost estimate of the proposed development and the other
engineering data, surveys, and other information and material as may be
required in order to determine the effects of the development on the affected
land and water uses, such as extent of wetland, a description of the amount
and location of work to be performed, a survey of the ecological
characteristics of the wetland, maps and data on soils, water table and the
flood capacity of the wetland, and copies of permits or reports from
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Washington Soil and Water
Conservation District.  When proposed work includes construction or
alteration of structures, 3 sets of plans and specifications for the work
shall be submitted with the application.



      (2)   The wetlands permit application shall be processed in
accordance with the procedures specified for the processing of conditional
use permits and the wetlands permit may be processed at the same time and in
connection with the processing of an application for a building permit or any
other permit required to be granted by ordinance of the city.



      (3)   See § 150.273 to determine if a Storm Water Management
Plan or an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is required.



   (D)   Issuance of permit.



      (1)   Restricted development.  Table A, below, a grouping of
wetland and wetland prone soils on which development is restricted.



 




Table A



75
 
265
 
540


113
 
266
 
541


120
 
325
 
543


123
 
329
 
544


161
 
408
 
552


162
 
449
 
862


166
 
452
 
863


170
 
456
 
1033


189
 
468
 
1055


225
 
481
 
1821


264
 
507
 
1847




 



      (2)   No special permits.  No special permits shall be issued
unless the Zoning Administrator, engineer, and soil scientist find and
determine that the proposed work complies with the following general and
specific, if applicable, requirements.



      (3)   Filling into wetlands.  It is the policy of the city to
limit the placement of any fill material into wetlands in order to preserve
the natural character of the wetlands, and maintain suitable aquatic habitat
for fish and wildlife, and provide for sound surface water management and
flood control.



         (a)   Placement in conformance with these rules shall be
permitted in the following cases, subject to wetland permit, where applicable:



            1.   Development of beach areas;



            2.   Protection of shoreline from continued
erosion by placement of rip-rap materials;



            3.   Recovery of shoreland lost by erosion or
other natural forces which has occurred within the last 5 years;



            4.   Limited filling to allow raising of previous
development constructed at too low an elevation; and/or



            5.   Provide navigational access from riparian
properties, where access cannot be gained by alternative means.



         (b)   Placement shall not be permitted in the following
cases:



            1.   To achieve vegetation control;



            2.   To create upland areas for development or
subdivision;



            3.   To stabilize lake and stream beds which
cannot support fill materials (e.g., excessive depths of muck, steep bank, or
bed slope, and the like); and/or



            4.   To stabilize areas of flowing water, active
springs, or subject to substantial wave action, draft, sedimentation, or
other disruptive forces.



         (c)   Except as provided in §§ 150.215 et seq., those
wetlands which serve the following functions shall not be altered:



            1.   Those that have a continuing scientific or
educational value due to their location, size, flora, fauna, and other
characteristics of the wetland;



            2.   Those that clearly contribute to storm water
flood control or to the maintenance of domestic water supplies, minimum
desirable stream flows, or lake water levels;



            3.   Those that significantly contribute to the
improvement of water quality;



            4.   Those that currently or potentially serve a
useful recreation function for a significant number of users;



            5.   Those that make a significant contribution to
scenic views;



            6.   Those that provide significant resting,
nesting, or spawning or breeding areas for water fowl, other birds, fish, or
mammals; and



            7.   Those that contain unique/endangered plant
species of areas of historical significance.



         (d)   A permit shall be required for all other filling
and shall be granted provided:



            1.   The project is not unduly detrimental to the
public purposes listed in M.S. § 105.37, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from
time to time, including but not limited to fish and wildlife habitat,
navigation, water supply and storm water retention; filling of posted fish
spawning areas is prohibited;



            2.   The fill consists of clean inorganic material
that is free of pollutants, nutrients, rubbish, refuse, and garbage as
defined in § 11.01.  The maximum particle size shall be 8 inches;



            3.   The existence of a stable, supporting
foundation is established by appropriate means, including soil boring data
where deemed necessary by the City Engineer;



            4.   Where erosion protection is deemed necessary
by the City Engineer, the site conditions and fill material are capable of
being stabilized by an approved existing land uses on the affected public
water; and



            5.   The maximum extent of filling which may be
permitted in a wetland shall be determined by flood storage and nutrient
stripping capacity requirement for the wetland watershed.



      (4)   Excavation of public waters.



         (a)   Policy and general restrictions.  It is the
policy of the city to discourage the excavation of materials from the beds of
public waters in order to preserve the natural character of public waters and
their shorelands, and maintain suitable aquatic habitat for fish and
wildlife.  Excavation shall be permitted provided the conditions of Minn.
Rules, part 4830.0111, subpart 5, item A, subitem (1), unit b, subunit vi, as
it may be amended from time to time, are met, except:



            1.   Where it is intended to gain access to
navigable water depths when access can be reasonably attained by utilizing a
temporary or permanent dock;



            2.   Where inland excavation is intended solely to
extend riparian rights to non-riparian lands, or to promote the subdivision
and development of non-riparian lands; and/or



            3.   Where the proposed excavation will be
detrimental to significant fish and wildlife habitat or protected vegetation.



         (b)   Dredging.



            1.   General standards.  A permit shall be
required for all dredging subject to the following general standards.



               a.   The project must be adequate in
relation to appropriate geologic and hydrologic factors including but not
limited to:  quantity and quality of local drainage at the site; type of
sediment/soil strata and underground formations in the vicinity;  life
expectancy of the dredging with respect to bed load, long-shore drift and
siltation patterns in the project vicinity; and protection of the water body
from increased seepage, pollution, and other hydrologic impacts.



               b.   Adequate and stable on-land spoil
disposal sites located above the ordinary high water mark and outside of
floodway districts must be available for containment of dredged spoils, and
project plans must include provisions for sodding, seeding, or otherwise
property-protecting these spoils.  Dredge spoils may be placed below the
ordinary high water mark only when the city determines that 1 or more
beneficial public purposes will be enhanced.



               c.   The proposed project must represent the
"minimal impact" solution to a specific need with respect to all other
reasonable alternatives such as weed removal without dredging, beach sanding,
excavation above the bed of public water, less extensive dredging in another
area of the public water, or management of an alternative water body for the
intended purposes.



               d.   The dredging must be limited to the
minimum dimensions necessary for achieving the desired purpose.  Where
excavation is proposed on a water body that is perched on an impervious
stratum, soil borings must show that the proposed excavation will not rupture
the impervious stratum.



            2.   Additional specific standards.  The
following categories of dredging projects shall be permitted, subject to the
following specific restrictions.



               a.   Beach development.  The existing site
conditions will not provide a suitable beach using a sand blanket alone. 
The area to be dredged shall be consistent with the general dimensions
authorized for beach sanding under Minnesota Rules.  The depth of dredging
needed to reach a suitable beach stratum shall not be excessive considering
anticipated site maintenance and desired water depths.



               b.   Wetland improvement.  The dredging
shall be limited to the removal of accumulated sediment or rock debris where
the materials constitute an impairment to the use of a common navigational
corridor, impede reasonable access, or where it is intended to create open
areas in aquatic vegetation to improve fish or wildlife habitat.



      (5)   Specific requirements.



         (a)   Work in the wetland will not be performed during
the breeding season or water fowl or fish spawning season.



         (b)   No part of any septic tank system or of another
sewage disposal system requiring on-land or in the ground disposal of waste
shall be located closer than 75 feet from the edge of a wetland unless it can
be shown that no effluent can reach the wetland because of existing physical
characteristics on the site.  On-site sewage disposal systems shall be
permitted only if they meet state regulations and local regulations.



         (c)   Runoff from developed property and construction
projects adjacent to a wetland may be directed to the wetland only when
reasonably free of silt and debris and chemical pollutants, and at rates
which will not disturb wetland vegetation or increase turbidity.



         (d)   No liquid waste shall be discharged in a wetland
or disposed of in a manner that would cause the waste to enter the wetland.



         (e)   Wetlands may not be used for disposal of material
which logically should be disposed of in a landfill, and no part of a wetland
shall be used for a sanitary landfill.



         (f)   Floor elevation of buildings located within the
district, if used for living quarters or work space, must be at least 3 feet
above the seasonal high water level of the wetland.



         (g)   No development shall be allowed in the wetland
protection district which will endanger the health, safety, and welfare of
persons and which will result in unusual maintenance costs of road and
parking areas or the breaking or leaking of utility lines.



         (h)   Removal of vegetation within the wetlands shall be
permitted only when and where work within the wetland has been approved in
accordance with the standards of §§ 150.215 et seq.



         (i)   Removal of vegetation within the district but
outside the wetland shall be limited to that reasonably required for the
placement of structures and the use of the property.



   (E)   Conditions.  A special permit may be approved subject to
compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure compliance with
the requirements contained in division (D) above, which are specifically set
forth in the permits.  The conditions may, among other matters, limit the
size, kind, or character of the proposed work, require the construction of
other structures, require replacement of vegetation, require monitoring
procedures, stage the work over time, require the alteration of the site
design to ensure buffering, or require the alteration of the site design to
ensure buffering, or require the conveyance to the county or another public
entity of certain lands or interests in the land.



   (F)   Time of permit; extensions; removals.



      (1)   (a)   A permittee shall begin the work authorized by
the permit within 60 days from the date of issuance of the permit unless a
different date for the commencement of work is set forth in the permit.  The
permittee shall complete the work authorized by the permit within the time
limits specified in the permit which in no event shall exceed more than 12
months from the date of issuance.  The permittee shall notify the Zoning
Administrator at least 24 hours prior to commencing of the work.  If the
work is not commenced as specified in §§ 150.215 et seq., then the permit
shall become void.  If, prior to the date established for commencement of
work the permittee makes written request to the Zoning Administrator for any
extension of time to commence the work setting forth the reasons for the
required extension, the Zoning Administrator may grant the extension.



         (b)   A permit which has become void may be renewed at
the discretion of the Zoning Administrator upon payment of renewal fee. If
the Zoning Administrator does not grant such a renewal, a permit for the work
may be granted only upon compliance with the procedures established for any
original application.



      (2)   The permittee shall notify the Zoning Administrator in
writing of the termination of the work authorized and no work shall be deemed
to have been completed until approved in writing by the Zoning Administrator
following the written notification.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator may cause inspection of the
work to be made periodically during the course of the work by Zoning
Administrator or a member of the city staff and shall cause a final
inspection to be made following the completion of the work.



   (G)   Variances and appeals.  Variances and appeals shall be
handled as proscribed in the zoning code.



(1997 Code, § 315.04)  (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.219  RESPONSIBILITY; EFFECT.



   (A)   Responsibility.  Neither the issuance of a permit nor
compliance with the conditions of the permit, nor with the provisions of §§
150.215 et seq. shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise
imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of
any permit under §§ 150.215 et seq. serve to impose any liability on the
city or its officers or employees for injury or damage to persons or
property.  A permit issued pursuant to §§ 150.215 et seq. does not relieve
the permittee of the responsibility for securing and complying with any other
permit which may be required by any other law, ordinance, or regulation.



   (B)   Severability.  If any part of §§ 150.215 et seq. is held to
be unconstitutional or otherwise illegal, the remainder of §§ 150.215 et
seq. shall be deemed and held to be valid and remain in force and effect as
if the portion had been included in §§ 150.215 et seq.  If §§ 150.215 et
seq. or any provision in §§ 150.215 et seq. is held to be inapplicable to
any person, property, or work, the holding shall not affect the applicability
of §§ 150.215 et seq. to any other person's property or work.



   (C)   Special assessment.  The land within a designated wetlands
district area which is restricted by §§ 150.215 et seq. and for which a
development or other restrictive easement is conveyed to the city shall not
be subject to special assessments to defray the costs of other municipal
improvements for which the assessments are authorized pursuant to M.S. Ch.
429, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   Conflicts.  Whenever §§ 150.215 et seq. is in conflict with
another section, or statute, or regulation, the more restrictive requirement
shall govern.



(1997 Code, § 315.05)



INTERSTATE CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT



§ 150.230  PURPOSE.



   The interstate corridor overlay district shall provide special
requirements and performance standards that shall be imposed in conjunction
with zoning districts adopted for land located in the interstate highway
corridor.  The purpose of this district is to manage changes in land use
that may occur along the interstate corridor as a result of improved highway
access and frontage road development.  To accomplish this objective, this
overlay district sets forth 2 sets of performance standards which must be met
by all proposed users in the corridor.



(1997 Code, § 320.01)



§ 150.231  PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.



   All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.



(1997 Code, § 320.02)



§ 150.232  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   All necessary uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.



(1997 Code, § 320.03)



§ 150.233  CONDITIONAL USES.



   All conditional uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.



(1997 Code, § 320.04)



§ 150.234  MINIMUM DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS; INTERIM USES.



   (A)   Uses not served by public sewer and water that are not
intensive (urban) land uses, and demand negligible increases in public
services, may be approved as "interim uses."



   (B)   These uses shall be subject to the following minimum
performance standards:



      (1)   Minimum lot size of 10 acres;



      (2)   No sewer discharge exceeding 8 S.A.C. units per 10 acres;



      (3)   No public utility service is required on the part of the
city;



      (4)   All projected traffic generated by the use can be
accommodated with existing streets, requiring no improvements at the cost of
the city or the public;



      (5)   An adequate supply of off-street parking and off-street
loading space shall be provided;



      (6)   The use will require no additional public safety
services or needs;



      (7)   No noise abatement problems shall exist that could
potentially require public corrective action;



      (8)   The proposed land use(s) will be compatible both in
terms of internal site plans, and with regard to adjacent land uses;



      (9)   Where potential land use compatibility problems exist,
site plans shall be designed to eliminate the conflicts through redesign or
through the incorporation of features that mitigate the impacts of the
conflicts;



      (10)   Land use plans provide for future development or
redevelopment at the time that public water and sewer services are provided;



      (11)   The site plan shall provide for adequate drainage
systems which do not pose pollution problems, see § 150.273 to determine if
a Storm Water Management Plan or an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is
required;



      (12)   The use(s) maintain standards of architectural design
and building quality consistent with the Uniform Building Code and all other
applicable city codes;



      (13)   The proposed use is consistent with the city's
Comprehensive Plan; and



      (14)   The proposed use will not create fiscal problems for
the city, or adversely impact the health, safety, or welfare of the city.



(1997 Code, § 320.05)  (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.235  MINIMUM DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS; LONG-TERM USES.



   (A)   Uses that are urban in nature and require public water and
sewer service, as well as other major public services, shall be classified as
"long term users."



   (B)   These uses shall be subject to the following minimum
performance standards:



      (1)   Public sewer and water extensions, provided at the
user's expense;



      (2)   If projected traffic generated by the proposed use
exceeds the capacity of existing streets, additional improvements shall be
provided at the expense of the land developer;



      (3)   All necessary noise abatement improvements will be
provided at no cost to the city;



      (4)   An adequate supply of off-street parking and off-street
loading space shall be provided;



      (5)   The proposed land use(s) will be compatible both in
terms of internal site plans, and with regard to adjacent land uses;



      (6)   Where potential land use compatibility problems exist,
site plans shall be designed to eliminate the conflicts through redesign or
through the incorporation of features that mitigate the impact of the
conflicts;



      (7)   The site plan shall provide for adequate drainage
systems which do not pose pollution problems, see § 150.273 to determine if
a Storm Water Management Plan or an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan is
required;



      (8)   The use(s) shall maintain standards of architectural
design and building quality consistent with the Uniform Building Code and all
other applicable city codes;



      (9)   The proposed use is consistent with the city's
Comprehensive Plan; and



      (10)   The proposed use will not create fiscal problems for
the city or adversely impact the health, safety, or welfare of the city.



(1997 Code, § 320.06)  (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 150.236  MINIMUM DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS; ALL USES.



   (A)   The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the
overlay district, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and
modifications set forth in this code.



   (B)   (1)   Uses permitted in the underlying zoning district
shall be subject to the lot area and setback requirements specified in the
applicable district.



      (2)   Lot area, setback, building requirements may be
increased under the overlay district to provide sound site planning and
eliminate potential conflicts between land uses.



(1997 Code, § 320.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.237  BUILDING TYPE AND CONSTRUCTION.



   No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvanized or unfinished aluminum
buildings (walls or roofs), except those specifically intended to have a
corrosive design finish, such as corten steel, shall be permitted.  Any
exposed metal or fiberglass finish on all buildings shall be limited to 50%
of any 1 wall.  Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials
comparable in grade and quality to the following: brick; natural stone;
decorative concrete block; cast-in-place concrete or precast concrete panels;
wood, provided the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood of proven
exterior durability is used such as cedar, redwood, and the like; curtain
wall panels of steel, fiberglass, and aluminum (non-structural, non-load
bearing), provided the panels are factory fabricated and finished with a
durable non-fade surface with fasteners of a corrosive resistant design;
glass curtain wall panels; stucco.



(1997 Code, § 320.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.238  S.A.C. UNIT DETERMINATION.



   (A)   S.A.C. unit calculations will be based upon the criteria
established by the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission, which state that 1
S.A.C. unit is equivalent to 274 gallons of flow per day.



   (B)   The following list of facilities is illustrative of the S.A.C.
unit requirements that a proposed project, development or addition to an
existing structure would have to meet.



 

Type of Facility
 
Parameter
 
S.A.C. Units




Arenas
 
110 seats
 
1


Auditoriums
 
110 seats
 
1


Automobile Service:
 
 


  (Fast service less than 4 hours per car)
 
2 service bays
 
1


  (Major service more than 4 hours per car)
 
14 employees
 
1


Ballroom:
 
 


  Facility without liquor service
 
825 square feet
 
1


  Facility with liquor service
 
590 square feet
 
1


Bank
 
2,400 square feet
 
1


Banquet Room:
 
 


  Food catered
 
2,060 square feet
 
1


  Food catering with dishwashing
 
1,180 square feet
 
1


  Food preparation and dishwashing
 
825 square feet
 
1


  Food preparation and dishwashing without liquor
 
590 square feet
 
1


Barber Shop
 
4 chairs
 
1


Beauty Salon
 
4 stations
 
1


Boarding House
 
5 beds
 
1


Body Shop (no vehicle washing)
 
14 employees
 
1


Bowling Alleys (does not include bar or dining area)
 
3 alleys
 
1


Camps:
 
 


  Children’s camps (central toilet and bath)
 
50 gallons per occupant at 274 gallons
 
1


  Day camps (no meals)
 
10 gallons per occupant at 274 gallons
 
1


Labor/Construction Camps
 
50 gallons per occupant at 274 gallons
 
1


Resorts (housekeeping cabins)
 
60 gallons per occupant at 274 gallons
 
1


Travel Trailer Parks with individual water and sewer hookup
 
100 gallons per site at 274 gallons
 
1


  With central toilet and showers
 
75 gallons per site at 274 gallons
 
1


  Sanitary dump (site without hookup)
 
10 gallons per site at 274 gallons
 
1


Schools (Sunday)
 
55 students
 
1


  (Elementary)
 
18 students
 
1


  (Nursery)
 
 


  Number of students licensed for
 
14 students
 
1


  (Secondary)
 
14 students
 
1


Service Stations (gas pumping only)
 
 
1


  (with service center)
 
 
2


  (with service center and car wash)
 
 
8


Swimming Pools (public)
 
900 square foot pool area
 
1


Tennis Courts (public)
 
1 court
 
2


Theater
 
64 seats
 
1


Theater (Drive-In)
 
55 parking spaces
 
1


Warehouse
 
7,000 square feet
 
1




 



   (C)   The S.A.C. unit for a facility not included in the above list
will be determined by the Metropolitan Waste Control Commission.  A request
for S.A.C. unit determination must be made prior to the issuance of the
building permits.



(1997 Code, § 320.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SHORELAND DISTRICT



§ 150.250  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The shorelands within the city are designated as shoreland
district. Regulations set forth in §§ 150.250 et seq. shall govern land use
and other activities within this district.  The classification of the lakes
shall govern the use, alteration, and development of land within the
shoreland district.



   (B)   The uncontrolled use of shorelands adversely affects the
public health, safety, and general welfare by contributing to pollution of
public waters and by impairing the local tax base.  In furtherance of the
policies declared in M.S. Ch. 103G, 103F, 115, 116, 394, and 462, as they may
be amended from time to time, the Commissioner provides the following minimum
standards and criteria for the subdivision, use, and development of the shore
lands of public waters.  The standards and criteria are intended to preserve
and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of water and
related land resources of the state.



(1997 Code, § 325.01)



§ 150.251  INTENT.



   It is the intent of the city to:



   (A)   Regulate placement of sanitary and waste treatment facilities
on shorelands of public waters to prevent pollution of public waters and
public health hazards resulting from the facilities;



   (B)   Regulate alteration of shorelands of public waters to prevent
excessive sediment pollution, increased water runoff, excessive nutrient
runoff pollution;



   (C)   To preserve and enhance the unique aesthetic appearance and
ecological value of the shoreland; and



   (D)   Regulate the construction of buildings and changes of land use
in shorelands to minimize property damage during periods of high water.



(1997 Code, § 325.02)



§ 150.252  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in §§
150.250 et seq. shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as
they have in § 11.01 with common usage in this and all other sections of the
code.  For the purpose of this §§ 150.250 et seq., the words "must" and
"shall" are mandatory and not permissive.  All distances, unless otherwise
specified, shall be measured horizontally.



(1997 Code, § 325.03)



§ 150.253  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   The city will provide for the administration and enforcement
of their shoreland management controls by establishing permanent procedures
for building construction, installation of sewage treatment systems, and
grading and filling.



   (B)   (1)   Permits required.  A permit is required for the
construction of buildings or building additions (including the related
activities as construction of decks and signs), installation and/or
alteration of sewage treatment systems, and those grading and filling
activities not exempted by § 150.255(E).  Application for a permit shall be
made to the city on the forms provided.  The application shall include the
necessary information so that the city can determine the site's suitability
for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be
provided.



      (2)   Variance.



         (a)   Variance requests will be considered pursuant to
the procedures set forth in the zoning code.



         (b)   For existing developments, the application for
variance must clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment
system is present for the intended use of the property.  The variance, if
issued, must require reconstruction of a non-conforming sewage treatment
system.



      (3)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources.



         (a)   Copies of all notices of any public hearings to
consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland
management controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the Commissioner's
designated representative and postmarked at least 10 days before the
hearings.  Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivision or plats
must include copies of the subdivision or plat.



         (b)   When a variance is approved after the Department
of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record,
the notification of the approved variance required in division (B)(3) of this
section shall also include the Board of Adjustment's summary of the public
record and testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which
supported the issuance of the variance.



         (c)   A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions or
plats and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local
shoreland management controls must be sent to the Commissioner or the
Commissioner's designated representative and postmarked within 10 days of
final action.



(1997 Code, § 325.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.254  SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION.



   (A)   The public waters of the city have been classified below,
consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota Rules, Chapter 6120.3000, as
it may be amended from time to time, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map
for Washington County, Minnesota.  The shoreland area for the water bodies
listed below shall be defined in § 150.252 and as shown on the city's
shoreland management area map.



   (B)   The classes of public waters for the city are natural
environment lakes, recreational development lakes, and tributary streams.



      (1)   Natural environment lakes.  Natural environment lakes
are generally small, often shallow lakes with limited capacities for
assimilating the impacts of development and recreational use.  They often
have adjacent lands with substantial constraints for development, such as
high water tables, exposed bedrock and unsuitable soils.  These lakes,
particularly in rural areas, usually do not have much existing development or
recreational use.



 


D.N.R. I.D.#

 
Lake Name
 
Location
 
OHW
 
100-Year Elevation




82007400
 
Horseshoe
 
Sec. 25
 
876.8
 


82009900
 
Clear
 
Sec. 2, 11
 
 


82010000
 
Unnamed
 
Sec. 4
 
 


82010500
 
Berschen’s Pond
 
Sec. 10
 
 


82010700
 
Sunfish
 
Sec. 14
 
896.4
 
899


82010800
 
Friedrich Pond
 
Sec. 15, 22
 
 
913.0


82011000
 
Downs
 
Sec. 24
 
889.1
 
893


82011100
 
H.J. Brown pond
 
Sec. 26
 
 


82011200
 
Rose (Sunfish)
 
Sec. 25, 36
 
 


82011300
 
Goose
 
Sec. 27, 34, 35
 
924.4
 




 



 


D.N.R. I.D.#

 
Lake Name
 
Location
 
OHW
 
100-Year Elevation


82011601
 
Armstrong (north of 10th Street)
 
Sec. 28
 
1020.3
 


82011602
 
Armstrong (south of 10th Street)
 
Sec. 33
 
1019.1
 



 



      (2)   Recreational development lakes.  Recreational
development lakes are generally medium- sized lakes of varying depths and
shapes with a variety of land forms, soil, and ground water situations on the
lands around them.  They often are characterized by moderate levels of
recreational use and existing development.  Development consists mainly of
seasonal and year-round residences.  Many of these lakes have capacities of
accommodating additional development and use.



 


D.N.R. I.D.#

 
Lake Name
 
Location
 
OHW
 
100-Year Elevation


82-101
 
DeMontreville
 
Sec. 4, 5, 9
 
929.3
 
931.0


82-103
 
Olson
 
Sec. 8, 9
 
929.3
 
931.0


82-104
 
Jane
 
Sec. 9, 10
 
924
 
925.0


82-106
 
Elmo
 
Sec. 13, 14, 23, 24, 26
 
885.6
 
889



 



      (3)   Tributary streams.  Tributary stream segments consist
of water courses mapped in the protected waters inventory that have not been
assigned 1 of the river classes.  These segments have a wide variety of
existing land and recreational use characteristics.



 


Location

 
Stream Name


Sec. 33
 
Unnamed to Wilmes Lake


Sec. 16, 21, 22
 
Raleigh Creek North (to Eagle Point Lake)


Sec. 22, 23, 27
 
Raleigh Creek South (Eagle Point lake to Lake Elmo)


Sec. 25
 
Unnamed Tributary



 



   (C)   The permitted and conditional uses allowed in the underlying
zoning district shall be those allowed in the natural environment lakes,
recreational development lakes, and tributary streams shoreland districts.



 




Land Use Matrix



Land Uses
 
Zoning Districts


 
AG
 
R1
 
P
 
HB
 
GB
 
R3
 
RR
 
RE
 
LB
 
BP
 
OP


Auto Service
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Churches and Schools
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Commercial Ag
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P


Duplex Multi-Family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP


Farming
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
P


Greenhouses
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP


Kennels
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Manufactured Homes; with sewer
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Manufacturing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Office Uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 


Restaurants
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP
 
CUP
 
 


Retail Uses
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
CUP
 
 


Single-Family Residential
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
 
 
 
 
P


Stables
 
CUP
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CUP


NOTES TO TABLE:

  (1)  P=Permitted Use

  (2)  CUP=Conditional Use Permit

  (3)  The Land Use Matrix outlines general allowed uses, subject to
restrictions and provisions of the zoning code.  Reference the Chapter 154
of the city code for specific allowable uses in each district.




 



(Am. Ord. 97-16, passed 9-16-1997 ; Am. Ord. 08-005, passed 2-4-2008 )



(1997 Code, § 325.05)



§ 150.255  SHORELAND STANDARDS.



   (A)   General provisions.  The following standards shall apply to
all shorelands of the protected waters.  Where the requirements of the
underlying zoning district as shown on the official zoning map are more
restrictive than those set forth in §§ 150.250et seq., the more restrictive
standards shall apply.  Only land above the ordinary high water level of
public waters can be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards
must be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line.



   (B)   Lot area; no sewer.



 


Zoning District

 

Natural Environment Lakes

 

Recreation Development Lakes



 
Riparian
 
Non-Riparian
 
Riparian
 
Non-Riparian




RE (No Sewer)
 
2.5 acres
 
2.5 acres
 
2.5 acres
 
2.5 acres


R1 (No Sewer)
 
80,000 square feet
 
80,000 square feet
 
1.5 acres
 
1.5 acres


RR (No Sewer)
 
10 acres
 
10 acres
 
10 acres
 
10 acres


AG (No Sewer)
 
40 acres
 
40 acres
 
40 acres
 
40 acres


OP (No Sewer)
 
0.5 acres
 
0.5 acres
 
 


R3 (No Sewer)
 
40,000 square feet
 
20,000 square feet
 
20,000 square feet
 
15,000 square feet


GB (No Sewer)
 
3.5 acres
 
3.5 acres
 
3.5 acres
 
3.5 acres


BP (No Sewer)
 
3 acres
 
3 acres
 
3 acres
 
3 acres




 



(Am. Ord. 97-16, passed 9-16-1997)



   (C)   Lot width.



 

Classification
 
Riparian Lot (No Sewer)
 
Riparian Lot (With Sewer)
 
Non-Riparian Lot (Without Sewer)
 
Non-Riparian Lot (With Sewer)


Natural Environment
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
200 feet
 
NA


Recreational Development
 
150 feet
 
150 feet
 
150 feet
 
NA


Tributary Streams
 
100 feet
 
100 feet
 
NA
 
NA



 



(Am. Ord. 97-16, passed 9-16-1997)



   (D)   Placement, design, and height of structures.



      (1)   Placement.  When more than 1 setback applies to a site,
structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks.  Where
structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building
site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the
adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed
building site is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact
zone.  Structures shall be located as follows.



         (a)   Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks. 
Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks (in feet) from ordinary high
water level.



 


Setbacks From OHW



Classification
 
Structures
 
Sewage Treatment System


Natural Environment
 
150 feet
 
150 feet


Recreational Development
 
100 feet
 
75 feet


Tributary
 
100 feet
 
75 feet



 



         (b)   Additional structure setbacks.  The following
additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the
water body.



 


Setback From

 

Setback (In Feet)



Top of bluff
 

30



Unplatted cemetery
 

50



Right-of-way line of federal, state, or county highways
 

Per underlying zoning district regulations and exceptions



Right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads or streets not
classified
 

Per underlying zoning district regulations and exceptions




 



         (c)   Bluff impact zone.  Structures and accessory
facilities, except stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff
impact zones.



         (d)   Significant historic sites.  No structure may be
placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of
the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and
documented in a public repository.



         (e)   Steep slopes.  The city shall evaluate possible
soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before
issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes.  When
determined necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to
prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures,
vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public water,
assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.



         (f)   Proximity to roads and highways.  Per underlying
zoning district regulations and exceptions.



         (g)   Use without water-oriented needs.  Use without
water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters
frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public water frontage, must
either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be
substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



      (2)   Design criteria for structures.



         (a)   High water elevations.  Structures must be placed
in accordance with any flood plain regulations applicable to the site.  All
principal structures shall have their lowest floor at a level at least 3 feet
above the highest known water level or the ordinary high water level,
whichever is higher.



         (b)   Water-oriented accessory structures.  Each lot
may have 1 water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal
structure setback in § 150.255(D) if this water-oriented accessory structure
complies with the following provisions.



            1.   The structure or facility must not exceed 13
feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater
than 250 square feet.  Detached decks must not exceed 8 feet above grade at
any point.



            2.   The setback of the structure or facility
landward from the ordinary high water level must be at least 10 feet on a
recreational development lake and 50 feet on a natural environment lake.



            3.   The structure or facility must be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, or color, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions.



            4.   The roof may be used as a deck with safety
rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area.



            5.   The structure or facility must not be
designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or
sewage treatment facilities.



            6.   As an alternative for general development and
recreational development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures
used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating
and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square
feet provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured
parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.



         (c)   Stairways, lifts, and landings.  Stairways and
lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for
achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. 
Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements.



            1.   Stairways and lifts must not exceed 4 feet in
width.  Wider stairways may be used for public open space recreational
properties.



            2.   Landings for stairways and lifts must not
exceed 32 square feet in area.  Landings larger than 32 square feet may be
used for public open space recreational properties.



            3.   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on
stairways, lifts, or landings.



            4.   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground,
provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion.



            5.   Stairways, lifts, and landings must be
located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from
the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever
practical.



            6.   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility
paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving
access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance
standards of divisions (D)(2)(c)1. to (D)(2)(c)5. above are satisfied.



      (3)   Height of structures.  All structures in residential
districts, except churches and non-residential agricultural structures, must
not exceed 35 feet in height.



   (E)   Shoreland alterations.



      (1)   Generally.  Alterations of vegetation and topography
will be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients,
preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank
slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.  Best management practices
are recommended to guide shoreland alteration activities.



      (2)   Vegetation alterations.  Vegetation alteration
necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and
the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by § 150.255(F) are
exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.  Removal or
alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural uses as regulated in §
150.255(H) is allowed, subject to the following standards.



         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and
bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed.



         (b)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep
slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs, and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the
principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and
watercraft access areas and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or
facilities, provided that:



            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles or
other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, is not substantially reduced;



            2.   Along rivers, existing shading of water
surfaces is preserved; and



            3.   The above provisions are not applicable to
the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose
safety hazards.



      (3)   Topographic alterations; grading and filling.



         (a)   Grading and filling and excavations necessary for
the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under
validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the
issuance of a separate grading and filling permit.  The grading and filling
standards in §§ 150.250et seq. must be incorporated into the issuance of
permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and
driveways.



         (b)   Public roads and parking areas are regulated by §
150.255(F).



         (c)   Notwithstanding divisions (E)(3)(a) and (E)(3)(b)
above, a grading and filling permit will be required for:



            1.   The movement of more than 10 cubic yards of
material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and



            2.   The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of
material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.



         (d)   The following considerations and conditions in
addition to §§ 150.215et seq. must be adhered to during the issuance of
construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits,
variances, and subdivision approvals.



            1.   Grading and filling in any Type 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, or 8 wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the
proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the
wetland.  (This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the
wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by
other local, state, or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of
Engineers.  The applicant will be so advised.)



               a.   Sediment and pollutant trapping and
retention;



               b.   Storage of surface runoff to prevent or
reduce flood damage;



               c.   Fish and wildlife habitat;



               d.   Recreational use;



               e.   Shoreline or bank stabilization; and



               f.   Noteworthiness, including special
qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered
plants and animals, or others.



            2.   Alterations must be designed and conducted in
a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for
the shortest time possible.



            3.   Mulches or similar materials must be used,
where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation
cover must be established as soon as grading is complete.



            4.   Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap
sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used.



            5.   Altered areas must be stabilized to
acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office
technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the
United States Soil Conservation Service.



            6.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed
in a manner that creates an unstable slope.



            7.   Plans to place fill or excavated material on
steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope
stability and must not create finished slopes of 30% or greater.



            8.   Fill or excavated material must not be placed
in bluff impact zones.



            9.   Any alterations below the ordinary high water
level of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner under
M.S. § 103G.245, as it may be amended from time to time.



            10.   Alterations of topography must only be
allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not
adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties.



            11.   Placement of natural rock rip-rap, including
associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is
permitted if the finished slope does not exceed 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot
vertical, the landward extent of the rip-rap is within 10 feet of the
ordinary high water level, and the height of the rip-rap above the ordinary
high water level does not exceed 3 feet.



         (e)   Excavations where the intended purpose is
connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons, and
harbors, must comply with all provisions of §§ 150.250et seq.  Permission
for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has approved the
proposed connection to public waters.



   (F)   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas.



      (1)   Public and private roads and parking areas must be
designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view of public waters.  Documentation must be
provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are
designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.



      (2)   Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure
setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when
other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist.  If the Council,
at its discretion, determines that no alternative exists, the structures may
be placed within these areas and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.



      (3)   Public and private (intended solely for the use of the
property owner) watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related
parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones, provided the
vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of §§ 150.250et seq.
are met.  For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of §
150.255(E) must be met.



   (G)   Storm water management.  The following general and specific
standards shall apply, in addition to all applicable requirements found in §
150.273.



      (1)   General standards.



         (a)   Existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and
vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain
storm water runoff before discharge to public waters.



         (b)   Development must be planned and conducted in a
manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities,
erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.  Disturbed areas
must be stabilized and protected as soon as grading is complete and
facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.



         (c)   When development density, topographic features,
and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle
storm water runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of
constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices,
dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used.  Preference must be given to
designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration other than
buried pipes and man-made materials and facilities.



         (d)   Use of fertilizers, pesticides, or animal wastes
within shorelands must be done in a way as to minimize impact on the shore
impact zone or public water by proper application.



      (2)   Specific standards.



         (a)   Impervious surface coverage of lots must not
exceed 6,000 S.F. or 15% of the lot area, whichever is larger.



         (b)   When constructed facilities are used for storm
water management, documentation must be provided by a licensed civil engineer
that they are designed and installed consistent with the field office
technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.



         (c)   New constructed storm water outfalls to public
waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and
skimming of surface debris before discharge.



   (H)   Special provisions for public/semi-public, agricultural, and
forestry.



      (1)   Standards for public and semi-public uses.



         (a)   Surface water-oriented public or semi-public uses
with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located
on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters.  Those uses with
water-oriented needs must meet the following standards.



            1.   In addition to meeting impervious coverage
limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in §§ 150.250et seq., the uses
must be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of
parking areas and structures.



            2.   Uses that require short-term watercraft
mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid
obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the
need.



            3.   No advertising signs or supporting facilities
for signs may be placed in or upon public waters.  Signs conveying
information or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a
public authority or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff.



            4.   Other outside lighting may be located within
the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to
illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to
prevent direct illumination out across public waters.  This does not
preclude use of navigational lights.



         (b)   Use without water-oriented needs must be located
on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or
parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the
normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from
view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions.



      (2)   Agriculture use standards.



         (a)   General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are
permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are
maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation
plan (Resource Management System) consistent with the field office technical
guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the United
States Soil Conservation Service, a provided by a qualified individual or
agency.  Best management practices of the Minnesota D.N.R. must be used. 
The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is
equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.



         (b)   Animal feedlots, as defined by the Minnesota
Rules, Chapter 7020.300, as amended from time to time, for compliance with
permits, must meet the following standards.



            1.   New feedlots must not be located in the
shoreland of water courses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum
setback of 300 feet from the ordinary high water level of all public water
basins.



            2.   Modifications or expansions to existing
feedlots that are located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level or
within a bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into
the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact
zones.



   (I)   Water supply and sewage treatment.



      (1)   Water supply.  Any public or private supply of water
for domestic purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the
Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 
Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in
accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the water well construction
code of the Minnesota Department of Health.



      (2)   Sewage treatment.  Any premises used for human
occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as
follows.



         (a)   Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where
available.



         (b)   All private sewage treatment systems must meet or
exceed the standards contained in City Code Chapter 51 or the standards for
individual sewage treatment systems contained in Minnesota Rules, Chapter
7080.0060, a copy of which is adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of §§ 150.250et seq.  In all cases the more restrictive regulation shall
apply.



         (c)   On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back
from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained
in § 150.255(D)(1).



         (d)   All proposed sites for individual sewage treatment
systems shall be evaluated in accordance with the criteria in this division
(I)(2)(d).  If the determination of a site's suitability cannot be made with
publicly available, existing information, it shall then be the responsibility
of the applicant to provide sufficient soil borings and percolation tests
from onsite field investigations.  Evaluation criteria:



            1.   Depth to the highest known or calculated
ground water table or bedrock;



            2.   Soil conditions, properties, and permeability;



            3.   Slope; and



            4.   The existence of lowlands, local surface
depressions, and rock outcrops.



         (e)   Non-conforming sewage treatment systems shall be
regulated and upgraded in accordance with § 150.256(B)(3).



         (f)   The discharge of non-treated raw sewage effluent
into a lake, wetland, or stream is strictly prohibited and the condition will
be required to be ceased immediately; and within a reasonable period (not to
exceed 30 days) of notice and order to comply by the Zoning Administrator,
the property owner shall install a system which complies with Minn. Rules
Chapter 7080, as it may be amended from time to time, and Chapter 51 of the
city code, whichever is more restrictive.



         (g)   Gray water, meaning liquid waste from a dwelling
produced by bathing, laundry, culinary operations, and floor drains
associated with these sources, and specifically excluding toilet waste, must
be treated in accordance with Minn. Rules Chapter 7080, as it may be amended
from time to time.  Discharge of gray water directly into a lake, wetland,
or stream is prohibited and the condition shall cease immediately.



         (h)   Any discharge of chemically-treated water into a
lake, wetland, or stream, such as an example only, the drainage of a swimming
pool, must not be done without first obtaining all required permits from the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   (J)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall
be subject to the review and approval procedures, and criteria and conditions
for review of conditional uses established in the zoning code.



      (2)   The following additional evaluation criteria and
conditions apply within shoreland areas.



         (a)   Evaluation criteria.  A thorough evaluation of
the water body and topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site
must be made to ensure:



            1.   The prevention of soil erosion or other
possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;



            2.   The visibility of structures and other
facilities as viewed from public waters is limited;



            3.   The site is adequate for water supply and
on-site sewage treatment; and



            4.   The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft
that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the ability of
public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.



         (b)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. 
The Council, upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes
of §§ 150.250et seq., shall attach the conditions to the issuance of the
conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of §§
150.250et seq.  The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:



            1.   Increased setbacks from the ordinary high
water level;



            2.   Limitations on the natural vegetation to be
removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and



            3.   Special provisions for the location, design,
and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and
docking areas, and vehicle parking areas.



(1997 Code, § 325.06) (Am. Ord. 08-005, passed 2-4-2008; Am. Ord. 08-024,
passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 2012-61, passed 9-4-2012; Am. Ord. 2012-63, passed
10-2-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.256  NON-CONFORMITIES.



   (A)   All legally established non-conformities as of the date of
§§ 150.250et seq. may continue, but they will be managed according to
applicable state statutes and other regulations of the city for the subject
of alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and
intensification of use; except that the following standards will also apply
to shoreland areas.



   (B)   (1)   Construction on non-conforming lots of record.



         (a)   Lots of record in the office of the County
Recorder on the date of enactment of §§ 150.250et seq. that do not meet the
requirements of § 150.255(B) may be allowed as building sites without
variances from lot size requirements, provided the use is permitted in the
zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands
at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with official
controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements
of §§ 150.250et seq. are met.



         (b)   A variance from setback requirements must be
obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is
issued for a lot.  In evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the
lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.



         (c)   If, in a group of 2 or more contiguous lots under
the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of §
150.255(B), the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for
the purposes of sale or development.  The lot must be combined with the 1 or
more contiguous lots so they equal 1 or more parcels of land, each meeting
the requirements of § 150.255(B) as much as possible.



      (2)   Additions/expansions to non-conforming structures.



         (a)   Additions/expansions.  All additions or
expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure
must meet the setback, height, and other requirements of § 150.255.  Any
deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance pursuant
to § 150.253(B)(2).



         (b)   Decks.  Deck additions may be allowed without a
variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary
high water level if all of the following criteria and standards are met.



            1.   The structure existed on the date the
structure setbacks were established.



            2.   A thorough evaluation of the property and
structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the
existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure.



            3.   The deck encroachment toward the ordinary
high water level does not exceed 15% of the existing setback of the structure
from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet,
whichever is more restrictive.



            4.   The deck is constructed primarily of wood and
is not roofed or screened.



      (3)   Non-conforming sewage treatment systems.



         (a)   A sewage treatment system not meeting the
requirements of § 150.255(I) must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a
permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on, or use of,
the property.  For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system
shall not be considered non-conforming if the only deficiency is the sewage
treatment system's improper setback from the ordinary high water level.



         (b)   The Council of the city has notified the D.N.R.
Commissioner of its plan to identify non-conforming sewage treatment systems
in shoreland areas.  The city will require upgrading or replacement of any
non-conforming system identified by this program within a reasonable period
of time, which will not exceed 180 days of notice and order to comply by the
Zoning Administrator.  Sewage systems installed according to all applicable
local shoreland management standards adopted under M.S. § 103F.201, as it
may be amended from time to time, in effect at the time of installation may
be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except
that systems including cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep
disposal methods, or systems with less soil treatment area separation above
ground water than required by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's
Chapter 7080, as it may be amended from time to time, for design of off-site
sewage treatment systems, shall be considered nonconforming.



(1997 Code, § 325.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.257  SUBDIVISION/PLATTING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Land suitability.  Each lot created through subdivision must
be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal
alteration.  Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall
consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential,
steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities,
near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation,
important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites,
or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health,
safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the
city.



   (B)   Platting.  All subdivisions shall be in accordance with the
city's platting regulations and requirements.



   (C)   Consistency with other controls.  Subdivisions must conform
to all regulations for the city.  A subdivision will not be approved where a
later variance from 1 or more standards in official controls would be needed
to use the lots for their intended purpose.  In areas not served by publicly
owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless
domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent
with § 150.255(D) and (I) can be provided for every lot.  Each lot shall
meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of § 150.255(B),
including at least a minimum contiguous vegetative area, that is free of
limiting factors sufficient for the construction of 2 standard sewage
treatment systems.  Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be
approved.



   (D)   Information requirements.  Sufficient information must be
submitted by the applicant for the city to make a determination of land
suitability.  The information may include the following at the discretion of
the City Planner or City Engineer:



      (1)   Topographic contours at 2 foot intervals or less;



      (2)   The surface water features required in M.S. § 505.02,
Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time, to be shown on plats
obtained from United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or
more accurate sources;



      (3)   Adequate soils information to determine suitability for
building and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the
most current existing sources or from field investigations such as soil
borings, percolation tests, or other methods;



      (4)   Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply;
extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations: near-shore
aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments and aquatic
vegetation: and proposed methods for controlling storm water runoff and
erosion, both during and after construction activities;



      (5)   Location of 100-year flood plain areas and flood way
districts from existing adopted maps or data; and



      (6)   A line or contour representing the ordinary high water
level, the "toe" and "top" of bluffs, and the minimum building setback
distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.



   (E)   Dedications.  When a land or easement dedication is a
condition of subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over
natural drainage or ponding areas for management of storm water and
significant wetlands.



   (F)   Controlled access or recreational lots.  Lots intended as
controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by
nonriparian lots within a subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing criteria
in § 150.255(B) and (C).



(1997 Code, § 325.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



STORM WATER AND EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



§ 150.270  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies
contained in M.S. Chs. 103B,  103F.401, 103F.441, and 462 and Minnesota
Rules Chs. 7050, 7090, and 8410. This subchapter is intended to meet the
current construction site erosion and sediment control and post-construction
storm water management regulatory requirements for construction activity and
small construction activity (NPDES Permit) as defined in 40 CFR pt.
122.26(b)(14)(x) and (b)(15), respectively.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6–16-2009)



§ 150.271  FINDINGS.



   The City of Lake Elmo finds that uncontrolled storm water runoff and
construction site erosion from land development and land disturbing activity
can have significant adverse impacts upon local and regional water resources
diminishing the quality of public health, safety, public and private
property, and natural resources of the city. Specifically, uncontrolled
construction site erosion and storm water runoff can:



   (A)   Threaten public health, safety, property, and general welfare
by increasing runoff volume peak flood flows, and overburdening storm sewers,
drainage ways, and other storm drainage systems;



   (B)   Diminish the capacity of lakes and streams to support fish,
aquatic life, recreational, and water supply uses by increasing pollutant
loadings of total sediment, suspended solids, nutrients, heavy metals,
bacteria, pathogens, and other urban pollutants;



   (C)   Degrade physical stream habitat by increasing stream bank
erosion, increasing stream bed scour, diminishing groundwater recharge,
diminishing stream base flows, and increasing stream temperatures;



   (D)   Undermine floodplain management efforts by increasing the
incidence and levels of flooding;



   (E)   Alter wetland communities by changing wetland hydrology and
increasing pollutant loading; and



   (F)   Generate airborne particulate concentrations that are health
threatening or may cause other damage to property or the environment.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.272  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The general purpose of this subchapter is to set forth
regulatory requirements for land development and land disturbing activities
aimed at minimizing threats to public health, safety, public and private
property and natural resources within the city from construction site erosion
and post-construction storm water runoff.



   (B)   Specific purposes are to establish performance standards that
will:



      (1)   Protect life and property from dangers associated with
flooding;



      (2)   Protect public and private properly and the natural
resources from damage resulting from runoff and construction site erosion;



      (3)   Protect functional values of all types of natural water
bodies (e.g., rivers, streams, wetlands, lakes, seasonal ponds);



      (4)   Sustain or enhance biodiversity (native plant and animal
habitat) and support riparian ecosystems;



      (5)   Protect water quality from nutrients, heavy metals,
bacteria, pathogens, debris, thermal stress, and other urban pollutants;



      (6)   Promote infiltration and groundwater recharge;



      (7)   Regulate storm water runoff volumes and peak rates for
land development and land disturbing activities;



      (8)   Promote regional storm water management by watershed; and



      (9)   Provide a single, consistent set of performance
standards that apply to all land development and land disturbing activities.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.273  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Storm water management.



      (1)   A storm water management (SWM) plan shall be required
for all proposed land development activity, unless otherwise exempted in this
subchapter, which meets any or all of the following:



         (a)   Any land development activity that increases
and/or replaces impervious surface with a surface area exceeding 1 acre,
including smaller individual sites that are part of a common plan of
development that may be constructed at different times; and/or



         (b)   A subdivision consisting of 3 or more lots; and/or



         (c)   Any land development activity, regardless of size,
that the city determines would otherwise cause an adverse impact to an
environmentally sensitive area.



      (2)   Exemptions.  The following land development activities
will be exempt from the storm water management requirements of this
subchapter:



         (a)   Mining activities regulated by Chapter 90 of the
City Code; and



         (b)   Reconstruction of existing public trails and
construction of new public trails that are not a part of a proposed land
development activity as defined in division (A)(1) above.



         (c)   Reclamation and maintenance of existing public
streets.



   (B)   Erosion and sediment control.



      (1)   An erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan shall be
required for all proposed land disturbing activity, unless otherwise exempted
in this subchapter, which meets any or all of the following:



         (a)   Meets the permit requirements of an excavation and
grading permit per § 151.017 of the City Code;



         (b)   New dwelling permits;



         (c)   A subdivision of any size;



         (d)   Involves the laying, repairing, replacing, or
enlarging of an underground utility, pipe or other facility, or the
disturbance of road ditch, grass swale or other open channel for a distance
of 500 feet or more; and/or



         (e)   Is a land disturbing activity, regardless of size,
that the city determines would otherwise cause an adverse impact to an
environmentally sensitive area, or may violate any erosion and sediment
control standard set forth in this subchapter.



      (2)   Exemptions.  The following land disturbing activities
will be exempt from the erosion and sediment control plan requirements of
this subchapter:



         (a)    Cemetery graves;



         (b)   Mining activities regulated by Chapter 90 of the
City Code;



         (c)   Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural,
horticultural or silvicultural (forestry) crops;



         (d)   Emergency work necessary to protect life, limb, or
property; and



         (e)   City, county, state, or federal agency project
whose plans and specifications meet the requirements of this subchapter and
are reviewed and approved by the city under a separate process.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009; Am. Ord. 08-043, passed 5-3-2011)



§ 150.274  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, all terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings as stated in Chapter 11 of the City
Code.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.275  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The following are incorporated into this subchapter by
reference:



      (1)   The Local Surface Water Management Plan; and



      (2)   The City Engineering Design Standards.



   (B)   All storm water mitigation and management technologies shall
be consistent with the most current versions of the City Engineering Design
Standards.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.276  PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Plan approval required.  The applicant shall not commence any
construction activity subject to this subchapter until plan approval has been
authorized by the city and all fees, escrows and securities have been paid
and filed with the city.



   (B)   Plan submittal.  The applicant must submit the required plans
and documentation to fully address all provisions of this subchapter and
demonstrating conformance to the current versions of the City Engineering
Design Standards.



   (C)   Plan review and authorization.  The city shall review the
plan submittal for completeness and compliance with standards. If the city
determines that the plan does not meet the requirements of this subchapter,
the city shall notify the applicant that the submittal is incomplete and
request changes or additional information. The plan(s) must be revised to
correct the deficiencies and resubmitted for approval before the land
disturbance activity begins. If the city determines that the storm water
management plan and/or erosion and sediment control plan meet the
requirements of this subchapter, the city shall issue a plan approval valid
for a specified period of time that authorizes the land activity contingent
on the implementation and completion of this plan. The city may approve the
plans subject to compliance to conditions reasonable and necessary to insure
that the requirements in this subchapter are met.



   (D)   Construction initiation and first compliance inspection.  No
work shall begin on a site until a preconstruction meeting has been conducted
(if required by the city as part of the plan approval). Once work is
authorized to begin, the applicant or agent shall install all erosion and
sediment control devices as required by the approved plan and shall inform
the city that they are in place. The city will complete an initial site
inspection to determine compliance with the plan and to authorize the land
disturbance activity to begin.



   (E)   Adherence to the approved plans and plan modifications.  Once
approved by the city, the storm water management plan and/or erosion and
sediment control plan must be followed throughout the duration of the land
disturbance or land development activity. The approved plans shall not be
modified or altered without receiving written authorization from the city.
Plan amendments will be required by the city whenever:



      (1)   A change in design, construction, operation,
maintenance, weather, or seasonal conditions that has a significant effect on
the discharge or pollutants to surface waters or underground waters;



      (2)   Inspections or investigations indicate the plans are not
effective in eliminating or significantly minimizing the discharge or
pollutants to surface waters or underground waters or that the discharges are
causing water quality degradation;



      (3)   The plan is not achieving the genera) objectives of
minimizing pollutants in storm water discharges associated with construction
activity; or



      (4)   The plan is found to not be consistent with the terms
and conditions of this subchapter.



   (F)   Variance requests.  The city may grant a variance on a
case-by-case basis. The content of a variance is specified in the zoning code.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.277  PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Storm water management plan.



      (1)   All storm water management plans shall meet the minimum
requirements of the NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit (Permit No.
MNR100001), the minimum requirements of the watershed(s) having jurisdiction
over the site(s), the City Engineering Design Standards, and other regulatory
agencies. A storm water management plan must be submitted to the city for
review and approval concurrently with the submittal to the watershed(s)
having jurisdiction over the site(s).



      (2)   Storm water criteria. Storm water management plans will
be assessed for stormwater rate control and storm water quality management to
reduce the impacts of the land activity.



         (a)   Rate control requirements. The stormwater
management plan shall demonstrate that all rate control requirements of the
NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit (Permit No. MNR100001) and the
watershed(s) having jurisdiction over the site(s) are met. Storm water best
management practices to meet this requirement shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the most current version of the City
Engineering Design Standards. The City Engineer retains the authority to
require the above conditions to apply to the rate of storm water runoff
discharging at any point leaving the site.



         (b)   Water quality control requirements. The stormwater
management plan shall demonstrate that all water quality control requirements
of the NPDES Construction Stormwater Permit (Permit No. MNR100001) and the
watershed(s) having jurisdiction over the site(s) are met. Storm water best
management practices to meet this requirement shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the most current version of the City
Engineering Design Standards. The City Engineer retains the authority to
require the above conditions to apply to the rate of storm water runoff
discharging at any point leaving the site.



         (c)   Volume control requirements.



            1.   The volume of storm water runoff discharging
from a proposed site shall not be greater than the volume of storm water
runoff discharging prior to the proposed site alteration for the 2-, 10-, and
100-year storm events. Storm water best management practices to meet this
requirement shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most
current version of the City Engineering Design Standards.  The City Engineer
retains the authority to require the above conditions to apply to the volume
of storm water runoff discharging at any point leaving the site.



            2.   The analyses for the volume of storm water
runoff shall be calculated using the Soil Conservation Service Type II time
distribution for the 2-, 10, and 100-year 24-hour storm events. The volume of
storm water runoff prior to the proposed development shall be calculated at
the pre-settlement condition as defined in the State of Minnesota Stormwater
Manual for a “meadow” condition based on the applicable hydrologic soil
group(s) for the development (see Table 1).



         (d)   Table 1.  Curve Number for Pre-Settlement
Condition



 

Hydrologic Soil Group
 
Runoff Curve Number


A
 
30


B
 
58


C
 
71


D
 
78



 



         (e)   Drainage-related easements.  Drainage easements
must be acquired on behalf of the city and legally recorded at the county for
all permanent storm water facilities to allow for proper access and
maintenance activities. At a minimum, drainage easements shall meet the
following criteria.



            1.   Easements are required for all ponding areas
to the basin’s 100-year storm high water level elevation.



            2.   Easements are required for all outlet swales
and ditches, and for overland overflow routes located downstream of basins
located on site.



            3.   Easements are required for all storm sewer
pipes, throughout its entire length. For storm sewer pipes installed less
than 10 feet in depth within private property, the easement shall be a
minimum of 20 feet wide. For storm sewer pipes installed greater than 10 feet
in depth within private property, the easement shall be a minimum of 30 feet
wide, or as determined by the City Engineer.



            4.   Easements are required for maintenance
vehicle access to all storm water facilities where not directly available on
a public road.



            5.   If a storm water management plan involves
direction of some or all runoff off of the site, it shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to obtain from adjacent property owners any
necessary easements or other property interests concerning flowage of water.



   (B)    Erosion and sediment control plan.



      (1)   All erosion and sediment control plans shall meet or
exceed the most stringent of the performance and design standards of this
subchapter and shall be consistent with National Pollution Discharge
Elimination Permit (NPDES) requirements, the City Engineering Design
Standards, and the filing or approval requirements of relevant watershed
districts (Brown’s Creek, South Washington, and/or Valley Branch),
Washington County, Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency, and other regulatory agencies.



      (2)   Erosion and sediment control criteria.



         (a)   Erosion and sediment control plans will be
assessed in the following ways:



            1.   Pollution prevention by minimizing
disturbance of natural soil cover and vegetation, and minimizing, in area and
duration, exposed soil and unstable soil conditions;



            2.   Using sediment barriers to protect soil
stockpiles, receiving water bodies, wetlands, storm sewer inlets, and
adjacent properties from sediment deposition;



            3.   Minimize off-site sediment transport on
trucks and equipment;



            4.   Minimize work in and adjacent to water bodies
and wetlands;



            5.   Maintain stable slopes;



            6.   Avoid steep slopes and the need for high cuts
and fills;



            7.   Minimize disturbance to the surrounding
soils, root systems and trunks of trees adjacent to site activity that are
intended to be left standing;



            8.   Minimize the compaction of site soils;



            9.   Using and maintaining temporary and permanent
soil stabilization;



            10.   Controlling site waste through the use of a
designated concrete washout area; and



            11.   Managing site waste of all unused building
materials by properly disposed of wastes offsite and not allowing site wastes
to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel or storm sewer system.



         (b)   All sites must be maintained to prevent
unreasonable erosion and sedimentation.



         (c)   Erosion control measures must be in place before
any land disturbance activity begins, and measures must remain in place and
functional until the site is permanently stabilized. Adequate and timely
temporary and permanent stabilization measures must be taken.



         (d)   Streets shall be cleaned and swept within 24 hours
whenever tracking of sediment occurs and before sites are left idle for
weekends and holidays.



         (e)   All temporary erosion and sediment control
measures, such as silt fence and inlet protection devices, shall be removed
within 30 days after permanent stabilization is attained. All storm sewer
systems and drainage ways must be flushed and cleaned of sediment
accumulation and all accumulated sediments must be removed and properly
disposed.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009; Am. Ord. 08-043, passed 5-3-2011; Am. Ord.
08-090, passed 10-15-2013)



§ 150.278  STORM WATER FACILITY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Maintenance of publically owned facilities.



      (1)   The city shall perform maintenance of publicly owned
storm water facilities within the city as provided for in the local surface
water management plan and the City Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.



      (2)   A final inspection shall be required before the city
accepts ownership of the stormwater facilities. Before work under the plan is
deemed complete, the applicant must submit as-built record drawings and a
maintenance plan demonstrating at the time of final stabilization that the
storm water facilities conform to design specifications.



   (B)   Maintenance of privately owned facilities.  A maintenance
agreement in a form acceptable to the city must be executed and recorded with
the county for all permanent storm water facilities to be located on private
property. The agreement shall provide a maintenance plan defining the party
responsible to conduct maintenance, the type of maintenance and the
maintenance intervals.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.279  MONITORING AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Monitoring and inspection requirements for site
construction.  The applicant is responsible for inspections and record
keeping in accordance with the approved plan requirements and NPDES permit
requirements. The applicant must maintain a copy of the approved storm water
management and erosion and sediment control plans at the site at all times
including all daily records required by the plan(s). The applicant must
monitor site conditions and make any and all necessary repairs and
corrections to the erosion control measures to maintain site compliance. The
applicant has a duty to report to the city any illegal offsite discharges.
Failure to make a report within 24 hours of the discovery of the offsite
discharge shall constitute a violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   City inspections.



      (1)   The city shall conduct inspections on a regular basis to
ensure that both storm water and erosion and sediment control measures are
properly installed and maintained prior to construction, during construction,
and at the completion of the project. The city shall not be responsible for
the direct or indirect consequences to the applicant or to third-parties for
non-compliant conditions undetected by inspection.



      (2)   Right of entry. The issuance of an approved plan under
this subchapter constitutes a right of entry for the city or its contractor
to enter upon the construction site for the purpose of obtaining information,
examination of records, conducting investigations, inspections or surveys,
including the right to bring such equipment to perform such surveys and
investigations. The City Inspector may copy any books, papers, records, or
memoranda pertaining to activities or records required to be kept under the
terms and conditions of this site, and may inspect the storm water pollution
control and erosion control measures including any sampling and monitoring
pertaining to the compliance requirements for the site.



      (3)   Construction shall not occur on the site at any time
when the city has identified conditions of non-compliance or a stop work
order has been issued.



      (4)   Construction activities undertaken by an applicant prior
to resolution of all discrepancies specified by the city shall constitute a
violation of this subchapter.



      (5)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance
with any of the provisions of this subchapter or evidence that any material
or construction does not conform to the requirements of the approved plans,
the city may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at no expense to
the city. Test methods shall be as specified by recognized test standards, or
in the absence thereof, by the city.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.280  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement.  The city shall be responsible for enforcing
this subchapter.



   (B)   Penalties.  Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply
with or violating any of the provisions of this subchapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this subchapter is committed, continued or permitted, shall
constitute a separate offense. All land use and building permits shall be
suspended until the applicant has corrected any and all violations.



   (C)   Enforcement by stop work order.



      (1)   Whenever a city inspector finds any violation of this
subchapter, the inspector will fill out an inspection form noting the
observed violations and a stop work order will be issued.



      (2)   The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be
given to the applicant or the applicant’s agent.



      (3)   Upon issuance of the stop work order, the cited work
shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the
order.



      (4)   The applicant must immediately begin corrective actions
to remedy the violations. Once the violations have been corrected the
applicant must contact the city to schedule a re-inspection.



      (5)   The applicant may commence further activity at the site
after a re-inspection is provided by the city and the city determines that
the site is in compliance, and all fees associated with the violation are
paid in full.



      (6)   If the applicant fails to correct the violations in a
timely manner, the city may correct the cited violations and draw down the
escrow to cover the costs.



   (D)   Enforcement actions to ensure compliance.



      (1)    The city can take the additional following actions in
the event of a failure by applicant to meet the terms of this subchapter.



         (a)   Withhold inspections or issuance of certificates
or approvals.



         (b)   Revoke any permit issued by the city to the
applicant.



         (c)   Conduct remedial or corrective action on the
development site or adjacent site affected by the failure.



         (d)   Recover from applicant all costs associated with
correcting the failure or remediating damage from the failure, by drawing
down any escrow funds. If the costs exceed the escrow funds the city may
invoice the applicant with payment due immediately. All payments by applicant
must be made prior to resuming work on the site.



         (e)   Bring other actions against the applicant to
recover costs of remediation or meeting the terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.281  FINANCIAL SECURITIES.



   (A)   Financial securities.  The applicant shall provide security
for the performance of the work in the amount established in the city’s fee
schedule, and in a form acceptable to the city.



   (B)   Action against the financial security.  The city may access
the financial security to conduct work necessary to correct any violations in
a timely manner and in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. The
city shall use the security to finance remedial work undertaken by the city,
or a private contractor under contract to the city including a fee to the
city for processing equal to 10% of the any contractor(s) invoice for
materials and services, to reimburse the city for all costs incurred in the
process of remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time,
engineering fees and attorney’s fees.



   (C)   Maintenance of financial security.  If at any time the
financial security is drawn upon, the applicant will be required to submit
additional security to restore the security to the full amount as originally
established. Restoring the full security is a requirement prior to resuming
work on the site.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.282  STORM WATER UTILITY.



   Please refer to Chapter 53 in the City Code.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



§ 150.283  LAWN FERTILIZER REGULATIONS.



   No person shall apply fertilizer to or deposit grass clippings, leaves,
or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces, or within storm water
drainage systems, natural drainage ways, or within wetland buffer areas.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.284  OTHER CONTROLS.



   (A)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this
subchapter and the provisions of any other city ordinance adopted by the city
council, the more restrictive standard prevails.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to impose supplemental or
additional conditions or requirements to prevent erosion or undesired runoff.



(Ord. 08-016, passed 6-16-2009)



ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION



§ 150.300  PURPOSE.



   The general purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public through the regulation of non-storm
water discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This subchapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
MS4 permit issued to the City of Lake Elmo by the Minnesota Pollution control
Agency (MPCA) under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process. The objections of this subchapter are:



   (A)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by storm
water discharges by any user;



   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4;



   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance, monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.301  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage
system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly
exempted by § 150.306(A)(1) through (A)(4) of this subchapter.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.302  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, all terms, phrases, words, and
their derivatives shall have the meanings as stated in Chapter 11 of the City
Code.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.303  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The City of Lake Elmo shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
City of Lake Elmo maybe delegated in writing by the City Administrator to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the city.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.304  COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.



   This subchapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of
this subchapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance,
rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this
subchapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision
is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health
or the environment shall control.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.305  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
subchapter are minimum standards; therefore this subchapter does not intend
or imply that compliance by any person will ensue that there will be no
contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.306  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.  No person shall throw,
drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to
throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants, other than storm water. The commencement, conduct
or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is
prohibited except as described as follows:



      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this subchapter: water line flushing, landscape
irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated
groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from
potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation,
irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn
watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats
and wetlands, street wash water, dechlorinated swimming pool water, and any
other water source not containing a pollutant.



         (a)   For swimming pool discharges, water shall sit
seven days without the addition of chlorine to allow for chlorine to
evaporate before discharge.



         (b)   Discharge of swimming pools, crawl spaces, sump
pumps, footing drains and other sources that may be determined to contain
sediment or other forms or pollutants may NOT be discharged directly to a
gutter or storm sewer. This discharge must be allowed to flow over a
vegetated area to allow filtering of pollutants, evaporation of chemicals and
infiltration of water consistent with the storm water requirements of the
City of Lake Elmo.



      (2)   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other
discharges specified in writing by the City of Lake Elmo as being necessary
to protect public health and safety.



      (3)   Discharges associated with dye testing, however this
activity requires a written notification to the City of Lake Elmo prior to
the time of the test.



      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the MPCA,
provided that the discharger is in foil compliance with all requirements of
the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and
provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the
storm drain system.



   (B)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
subchapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.



      (4)   Improper connections in violation of this subchapter
must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite
wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of
the City of Lake Elmo.



      (5)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in
plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer
system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon
receipt of written notice of violation from the City of Lake Elmo requiring
that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time
period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection
to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be
identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided
to the City of Lake Elmo.



   (C)   Additional discharge prohibitions. Any owner or occupant of
property within the City of Lake Elmo shall comply with the following
requirements:



      (1)   Subsurface sewage treatment systems shall be maintained
to prevent failure.



      (2)   Recreational vehicle sewage shall be disposed of to a
proper sanitary waste facility.



      (3)   Mobile washing companies (carpet cleaning, mobile
vehicle washing, and the like) shall dispose of wastewater to the sanitary
sewer.



      (4)   All motor vehicle parking lots and private streets shall
be swept, at a minimum, once a year in the spring to remove debris. Such
debris shall be collected and properly disposed.



      (5)   Fuel, chemical residue, household hazardous waste or
other types of potentially harmful material shall be disposed of properly.



      (6)   Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease,
oil or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles containing
hazardous materials, shall not be stored in areas susceptible to runoff.



      (7)   Any machinery or equipment that is to be repaired or
maintained in areas susceptible to runoff shall be placed in a confined area
to contain leaks, spills or discharges.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.307  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, yard waste, excessive vegetation,
and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard
the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee
shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.308  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Submission of Notice of Intent (NOI) to the City of Lake Elmo.



   (A)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity
NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit is required in a form acceptable
to the City of Lake Elmo prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



      (1)   Industrial activity includes activities subject to NPDES
Industrial Storm Water Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14).



      (2)   Construction activity includes activities subject to
NPDES Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in
land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not
limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



   (B)   The operator of a facility, including construction sites,
required to have an NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with
industrial activity shall submit a copy of the NOI to the City of Lake Elmo
at the same time the operator submits the original NOI to the EPA as
applicable.



   (C)   The copy of the NOI must be delivered to the City of Lake Elmo
either in person or by mailing it to:



            Notice of Intent to Discharge Storm Water
            City of Lake Elmo
            3800 Laverne Avenue S.
            Lake Elmo, MN  55042



   (D)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility
that is discharging storm water associated with industrial activity without
having submitted a copy of the NOI to do so to the City of Lake Elmo.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.309  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORM WATER
POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The City of Lake Elmo will adopt requirements identifying best
management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause
or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain
system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of such
activity, operation, or facility shall provide, at their own expense,
reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or
other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through
the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person
responsible for a property or premise that is, or may be, the source of an
illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense,
additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further
discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions
of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated
with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. These BMPs shall be part
of a storm water management plan (SWMP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.310  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal
discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain
system, or waters of the United States, said person shall take all necessary
steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In
the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous
materials, said person shall notify the City of Lake Elmo in person or by
phone no later than the next business day. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner
or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record
of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Failure to
provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this
subchapter.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.311  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The City of Lake Elmo shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this subchapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this subchapter, including the right
to set up, or require facilities owner to set up devices necessary to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the facilities storm water discharge.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.312  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement.  The City of Lake Elmo shall be responsible for
enforcing this subchapter.



   (B)   Penalties.  Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply
with or violating any of the provisions of this subchapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this subchapter is committed, continued or permitted, shall
constitute a separate offense. All land use and building permits shall be
suspended until the applicant has corrected any and all violations.



   (C)   Emergency cease and desist orders.  When the City of Lake
Elmo finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this subchapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the
person’s past violations are likely to recur, and that the person’s
violation(s) has (have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened
discharge to the MS4 or waters of the state which reasonably appears to
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, the City of Lake Elmo may issue an order to
the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations.



   (D)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge.  Any
person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this subchapter may have their
MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit
discharge.  Such suspension may also be imposed if it is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger.



   (E)   Violations deemed a public nuisance.  In addition to the
enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or
permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter
is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed
a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s
expense; and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.313  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this subchapter are severable. If any provision of
this subchapter or the application of any provision of this subchapter to any
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other
provisions or applications of this subchapter, which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



§ 150.314  AUTHORITY.



   This subchapter shall become effective upon its passage and publication
in accordance with the law.



(Ord. 2012-59, passed 6-5-2012)



INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



§ 150.325  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The City of lake Elmo does hereby adopt, by reference, the year 2006
edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as hereinafter
amended pursuant to this subchapter, as the Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Lake Elmo.



(Ord. 08-075, passed 5-7-2013)



§ 150.326  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The year 2006 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code adopted by this subchapter is hereby modified by deleting
the following sections: 103.2, 103.3, 302.4, and sections 111.1 through 111.8.



   (B)   The year 2006 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code adopted by this subchapter is hereby amended by modifying
the following denominated sections thereof to read as hereinafter set forth:



      (1)   Chapter 1.



         101.1  For the purpose of this article, these regulations
shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Lake Elmo,
hereinafter referred to as this code.



         102.3  Application of Other Codes. Repairs, additions or
alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Minnesota State Building
Code.  Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set
aside any of the provisions of the City of Lake Elmo Zoning Code.



         103.1  Enforcement. Responsibility for enforcement of this
code shall be vested in the City’s Building Officials Office.  The
City’s Building Official is hereby appointed as the code official for the
purposes of this code and employees acting under his or her discretion and
control shall be deemed to be deputy code officials.



         103.5 Fees.  The fees for activities and services
performed by the department carrying out its responsibilities under this Code
shall be determined by the City Council.



      (2)   Chapter 3.



         304.14  Insect Screens.  During the period from May 15 to
October 31 every door window and other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or
any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16
mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition.



      (3)   Chapter 6.



         602.3  Heat Supply.  Every owner and operator of any
building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping
units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish
heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from
September 1 to May 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F
(20°C) in all habitable rooms.



         602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces
shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to May 31 to
maintain a temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied.



      (4)   Chapter 8.



         800 General References.  Whenever this code refers to the
International Building Code, the ICC Electrical Code, the International Fire
Code, the International Mechanical Code, or the International Plumbing Code,
such references shall be deemed to the comparable applicable Code as adopted
by the State of Minnesota.  Whenever this code shall refer to the
International Zoning Code, such references shall be deemed to be Chapter 154
of the Lake Elmo City Code.



(Ord. 08-075, passed 5-7-2013)



CHAPTER 151:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section




Building Code




   151.001   State Building Code adopted by reference



   151.002   Application, administration, and enforcement



   151.003   Permits, inspections and fees




Permits, Fees, and Bonds; Excavating and Grading;
Culverts; Moving Buildings into City




   151.015   Generally



   151.016   Culverts in developments with rural section



   151.017   Excavation and grading permits



   151.018   Private road permits



   151.019   Moving buildings into city



   151.020   Exterior finish



   151.021   (Reserved)



   151.022   Security escrow for construction



   151.023   Survey



   151.024   (Reserved)



   151.025   Incompatible structures



   151.026   (Reserved)



   151.027   Construction site erosion control




Fire Detection




   151.040   (Reserved)



   151.041   Fire prevention and protection




Principal Buildings




   151.055   Minimum standards




Swimming Pools




   151.085   Swimming pools; generally




Tennis Courts




   151.100   Tennis courts; generally




Signs




   151.115   Purpose



   151.116   Administration and enforcement



   151.117   General standards



   151.118   Specific regulations by zoning district



   151.119   Sign variances




Manufactured Home Park




   151.135   Purpose



   151.136   Scope



   151.137   Definitions



   151.138   Permits



   151.139   Applications



   151.140   Fees



   151.141   Hearing



   151.142   Design standards



   151.143   Office



   151.144   Child-free area



   151.145   Building permits



   151.146   Operator



   151.147   Violations



   151.148   Inspections



   151.149   Flood plain management



   151.150   Storm shelters




Manufactured Home Park Closings




   151.165   Purpose and intent



   151.166   Notice of closing



   151.167   Public hearing



   151.168   Conditions of closing



   151.169   Park resident statement



   151.170   Election to receive relocation costs



   151.171   Election to receive compensation



   151.172   General requirements



   151.173   Limitation of relocation costs and compensation



   Exhibit A:   Official Sign District Map



BUILDING CODE



§ 151.001  STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of
Labor and Industry pursuant to M.S. Ch. 326B, including all of the
amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from
time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Labor and Industry, through its
Building Codes and Standards Unit, is hereby adopted by reference with the
exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this
section. The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in this
section as if fully set out herein and shall be known as the “Lake Elmo
Building Code.”



(Ord. 97-121, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 97-157, passed 5-17-2005; Am. Ord.
97-171, passed 5-26-2006; Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)



§ 151.002  APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the
Building Code shall be in accordance with Minnesota State Building Code. The
Building Code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted
by M.S. § 326B.121, Subd. 2(d).



   (B)   The code enforcement agency of the City is called the “Lake
Elmo Building Department.” The Building Code shall be enforced by the City
Building Official, as the Building Official is designated by the city to
administer the code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.133, Subd.1.



(Ord. 97-121, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-048, passed 7-19-2011; Am. Ord.
08-093, passed 11-19-2013; Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)



§ 151.003  PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   The issuance of permits, conducting of inspections and the
collection of fees shall be as authorized in Minn. Rules Ch. 1300. Permit
fees shall be assessed for work governed by this section in accordance with
the city’s fee schedule. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on
all permits issued for work governed by this section in accordance with
M.S.§ 326B.148, Subd. 1.



   (B)   No permit as required by the Building Code shall be issued,
until the fees prescribed have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a permit
be approved until the additional fees, if any, due to an increase in the
estimated cost of the building or structure have been paid.



   (C)   Plan review fees shall be 65% of the building permit fee.
Investigation fees for work started without a permit shall be equal to the
permit fee.



   (D)   Plan review fees for similar plans shall be 25% of the normal
building permit fee.



   (E    The plan checking fee shall be paid by the applicant to the
city.



   (F)   Permits shall he required for moving structures within, out,
or through the city. Structure moving permit fees shall be as established by
the city’s fee schedule.



   (G)   An escrow administration fee in an amount established the
city’s fee schedule shall be paid before a permit is issued for all permits
requiring escrow in accordance with § 151.022 of this code.



(Ord. 97-121, passed 7-15-2003; Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)



PERMITS, FEES, AND BONDS; EXCAVATING AND GRADING;
CULVERTS; MOVING BUILDINGS INTO CITY



§ 151.015  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Permits required.  No person, firm, or corporation shall
erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or
demolish any building or structure in the city or cause these actions to be
done without first obtaining a separate building permit for each building or
structure as required by the State Building Code as adopted by this chapter.



   (B)   Fees established.



      (1)   Fees shall be as provided by City Council ordinance, as
amended from time to time, and shall be attached as Appendix A of the code.



(Ord. 97-43, passed 5-4-1999; Am. Ord. 97-202, passed 12-4-2007)



      (2)   (a)   The Building Official shall utilize the chart
of estimated construction costs as annually provided by the Minnesota
Department of Labor and Industry, Building Codes and Standards Unit, to
compute building valuations for the purposes of establishing the permit fees
of the city.



         (b)   Specific fees are set forth from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   Double fee.  If any construction is undertaken in the absence
of a permit required by this code to be issued as a prerequisite to building
construction, the permit fee shall be double the stated amount.



   (D)   Building demolition fees.  All building or structures
prepared for demolition within the city require a demolition permit.



(1997 Code, § 505.01) (Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.016  CULVERTS IN DEVELOPMENTS WITH RURAL SECTION.



   No building permit shall be issued for any parcel served by a roadway
with a rural ditch section until the applicant installs or is served by a
driveway culvert of a type and in a manner to avoid obstruction of water
flow, as determined by the City Engineer, or until the City Engineer
determines that no culvert is necessary.



(1997 Code, § 505.02)



§ 151.017  EXCAVATION AND GRADING PERMITS.



   (A)   Permit required.  No person shall undertake, authorize, or
permit any of the following actions without first having obtained a grading
and excavating permit from the city:



      (1)   Any excavating, grading, filling, or other changes in
the earth’s topography resulting in the movement of more than 50 cubic
yards of material, except in any designated wetlands, flood plain, or
shoreland district;



      (2)   Any excavating, grading, filling, or other changes in
the earth’s topography in any designated wetlands, flood plain, or
shoreland district for construction projects, development, or subdivisions;



      (3)   Any excavation of gravel or other materials for the
purpose of creating wetlands, berming, other natural features, and landscape
amenities; or



      (4)   Any changing of a natural drainage way or drainage
pattern that results in increasing or intensifying the flow of surface water
upon adjacent property.



   (B)   Exceptions.  Notwithstanding the above, no grading or
excavation permit shall be required for the following activities except as
required by Minnesota State Building Code:



      (1)   Earthwork undertaken in accordance with grading plans
approved in conjunction with a site and building plan review or plat approval;



      (2)   Earthwork which will result in moving less than 50 cubic
yards of material, provided the work does not take place in any designated
wetlands, flood plain, or shoreland district and does not affect local
drainage patterns; or



      (3)   Public improvement projects.



   (C)   Plan approval required.  No grading or excavation permit
shall be issued for site grading or excavation without approved plans for
site development and adequate provision for site protection from wind or
water erosion.  See § 150.273 for storm water and erosion and sediment
control requirements.



   (D)   Changes to earth’s topography prohibited without permit. 
No person shall undertake, authorize, or permit any excavating, grading,
filling, or other change in the earth’s topography which violates or is not
in compliance with a grading or excavating permit issued by the city,
including the approved plans and all terms and conditions of the permit.



   (E)   Public hearing.  All grading and excavating applications, for
the purpose of creating wetlands, berming, landscape amenities, and other
natural features that result in the moving of more than 400 cubic yards of
material per acre of site area shall require a public hearing.  To the
extent possible grading permit review will be combined with other planning
permits reviews.



   (F)   Review of grading permits.  Applications for a grading or
excavation permit that require either an administrative review or approval by
the City Council following a public hearing, shall be made to the City
Planner on forms provided by the city.  The application shall be accompanied
by the fee set forth from time to time by resolution of the City Council.



   (G)   Submission requirements.  All grading and excavation permit
applications shall be accompanied by the following information:



      (1)   The legal description of the property;



      (2)   The required fee as set forth in the city’s fee
schedule, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (3)   Evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



      (4)   Existing and proposed final grades utilizing 2 foot
contour intervals;



      (5)   A survey showing the location and elevation of all
roads, utilities, and structures which may be impacted by the proposal;



      (6)   A tree survey showing all trees having a caliper of 6
inches or greater and a tree preservation plan;



      (7)   A landscaping and site restoration plan;



      (8)   A development concept plan indicating how the
recontoured parcel may be developed in a manner consistent with this chapter
and the Comprehensive Plan;



      (9)   A drainage plan which includes any engineering work for
stormwater retention must comply with § 150.277;



      (10)   An erosion control plan indicating the type and
location of erosion measures to be used, must comply with § 150.277;



      (11)   A traffic analysis showing how the materials will be
removed from or delivered to the site;



      (12)   Two copies of all available soil borings together with
boring location maps and any other soil information pertinent to improvements;



      (13)   The other information as may be required by the city;



      (14)   Schedule of building construction phasing on permit
site;



      (15)   Hours of operation; and



      (16)   Duration of activity.



   (H)   Administrative review of grading and excavating permits.



      (1)   Grading or excavating plans that result in the moving of
more than 50, but less than 400, cubic yards of material per acre may be
approved by the City Administrator upon recommendation of the City Planner
and City Engineer.  The application shall be accompanied by the submission
requirements set forth in division (G) above.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the City
Planner shall review the application within 10 working days and shall notify
the applicant of the decision by mail.  The City Planner may impose the
modifications and conditions as may be necessary to protect the public
interest.  Bonding may be required in any amount sufficient to ensure site
restoration should the applicant default on his or her responsibilities.



   (I)   City Council review of grading and excavating permits.



      (1)   Grading and excavating plans that result in the moving
of 400 cubic yards of material per acre require a public hearing and approval
of the City Council.  The application shall be accompanied by the submission
requirements set forth in division (G) above.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk
shall call a public hearing within 30 days from the date of application. 
Notice shall be published in the city’s legal newspaper, and property
owners within 350 feet of the project site shall be notified of the public
hearing no less than 10 days prior to the hearing.  The application shall be
reviewed by the City Planner and City Engineer and their written comments
submitted to the City Council.



   (J)   Grading permit standards.  Grading and excavating permits
shall be issued only for grading plans which comply with the following.



      (1)   The plans shall maximize the preservation of trees on
the property and utilize the trees to the maximum extent possible to screen
the grading from adjacent property.



      (2)   The plan shall utilize landscaping to restore site
aesthetics, minimize the visual impact of the work, screen the grading from
adjacent property, and enhance the property’s development potential.  All
areas altered because of grading activity shall at a minimum, be restored
with seed and disked mulch or sod within 2 weeks after the completion of the
activity.  The city may approve an extension of this deadline if
appropriate, but in no case shall site restoration be delayed beyond October
1.



      (3)   The plan shall not result in sites which are
unsatisfactory for development of permitted uses.  The development potential
of a site may be adversely impacted by the matters as unsuitable finished
grades, poor soil stability, unsatisfactory drainage, soil compaction
detrimental to drainfield construction, or exposure to deleterious influences
such as highway frontages for residential property.



      (4)   The plan shall provide for the removal of any
significant amounts of organic material or construction debris from the site.



      (5)   In instances where an existing natural or created buffer
will be impacted by grading or filling operations, site restoration shall be
completed in a manner which resembles, to the extent possible, the original
vegetative and topography state of the property, when deemed appropriate by
the city.



      (6)   The plan shall protect wetlands, flood plains,
shorelands, public waters, and other natural features to the maximum extent
possible.



      (7)   The plan shall provide for adequate drainage, stormwater
retention, and erosion control measures.



      (8)   The plan shall provide for traffic movements to and from
the site which do not have significant adverse affects on roads,
intersection, or development in the area.  Streets surrounding the site
shall be swept as needed to remove any debris which may accumulate due to
these activities.



      (9)   The plan shall include a schedule of activities which
limits the duration of off- site disruptions and impacts.



      (10)   The plan must also be approved, where required, by
appropriate watershed districts, the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, and any other government
agency which has jurisdiction.



      (11)   (a)   The plan shall be accompanied by a bond
sufficient to ensure compliance with the approved permit and adequate site
restoration.



         (b)   The amount of the bond shall be based upon the
size of the site, sensitivity of its surroundings, extent of grading, amount
of material moved, necessary site restoration and potential impacts upon
public facilities, including damage to public roadways and property.



      (12)   The plan shall comply with the Minnesota State Building
Code and all other applicable statutes or ordinances.



(1997 Code, § 505.03)  (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 08-147,
passed 7-19-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.018  PRIVATE ROAD PERMITS.



   A permit shall be required to construct an asphalt, concrete, or gravel
private road or alley.  Fees are set forth from time to time by ordinance of
the Council.



(1997 Code, § 505.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.019  MOVING BUILDINGS INTO CITY.



   (A)   Application.  Prior to moving a building or structure which
will be located or relocated within the city, a moving permit must be
obtained from the Council.  The application for a moving permit shall
include the following information:



      (1)   A performance bond in an amount set forth by the Council
based on a written recommendation of the Building Official, City Attorney,
and/or City Planner;



(Am. Ord. 9706, passed 5-20-1997)



      (2)   A certificate of insurance which indicates that the
applicant has obtained liability coverage and property damage coverage in an
amount set forth by the Council based on a written recommendation of the
Building Official, City Attorney, and/or City Planner;



(Am. Ord. 9706, passed 5-20-1997)



      (3)   Photos of all sides of the building or structure;



      (4)   A complete description of the building or structure
including its age and physical condition;



      (5)   A site plan;



      (6)   A percolation test for the site in the city on which the
building will be located or relocated;



      (7)   An application fee set forth from time to time by
Council resolution;



      (8)   A written approval from utility companies;



      (9)   Proof of ownership of site in city on which the building
will be located or relocated



      (10)   Proof of state license for house and building moving;
and



      (11)   The required fee.



   (B)   Inspection.  The Building Inspector shall inspect the
building or structure for which the permit is requested before and after it
is moved.  Applicant shall reimburse the city for expenses incurred by the
Building Official in order to inspect a building or structure located beyond
the borders of the city.  The expense reimbursement shall be made before
issuance of the moving permit.



   (C)   Standards.  All improvements required to render the building
or structure safe and suitable for occupancy shall be completed prior to
occupancy.  Additional improvements necessary to ensure that the building or
structure complies with the city’s building code and with the site grading
requirements or landscaping requirements for the zone, in which the structure
will be located, shall be completed within 12 months of the date of issuance
of the moving permit.  The building or structure as improved shall not
materially depreciate surrounding property values.



   (D)   Review procedure.



      (1)   The completed application shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission along with recommendations of the Building Official. 
The Planning Commission shall conduct a hearing on the application preceded
by at least 10-days mailed notice to all property owners within 350 feet of
the building location site.  The Planning Commission shall make its
recommendation to the City Council within 40 days after the completed
application has been referred to the Planning Commission.  If the Planning
Commission recommendation is not received within the required time, the
Council may take action without the Planning Commission’s report.



      (2)   The Council may grant or deny the application or table
it in order to obtain additional data necessary to make a reasonable
decision.  The Council may require that the applicant post a performance
bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit, in a reasonable amount in order to
insure that applicant completes those improvements which are required to be
completed within 12 months of the date of the issuance of the moving permit.



(1997 Code, § 505.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.020  EXTERIOR FINISH.



   The exterior of all structures must be finished within 6 months from
the date of commencement of construction of the structure. The Building
Official may extend the completion date for large scale projects or
demonstrated hardship.



(1997 Code, § 505.06) (Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 151.021 (RESERVED).



§ 151.022  SECURITY ESCROW FOR CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Security escrow. A security escrow in an amount established by
the city’s Fee Schedule or Building Official shall be paid before a
building permit is issued for the construction of all new structures and
other significant construction related projects at the discretion of the
city. The security shall be returned to the applicant upon the successful
completion of the following:



      (1)   Compliance with the State Building Code;



      (2)   Compliance with the City of Lake Elmo City Code; and



      (3)   Compliance with specified requirements as determined by
the Building Official.



   (B)   Purpose. The security may be used at any time for the
remediation of construction related damage or debris on and around the site
and other violations of the city code, including, but not limited to, erosion
control, street maintenance, and landscaping. If the security items are not
completed within six months of start of construction, excluding the time
between November 1 and April 1, or upon the builder filing bankruptcy, or if
the job is abandoned for 30 days or more, the city may enter the lot, perform
the work, and apply the security toward the cost, plus administrative fees.



   (C)   Action against the financial security. The city shall use the
security to finance remedial work undertaken by the city, or a private
contractor under contract to the city including a fee to the city for
processing equal to 10% of the any contractor(s) invoice for materials and
services, to reimburse the city for all costs incurred in the process of
remedial work including, but not limited to, staff time, engineering fees and
attorney’s fees.



   (D)   Maintenance of financial security. If at any time the
financial security is drawn upon, the applicant may be required to submit
additional security to restore the security to the full amount as originally
established. Restoring the full security is a requirement prior to resuming
work on the site.



(Ord. 08-65, passed 1-15-2013)



§ 151.023  SURVEY.



   The Building Inspector may require a certificate of survey showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built on, the exact size and location on
the lot of the building and accessory buildings to be erected, and other
information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the city code,
before issuing a building permit for new construction on any lot.



(1997 Code, § 505.09)



§ 151.024  (RESERVED).



§ 151.025  INCOMPATIBLE STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Referral by Building Official and City Administrator. 
Whenever an application is filed with the city for a building permit for any
structure to be built, enlarged, or altered within, or moved in or into the
city, and the Building Official finds that the application, plans, and
specifications, and the plot plan submitted (the application papers) comply
with the code of the city except that the application papers provide for a
structure, the exterior design, appearance, and functional plan which the
Building Official and City Administrator, feel may be so at variance or so
similar with the exterior design, appearance, and functional plan of
structures in the neighborhood and same zoning district of the proposed
structure as to cause a material depreciation generally to property in the
neighborhood, then the Building Official shall within 10 days after the
receipt of the application papers, file the papers and the opinion in
writing, signed by the Building Official and City Administrator, with the
Planning Commission.



   (B)   Call of hearing.  Within 10 days after the receipt of the
application papers and opinions, the City Administrator shall give notice to
each member of Planning Commission and to the public by publication in the
official paper and to any other persons the City Administrator deems
advisable, of a hearing to be held by the Planning Commission with respect to
the application.  The notice shall state the purpose of the hearing and the
location of the structure.  Notice to the applicant shall be by registered
mail at least 3 days in advance of the hearing, provided appearance at the
hearing shall constitute a waiver of any defect in the notice of the
hearing.  The hearing on the application shall be held not less than 1 week
nor more than 2 weeks after receipt of the application by the city.



   (C)   Hearing and findings.  Before or during the hearing, each
member of the Planning Commission may view the premises upon which the
structure is located or to be located, and at the hearing the Commission
shall examine the application papers and hear the applicant.  It may also
hear any citizens of the neighborhood and other individuals who request to be
heard.  Within 48 hours of the close of the hearing, the Commission shall,
pursuant to a majority vote of all the members of the Commission, file
written findings of the fact.  It shall determine whether the exterior
design, appearance, and functional plan of the structure is or is not at a
variance or so similar with the exterior design, appearance, and functional
plan of structures constructed or in the course of construction in the
neighborhood of the proposed structures, (in the same zoning district) as to
cause material depreciation generally to property in the neighborhood.  The
Commission shall further make a recommendation that the application be
accordingly granted or denied.  The finding, determination, and
recommendation shall be in writing, signed on behalf of the Planning
Commission by its Chair.  The City Administrator shall file a certified copy
of the finding, determination, and recommendation with the Building Official
and shall mail a copy to the applicant.  The application papers, the written
opinions, and the findings, determinations, and recommendations of the
Planning Commission shall immediately be presented by the City Administrator
to the Council at its next regular meeting.  Further action with respect to
the application shall be held in abeyance pending order and direction of the
Council.  In that case, no permit with respect to the application shall be
issued except upon order and direction of the Council.



(1997 Code, § 505.11) (Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)



§ 151.026 (RESERVED).



§ 151.027  CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL.



   (A)   Site grading.



      (1)   Submission requirements.  All applications for a
building permit shall include a plot or site plan detailing the proposed
finished grades of the site at all building corners and all lot corners. 
All grades proposed shall be consistent with the approved grading plan for
the subdivision in which the building site is located.



      (2)   As built grades certification.  Amounts collected by
the city and held in escrow as security to ensure completion of construction
projects for any activity which requires a permit shall be held until the
builder or the property owner has provided the city with a certificate of a
registered surveyor or civil engineer attesting to the “as built” grades
of all building corners and site corners; and, the certificate shows all the
grades to be consistent with the plot or site plan attached to the building
permit application.



   (B)   See §§ 150.279 and 150.280 for additional requirements.



   (C)   The requirements for construction site storm water management
and erosion and sediment control are found in § 150.273.



(1997 Code, § 505.13)  (Am. Ord. 97-83, passed - -; Am. Ord. 08-024, passed
4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



FIRE DETECTION



§ 151.040 (RESERVED).



§ 151.041  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION.



   (A)   State fire code adopted. The Minnesota State Fire Code, as
adopted by the Commissioner of Labor and Industry pursuant to M.S. Ch.
299F.011, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established,
and appendix chapters as outlined below, adopted and published from time to
time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Public Safety, through its fire marshal
division is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this section as
completely as if set out in full. A person desiring a permit as required by
the Minnesota State Fire Code shall submit an application to the Fire Code
Official along with any fee required by the city fee schedule.



2017 S-10



   (B)   Appendix chapters adopted. The following appendix chapters as
identified in the Minnesota State Fire Code are hereby adopted and
incorporated:



      (1)   Appendix C:  Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution;



      (2)   Appendix D:  Fire Apparatus Access Roads;



      (3)   Appendix H:  Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP)
and Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS) Instructions;



      (4)   Appendix I:  Fire Protection Systems—Noncompliant
Conditions;



      (5)   Appendix K:  Fires or Barbeques on Balconies or Patios;
and



      (6)   Appendix L:  Emergency Responder Radio Coverage.



   (C)   Use of the terms of the Fire Code. Wherever the word
“jurisdiction” is used in the Minnesota State Fire Code, it shall mean
the City of Lake Elmo. Where the term “fire code official” is used in the
Minnesota State Fire Code, it shall mean the city’s Building Official.



   (D)   Duties and responsibilities of the Fire Code Official. The
Fire Code Official or his or her authorized representative shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:



      (1)   Enforcement of the provisions of this section;



      (2)   May order the establishment of fire lanes on public or
private property as may be necessary



in order to ensure that the travel of fire equipment is not be impeded or
interfered with, and that access to



fire hydrants and buildings is not blocked off. When a fire lane has been
ordered to be established, it shall



be marked by a sign bearing the words “No Parking - Fire Lane” or a
similar message. If the sign is in private property, it shall be erected and
maintained by the property owner at the property owner’s expense. Such sign
must be installed within 30 days after notification by the Fire Code Official
that a fire lane must be established. Thereafter, no person shall park a
vehicle or otherwise occupy or obstruct the fire lane; and



      (3)   Keeping on file with the city all statutes and
regulations applicable to this section.



2017 S-10



   (E)   Fire inspections. In order to ensure the health, safety, and
public welfare, the city will inspect existing facilities in accordance with
established policy. A fire service fee will be charged in accordance



with the city’s fee schedule for new construction, additions and
alterations where a building permit is required.



   (F)   Lock boxes. Lock boxes are required on all new commercial
structures in the city. They shall meet the following requirements:



      (l)   The lock box must be mounted in an easily accessible
location near the main entrance of the structure or as otherwise approved in
writing by the Fire Chief;



      (2)   The lock box must contain all keys necessary to gain
access to the commercial structure as



well as access to interior areas of the structure; and



      (3)   The Fire Chief must be contacted when access to a lock
box is requested by the property owner in order to change keys for various
building locks.



   (G)   Hazardous material list. With respect to commercial
properties, the property owner must provide the Fire Chief with the following
information related to hazardous materials and chemicals on the property.
This information must be updated annually and when shipments of new or
seasonal hazardous materials or chemicals are received on the property.



      (1)   A list of all hazardous materials and chemicals stored
in the structure(s) and on the property;



      (2)   A drawing to scale which provides the quantities of the
materials and chemicals; and



      (3)   A material data sheet for each hazardous material or
chemical.



(Ord. 97-118, passed 4-1-2003; Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS



§ 151.055  MINIMUM STANDARDS.



   (A)   Regulations.  All principal buildings shall meet or exceed
the minimum standard of the Minnesota State Building Code or the Manufactured
Housing Code, the Minnesota State Uniform Fire Code, the Minnesota Department
of Health, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and the city's on-site
sewage treatment ordinance.



   (B)   Existing neighborhoods.  When the principal building is a
dwelling unit in an existing neighborhood, it shall contain no less than 75%
of the average square footage, in finished living area, of the homes in that
block.  This provision may not be construed to require more than 940 square
feet in finished living area for a 2-bedroom dwelling unit, in any
neighborhood.



   (C)   Undeveloped areas.  When the principal building is a dwelling
unit in an undeveloped block, it shall be required to meet the requirements
of division (A) above only.



(1997 Code, § 515.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SWIMMING POOLS



§ 151.085  SWIMMING POOLS; GENERALLY.



   (A)   Permits required.  No person, corporation, partnership, or
firm shall construct, repair, enlarge, alter, change, remodel, or otherwise
significantly improve a swimming pool in the city without first having
obtained a permit from the Building Official.



   (B)   Definitions.  Unless specifically defined in this section,
common definitions, words, and phrases used in this section shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage
through this code.  Definitions are found in § 11.01.



   (C)   Application for permit.  The Building Official may require
plans, specifications, and pertinent explanatory data be submitted with an
application for a permit.



      (1)   An application for a permit which includes a site plan
showing:



         (a)   The type and size of pool, location of pool,
location of house, garage, fencing, and other improvements on the lot;



         (b)   The location of structures on all adjacent lots;



         (c)   The location of filter unit, pump, and writing
indicating the type of the units;



         (d)   The location of back-flush and drainage outlets,
grading plan, finished elevations, and final treatment (decking, landscaping,
and the like) around pool;



         (e)   The location of existing overhead or underground
wiring, utility easements, trees, and similar features;



         (f)   The location of any water heating unit;



         (g)   The location of water supply systems, buried
sewers, and sewage disposal systems, other utilities and proximate sources of
possible contamination of the pool; and



         (h)   All dimensions, including the length, width, depth
of the pool, the size of the pool deck, and the liquid capacity of the pool;
plans shall be drawn to a scale of not smaller than 1/4 inch to 1 foot;



      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by the permit fee
the Council establishes by resolution.



      (3)   Pools shall not be located within 20 feet of any septic
tank/drainfield nor within 6 feet of any principal structure or frost
footing.  Pools shall not be located within any required front or side yard
setbacks.



      (4)   Pools shall not be located beneath overhead utility
lines nor over underground utility lines of any type.



      (5)   Pools shall not be located within any private or public
utility, walkway, drainage, or other easements.



      (6)   In the case of underground pools, the necessary
precautions shall be taken during the construction, to:



         (a)   Avoid damage, hazards, or inconvenience to
adjacent or nearby property; and



         (b)   Assure that proper care shall be taken in
stockpiling excavated material to avoid erosion, dust, or other infringements
upon adjacent property.



      (7)   All access for construction shall be over the owner's
land and due care shall be taken to avoid damage to public streets and
adjacent private or public property.



      (8)   (a)   To the extent feasible, back-flush water or
water from pool drainage shall be directed onto the owner's property or into
approved public drainage ways.



         (b)   Water shall not drain onto adjacent or nearby
private land.



      (9)   The filter unit, pump, heating unit, and any other
noise-making mechanical equipment shall be located at least 50 feet from any
adjacent or nearby residential structure and not closer than 10 feet to any
lot line.



   (D)   Pool piping.  Pool piping systems shall be constructed of
materials prescribed in the city plumbing code.  Installation of the piping,
including the pool water supply line, shall be inspected by the Building
Official prior to covering the piping.



   (E)   Main outlets.  Pools shall be equipped with facilities for
completely emptying the pool and effecting surface drainage (by gravity if
elevations permit).  The drainage system shall be constructed in accordance
with the provisions of the city plumbing code.



   (F)   Water supply.  Water supplies serving all swimming pools
shall be of a safe sanitary quality and be acceptable to the County Health
Officer.  The installation of the pool water supply piping and connection to
the source of supply shall be in accordance with the city plumbing code.



   (G)   Electrical requirements.  All electrical installations
provided for, installed, and used in conjunction with residential swimming
pools shall conform with the state electrical code and shall be inspected and
approved by the state electrical inspector.  No current-carrying electrical
conductors shall cross residential swimming pools, either overhead or
underground or within 15 feet of the pools, except as necessary for pool
lighting or pool accessories.



   (H)   Heating requirements.  Permits shall be required for all
heating units used in conjunction with swimming pools.  Installation shall
be made in accordance with the city heating building code in effect at the
time of installation.



   (I)   Pressure relief valves.  Pools shall be designed and
constructed with under-drain systems and pressure relief valves to prevent
pool flotation, where the Building Official determines the same to be
necessary.



   (J)   Shield lights.  Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool
shall be so arranged and shielded so as to reflect light away from adjoining
properties.



   (K)   Location.  All swimming pools or appurtenances to swimming
pools shall be located in the rear yard and meet the setback requirements of
the district in which it is located.  Requests for a variance from the
provisions of this section shall be referred first to the Planning Commission
for its study and recommendation and then to the Council.



   (L)   Fences.  All swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a
non-climbable type fence.  All fence openings or points of entry into the
pool area shall be equipped with gates.  The fence and gates shall be at
least 4 feet in height and shall be constructed of a minimum number 11 gauge
woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material or other material approved by
the Building Official.  All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and
self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate or otherwise be
inaccessible to small children.  All fence posts shall be decay or corrosion
resistant and shall be set in concrete bases or other suitable protection. 
The openings between the bottom of the fence and the ground or other surface
shall not be more than 4 inches.



   (M)   Above-ground swimming pools.  Ladders or stairs which are
attached to or placed against the outside of above-ground tank-type swimming
pools having a depth of 24 inches or more shall be removed from the outside
of the pool when it is not being used by the owner or owner’s authorized
guests.  All other applicable provisions of this section shall apply to
above-ground pools.



   (N)   Public or semi-public swimming pools.  Swimming pools other
than residential pools shall be constructed and operated in conformance with
standards for the installations established by the Minnesota State Board of
Health.  In addition, the person, firm, corporation, or agency proposing the
construction of a swimming pool other than residential shall file with the
Building Official, prior to the beginning of any construction, a copy of the
report prepared and issued by the Minnesota State Health Department showing
approval of the plans, and 1 set of pool plans upon which the approval is
indicated by stamp, seal, or other official marking of that agency.



(1997 Code, § 525.01) (Am. Ord. 08-147, passed 7-19-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



TENNIS COURTS



§ 151.100  TENNIS COURTS; GENERALLY.



   (A)   Permits required.  A permit shall be required for all private
tennis courts on residential lots.



   (B)   Application.  An application for a permit shall include name,
address, lot and block number, and a site plan showing the size, shape, and
pavement and sub-pavement materials, the location of the court, the location
of the house, garage, fencing, septic systems, and any other structural
improvements on the lot, the location of structures on all adjacent lots, a
grading plan showing all revised drainage patterns and finished elevations at
the 4 corners of the court, landscaping and turf protection around the court,
location of existing and proposed wiring and lighting facilities.



   (C)   Administration.  Permits shall be issued by the Building
Official.



   (D)   Applicable standards.



      (1)   Tennis courts shall not be located closer than 10 feet
on any side or rear lot line.  Tennis courts shall not be located within any
required front yard.



      (2)   Tennis courts shall not be located over underground
utility lines of any type, nor shall any court be located within any private
or public utility, walkway, drainage, or other easement.



      (3)   Solid tennis court practice walls shall not exceed 10
feet in height.  A building permit shall be required for the walls.  The
walls shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any lot line.



      (4)   Chain link fencing surrounding the tennis court may
extend up to 10 feet in height above the tennis court surface elevation.



   (E)   Fees.  Fees shall be based on the value system established in
the State Building Code, or as adopted by ordinance of the Council.



(1997 Code, § 530.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SIGNS



§ 151.115  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Purpose and findings.



      (1)   Purpose.



         (a) The Lake Elmo sign regulations are intended to
establish a comprehensive and balanced system of sign control that
accommodates the need for a well-maintained, safe, and attractive community,
and the business community’s need for effective communication and
identification. It is not the purpose or intent of these regulations to favor
commercial messages or speech over non-commercial messages or speech or to
discriminate between types of non-commercial speech or the viewpoints
represented therein. It is the intent of these regulations to promote the
health, safety, general welfare, and desirable rural community image through
the regulation of signs with the following objectives in mind:



            1.    Signs shall demonstrate a high standard of
aesthetic character and encourage the use of monument and individual
letter-style signs;



            2.   Permit large enough copy/graphic area to
effectively convey the intended message but not so large as to unduly
distract the reader and insist on lettering large enough to be easily read to
encourage simple, uncluttered messages;



            3.   Signs shall be proportioned to the size of,
and architecturally compatible with, the structures and other signs on the
premises;



            4.   Permanent signs shall only advertise
on-premise businesses, services, facilities, and the like;



            5.   Allow temporary business signs for grand
openings and occasional sales events; allow temporary signs to advise the
public of the seasonal sale of agricultural and horticultural products in
keeping with the city’s rural image; and to allow temporary directional
signs permitting the public to more easily locate land conservation
developments which enhance the city’s rural image, without creating
continuous visual clutter or traffic hazards along streets or at
intersections; and



            6.   Signs shall be properly maintained.



            7.   Dynamic signs that distract drivers, cyclists
and pedestrians shall not be permitted. Studies conducted by public and
private agencies have identified that dynamic signs, including multi-vision
signs, electronic signs and video displays can be highly distracting to
drivers, pedestrians, and cyclists and that distraction is a significant
underlying cause of traffic accidents. With respect to electronic signs,
including video display signs, the City finds that they are highly visible
from long distances and at very wide viewing angles both day and night and
are designed to catch the eye of persons in their vicinity and hold it for
extended periods of time. If left uncontrolled, electronic signs, including
video display signs, constitute a serious traffic safety threat. Studies
conducted by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), Research Review of
Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and
Distraction, September 11, 2001, and The Role of Driver Inattention in
Crashes: New Statistics from 1995; the University of North Carolina Highway
Safety Research Center, Distractions in Everyday Driving, May 2003 and The
Role of Driver Distraction in Traffic Crashes, May 2001; the Wisconsin
Department of Transportation, Synthesis Report of Electronic Billboards and
Highway Safety, June 10, 2003; the Municipal Research and Services Center of
Washington, Sign Control Provisions, Jan. 2006; the Veridan Group, Video
Signs in Seattle, Gerald Wachtel, May 2001, reveal that electronic signs are
highly distracting to drivers and that driver distraction continues to be a
significant underlying cause of traffic accidents.



      (2)   Findings.  The City of Lake Elmo hereby finds that
regulation of the construction type, location, size, and maintenance of signs
is necessary to accomplish the above referenced objectives, because:



         (a)   The presence of permanent and temporary signage
affects the rural image of the City of Lake Elmo;



         (b)   Properly regulated signage can create an
atmosphere of prosperity, stimulate commercial activity, and consequently,
lead to increased employment and a healthier tax base;



         (c)   The safety of motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians
can be threatened by signage that interferes with necessary sight-distances
and/or unduly diverts the attention of such persons;



         (d)   Signs that are too bright, overly illuminated,
flash, blink, scroll, twirl, change messages or color, or imitate movement,
including video displays, can distract drivers, cyclists and pedestrians and
impact traffic safety.



   (B)   Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or
phrase in §§ 151.115 through 151.119 are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the
sign ordinance . The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted
the Sign Ordinance in each section, subsection, sentence, or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.



(Ord. 08-015, passed 7-21-2009)



§ 151.116  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Permit required.  No sign shall be erected, altered,
reconstructed, maintained or moved in the city without first securing a
permit from the city. The content of the message or speech displayed on the
sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or
deny a sign permit.



      (1)   Permanent signs. To apply for a permanent sign permit, a
complete application shall be submitted to the City containing the following:



         (a)   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of
the sign, and lot;



         (b)   The address at which the sign(s) are to be erected;



         (c)   The legal description of the property on which the
sign(s) are to be erected and the street on which they are to front;



         (d)   A complete set of scaled plans showing the sign
dimensions, area, height, ground elevations, applicable setbacks, and other
details to fully and clearly represent the safe construction and placement of
the proposed signs);



         (e)   Type of sign(s) being requested (i.e. wall sign,
monument sign, and the like);



         (f)   The permit fee; and



         (g)   The following if applicable:



            1.   Written authorization from the property owner
upon who’s land the sign is to be erected;



            2.   A permit from either MnDOT or Washington
County if the proposed sign is along a state highway or county road;



            3.   A sign plan showing signs for all businesses
if the sign is located on a building with more than one business;



            4.   Photographs of the building face and the
building faces of both adjacent buildings if the sign is being placed on an
existing structure; and



            5.   If replacing a historical sign, pictorial
proof or other information that the sign is of historical significance or is
a reproduction of a historic sign.



      (2)   Temporary signs. To apply for a permit to allow a
temporary sign, a complete application shall be submitted to the city
containing the following:



         (a)   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of
the sign, and lot;



         (b)   The address at which the sign(s) are to be erected;



         (c)   A generalized plan set showing the sign dimensions
and height, and a notation of the materials to be used;



         (d)   A scaled site plan which clearly represents the
placement of the proposed sign(s) on the applicable property;



         (e)   The proposed time frame(s) over which the sign(s)
will be posted;



         (f)   The permit fee; and



         (g)   The following if applicable:



            1.   Written authorization from the property owner
upon who’s land the sign is to be erected; and



            2.   A permit from either MnDOT or Washington
County if the proposed sign is along a state highway or county road.



      (3)   Temporary sign renewal. A temporary sign permit issued
by the city may be renewed provided the sign design, size, location, or other
previously approved details are not proposed to change.  A sign renewal
application shall include the following:



         (a)   Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of
the sign, and lot;



         (b)   The address at which the sign(s) are to be erected;



         (c)   The date of issuance of the permit being renewed;



         (d)   The proposed time frame(s)over which the sign(s)
will be posted;



         (e)   Written authorization from the property owner upon
who’s land the sign is to be erected (if applicable); and



         (f)   The permit renewal fee.



      (4)   Review.  The planning department shall approve or deny
complete sign permit applications upon receipt of a complete application. If
the permit is denied, the planning department will send a written notice of
denial to the applicant. The written notice will indicate the reason(s) for
denial and a description of the applicant’s appeal rights.



   (B)   Exemptions.  The following signs shall not require a permit,
but shall still comply with all provisions of this subchapter or any other
law or ordinance regulating signs.



      (1)   The changing of the display surface on a previously
approved sign.



      (2)   Signs 6 square feet or less in size, per surface if
double sided.



      (3)   Window signage that does not cover more than 1/3 of the
total area of the window in which the sign is displayed.



      (4)   Governmental signage.



   (C)   Fees.  The fee for a sign permit is established yearly in the
city’s adopted fee schedule as indicated in § 11.02.



   (D)   Computations.   



      (1)   Sign area measurement.  The area of a sign shall be
computed by means of the smallest circle, rectangle or triangle that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other
display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the building
facade against which it is placed. When a sign has two back-to-back sign
faces containing sign copy, the sign area for both faces are counted toward
the total allowed sign area. Poles, bases, and other supports shall not be
included in the sign area calculation.



Figure 1:  Sign Area Measurement







 



      (2)  Sign height measurement.  The height of the sign shall be
computed as the vertical distance measured from the average grade at the base
of the sign to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.



Figure 2: Sign Height Measurement







 



      (3)  Total sign area calculation. The total square footage of
all sign surfaces shall be computed by adding together the sign areas of all
signs on a property.



Figure 3: Total Sign Area Measurement Example







 



   (E)  Construction, maintenance and repairs.



      (1)   The construction of all signs, unless otherwise stated
herein, shall be in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Sign Code
published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 1997
Edition, as may be amended, which is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part of this subchapter.



      (2)   All signs and structures shall be properly maintained
and shall be constructed of sufficiently permanent material so that they
shall not succumb to deterioration from weathering.



      (3)   Any existing sign or sign structure which is rotted,
unsafe, deteriorated, defaced, or otherwise altered, shall be repainted,
repaired, replaced, or removed if repair is not feasible. Sign maintenance
shall be the responsibility of the underlying fee owner.



   (F)   Abatement.  If the city finds that any sign has been erected
without the necessary approvals or any sign is being maintained in violation
of any zoning provision, the city may give written notice of such violation
to the installer of the sign; to the permit holder; and/or to the owner,
lessee or manager of the property. If after receiving said notice such person
fails to remove or alter the sign so as to comply with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance, the sign shall be deemed to be a nuisance and may be abated
by the city under M.S. Ch. 429. The cost of such abatement, including
administrative expenses and reasonable attorneys’ fees, may be levied as a
special assessment against the property upon which the sign is located.



(Ord. 08-015, passed 7-21-2009)



§ 151.117  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Abandoned signs.  Abandoned signs shall be removed.



   (B)   Building identification.  A building address, date of
construction, commemorative tablet, and the like; shall not count towards the
overall permitted signage on a building or parcel. All forms of building
identification, except for the building address, shall be cut into a masonry
surface or be constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.



   (C)   Building official review.  No sign shall be attached to or be
allowed to hang from any building until all necessary wall and roof
attachments have been approved by the City Building Official.



   (D)   Changeable copy signs.  A changeable copy sign, such as a
reader board, may he integrated into an allowable sign subject to the
following restrictions:



      (1)   The message conveyed by the sign face shall not blink,
flash, scroll or be so animated as to be deemed a distraction to passing
motorists;



      (2)   Copy on the sign shall not change more than once per day
on average (except for time, temperature, and price information which must
change when necessary for accuracy);



      (3)   Characters and backgrounds depicted on a changeable copy
sign shall not use florescent coloring; and



      (4)   All changeable copy sign faces shall be limited to a
maximum of 25 square feet in sign area, or the maximum size of the type of
sign on which the face is placed, whichever is less.



   (E)   Flags.  No more than 3 flags may be displayed on any given
parcel. Individual flags shall not exceed 50 square feet in size per surface.



   (F)   Illumination.



      (1)   Illumination of signs shall comply with Chapter 150 code
requirements governing lighting, glare control, and exterior lighting
standards.



      (2)   Indirect illumination for signs shall be so constructed
and maintained that the source of light (i.e. the bulb; not the fixture) is
not visible from the public right-of-way or residential property.



      (3)   Back-lit awnings are prohibited.



   (G)   Ingress or egress. No sign or structure shall be erected or
maintained if it prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window, or
fire escape. No sign or sign structure shall be attached to a standpipe or
fire escape.



   (H)   Landscaping.  Sign owners shall be required to maintain the
appearance of the ground around all signs detached from buildings and to
landscape where possible.



   (I)   Master sign program.  A master sign program shall be reviewed
and approved for all multi-tenant commercial buildings and for all business
park development to coordinate all signage for current and future tenants.
The master sign program shall be reviewed as a permanent sign permit, but
shall only authorize the general locations and sizes of signs to be erected
within a development or on a multi-tenant building. Individual permanent sign
permits shall still be needed for the placement of permanent signs in
accordance with an approved master sign program. Master sign programs shall
be subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   A Master sign program shall include a to-scale site plan
which identifies the overall sign types, sizes, and locations for all
proposed signage on the site(s). The site plan shall not contain the names of
any current or future tenants or occupants of the center or overall
development;



      (2)   The master sign program shall include a calculation of
allowable sign square footage for the site(s) based on applicable zoning
requirements and lot characteristics;



      (3)   The master sign program shall include square footage
calculations for individual signs proposed for the site(s), along with a
total sign square footage area calculation;



      (4)   All signs within a master sign program shall be visually
consistent in location, design, and scale; and



      (5)   The master sign program may be reviewed concurrently
with, a separate permanent sign permit for the individual sign(s) identified
in the master sign program. The separate permanent sign permit shall include
all information required by § 151.116(A)(1), and may only be approved if the
master sign program is approved.



   (J)   Multi-tenant buildings.



      (1)   Multi-tenant buildings are herein considered a single
commercial establishment, and shall be limited to 1 freestanding sign amongst
all planned/allowed signage subject to the following requirements:



         (a)   If the multi-tenant commercial building has a
floor area of 40,000 square feet or less, the sign shall not exceed 40 square
feet (per side) and shall not exceed 8 feet in height;



         (b)   If a multiple tenant commercial building has a
floor area greater than 40,000 square feet but less than 100,000 square feet,
the sign shall not exceed 75 square feet (per side) and shall not exceed 9
feet in height; and



         (c)   If a multiple tenant commercial building has a
floor area of greater than 100,000 square feet, the sign shall not exceed 120
square feet (per side) and shall not exceed 15 feet in height.



      (2)   Where a building, group of attached buildings on the
same block, or center contains more than one business, the allowable sign
area for any single business may be its portion of the gross square footage
of the building or center applied as a percentage to the allowable sign area
of the entire building or center, subject to size limitations for specific
signs within an approved master sign program.



   (K)   Neighborhood identification signs.  Independent of the total
allowable sign area for individual residences within a residential zoning
district, 2 ground signs for a unified residential area with 6 or more lots
may be allowed consistent with the following provisions:



      (1)   New subdivisions:



         (a)   Neighborhood identification sign(s) shall be
approved as a component of a preliminary and final plat to be included as
part of a new subdivision;



         (b)   Each sign shall be single sided, not exceed a
total of 24 square feet in sign area, and not exceed a total of 48 square
feet inclusive of poles, bases, and other supports;



         (c)   Signs are to be located on outlots of sufficient
size and area to accommodate them or within a dedicated permanent sign
easement. A homeowners or neighborhood association is required for the area
identified by the signs which shall own and be responsible for the upkeep,
perpetual maintenance, taxes, insurance, utilities, and other costs
associated with the sign(s) and their property. The association rules or
by-laws shall specify how the aforementioned sign responsibilities will be
delegated and paid for. City staff shall review the proposed bylaws to ensure
that they specify the aforementioned responsibilities;



         (d)   Outlots or easements for signs are to be
considered and planned for at the time of preliminary plat application and
shall be included in the final plat. A developers agreement shall specify the
designated use of the outlot or easements, its ownership, and the respective
home owners association responsibilities regarding the proposed improvements;



         (e)   Only indirect lighting of neighborhood
identification may be approved. The electric costs and maintenance of such
lighting shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association or
neighborhood association of the area identified by the sign(s) and shall be
clearly noted in the association’s rules or bylaws;



         (f)   The area around the sign is to be landscaped and
maintained in such a manner to accent and enhance the sign while remaining
sensitive to the natural features of the site. Detailed site and landscape
plans shall be included with each sign permit application and shall be
subject to review by the Planning Commission and City Council at the time of
preliminary plat;



         (g)   The design and construction of neighborhood area
identification signs shall be done with the highest quality materials and
workmanship to keep maintenance and upkeep costs to a minimum and to minimize
the potential for vandalism. Neighborhood area identification signs are to be
aesthetically pleasing when designed and constructed. The signs shall be
compatible with nearby or potential homes and other structures in the area.
Detailed construction plans and a materials list shall be included with the
preliminary plat application; and



         (h)   The city reserves the right to require the
removal, at the owner’s expense, of any sign when the requirements of this
section and this subchapter are not completely followed and adhered to or if
the sign is not properly maintained or falls into a state of disrepair. The
city shall not have any obligation or liability to replace any sign or nearby
landscaping when removed by the city.



      (2)   Existing unified residential areas: A neighborhood
identification sign may be allowed by conditional use permit for existing
unified residential areas. If no outlots or easements were originally
designated for signs, the plat may be amended to provide for such a proposal
and shall meet the same criteria and requirements as set forth for new
subdivisions.



   (L)   Non-commercial speech signs. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this subchapter, all signs of any size containing
non-commercial speech may be posted from August 1 in any general election
year until 10 days following the general election and 13 weeks prior to any
special election until 10 days following the special election.



   (M)   Private on-premises directional signs.  Signs located on,
above or beside entrances or exits to buildings or driveways which direct
pedestrians or vehicles (e.g. “employees entrance,” “exit only,’‘
“rest rooms,” and the like) shall not count towards the overall permitted
signage on a site provided such signs are no more than 4 square feet in area.



   (N)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all
zoning districts.



      (1)   Signs obstructing vision. Any sign which obstructs the
vision of drivers or pedestrians or detracts from the visibility of any
official traffic-control device. This includes indoor signs that are visible
from public streets.



      (2)   Unofficial traffic signs or signals. Any sign which
contains or imitates an official traffic sign or signal, except for private,
on-premises directional signs which do not interfere with traffic flows on
public roads.



      (3)   Off-premises advertising signs. Off-premises advertising
signs except as specifically allowed.



      (4)   Signs with moving parts, moving lighting or animation.
No sign shall display any moving parts, be illuminated with any flashing or
intermittent lights, use changing light intensity, utilize spotlights giving
off an intermittent or rotating beam existing as a collection or
concentration of rays of light (including but not limited to revolving
beacons, beamed lights, or similar devices), or be animated. The only
exceptions to this provision include allowable changeable copy signs;
barbershop poles; and static time, temperature, and price information
changing only when necessary (which shall be allowed provided the message
depicted is reasonably accurate).



      (5)   Roof signs.



      (6)   Banners, pennants, ribbons, streamers.  No sign which
contains or consists of banners, pennants, ribbons, streamers, string of
light bulbs, spinners, or similar devices; except when used for
non-commercial purposes, as a governmental sign, or as part of an approved
master sign program or special event temporary sign permit.



      (7)   Portable signs. Including but not limited to signs with
wheels removed, attached temporarily or permanently to the ground, structure
or other signs, mounted on a vehicle for advertising purposes, parked and
visible from the public right-of-way, hot air or gas filled balloons or
semitruck umbrellas used for advertising. This prohibition shall not include
business vehicle identification signs when the vehicle is being used for the
normal day-to-day operations of a permitted business.



      (8)   Signs supported by a guy wire.



      (9)   Billboards.



      (10)   Electronic variable message signs.



      (11)   Signs on natural surfaces. No sign shall be painted,
attached or in any other manner affixed to trees, rocks, or similar naturally
occurring surfaces within the City of Lake Elmo. This shall not prohibit the
use of natural building materials (e.g. boulders) in the construction of a
legally permitted sign.



      (12)   Snipe signs.



   (O)   Public lands and rights-of-way. No signs other than
governmental signs shall be erected or temporarily placed within any street
right-of-way or upon public lands or easements or rights-of-ways without
Council approval.



   (P)   Regulations for specific sign types.



      (1)   Wall signs.



         (a)   A wall sign shall be located on the outermost wall
of any principal building but shall not project more than 16 inches from the
wall to which the sign is to be affixed.



         (b)   A wall sign shall not project higher than the
parapet line of the wall to which the sign is to be affixed.



         (c)   Wall signs authorized by a master sign program
shall not exceed 25 square feet per business, and all signs shall be visually
consistent in location, design, and scale.



         (d)   Wall signs may be placed on not more than three
walls of rectangular shaped structures or not more than 75% of the major
walls on non-rectangular shaped buildings.



      (2)   Mural sign.



         (a)   Mural signs shall not be limited in size, but any
commercial or noncommercial language incorporated into the mural sign shall
be limited in size by the restrictions established for the applicable zoning
district.



         (b)   In addition to the standard conditional use
criteria in the zoning code, mural signs shall also be subject to the
following:



            1.   The location for the proposed mural sign
shall be viewable by the public and be accessible;



            2.   The scale and suitability of the mural sign
shall be appropriate in the context of the surrounding properties;



            3.   The artist(s) commissioned to complete the
mural must provide documentation of demonstrated craftsmanship on similar
projects:



            4.   The applicant shall provide sureties to the
city guaranteeing completion of the project within the proposed timeframe;



            5.   The applicant shall demonstrate that the
necessary funds are available for the proposed project; and



            6.   The applicant must be able to show the final
mural will last a minimum of 5 years and be reasonably resistant to vandalism
and weather.



      (3)   Projecting, awning, and canopy signs.



         (a)   Projecting signs and awning signs shall be located
on street level.



         (b)   If lighted, projecting, awning, and canopy signs
shall use indirect illumination.



         (c)   Awning or canopy signs shall not project higher
than the top of the awning or canopy or below the awning or canopy.



         (d)   Clearance. The bottom of a projecting sign or
awning shall be a minimum of 8 feet above the ground surface when projecting
over a private or public walkway.



      (4)   Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall not be
erected or maintained any closer than 3 feet to any building.



   (Q)   Separation angle. So as not to create a double exposure or
increase sign size limitations, there shall be a maximum separation angle of
45 degrees for signs which are back to back. In all residential districts,
double-faced signs shall be parallel.



   (R)   Signs needing electricity. Signs needing electricity shall be
subject to all applicable electrical codes as may be amended. Overhead wiring
for such signs is prohibited.



   (S)   Special sign districts. All general sign regulations shall
apply to signs within each of the special sign districts except as
specifically noted herein.



      (1)   Old Village.



         (a)   Boundary. The boundary of the Old Village Sign
District is depicted on the city’s official sign district map.
Modifications to the district boundary may be completed using the zoning map
amendment process.



         (b)   Illumination. Indirect illumination or reverse lit
letters shall be the permitted techniques for lighting all signs within the
Old Village Sign District. Other forms of direct illumination are prohibited.



         (c)   Wall signs.



            1.   Wall signs in the Old Village Sign District
shall not project higher than the parapet line of the wall to which the sign
is to be affixed or 15 feet as measured from the base of the building wall to
which the sign is affixed, whichever is lower.



            2.   Wall signs in the Old Village Sign District
authorized by a master sign program shall not exceed 20 square feet per
business, and all signs shall be visually consistent in location, design, and
scale.



         (d)   Freestanding signs.



            1.   The area of a freestanding sign in the Old
Village Sign District shall not exceed 30 square feet.



            2.   Freestanding signs in the Old Village Sign
District shall not project higher than 6 feet, as measured from the average
grade at the base of the sign or grade of the nearest roadway, whichever is
lower.



      (2)   Agricultural Sales District.



         (a)   Boundary. The Agricultural Sales District shall
include all properties zoned agricultural or rural residential.



         (b)   On-premises sign(s). Independent of the total
allowable sign area for an individual property within the agricultural sales
district, one or more additional on-premises signs may be erected on a
property in conjunction with an operating agricultural sales business subject
to the following requirements and restrictions:



            1.   Agricultural sales businesses utilizing less
than 10 acres of land specifically for the growing of agricultural crops for
the business are allowed 1 on-premises sign not to exceed 32 gross square
feet of advertising surface;



            2.   Agricultural sales businesses utilizing more
than 10 acres of land but less than 40 acres of land specifically for the
growing of agricultural crops for the business are allowed 1 or 2 on-premises
signs not to exceed 48 gross square feet of advertising surface (with no sign
surface exceeding 32 square feet in size);



            3.   Agricultural sales businesses utilizing more
than 40 acres of land specifically for the growing of agricultural crops for
the business are allowed 1 , 2 or 3 on-premises signs not to exceed 64 gross
square feet of advertising surface (with no sign surface exceeding 32 square
feet in size);



            4.   Sign(s) shall be in the form of an allowable
sign type in the underlying zoning district;



            5.   No dimension of any sign shall exceed 15 feet
exclusive of supporting structures; and



            6.   Any illuminated sign shall be illuminated
only during those hours when business is open to the public for conducting
business.



         (c)   Temporary off-premises sign(s). Independent of the
total allowable sign area for an individual property anywhere within the
city, a temporary off-premises sign may be erected on a property in
conjunction with an operating agricultural sales business subject to the
following requirements and restrictions.



            1.   Maximum number.  Every agricultural sales
business shall have no more than 2 off-premises signs at any given time to
direct the public to the location of the business.



            2.   Time frame of use. Temporary off-premises
signs may be erected for 45-day time periods no more than 4 times in any
given calendar year. The required temporary sign permit shall stipulate the
range of dates for each of the 4 allowable time periods in any given calendar
year.



            3.   Size and height. An off-site agricultural
sales advertising sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not
be taller than 10 feet in height.



            4.   Setbacks. Off-premises signs shall be a
minimum of 25 feet from all side property lines, and a minimum of 50 feet
from other off-premises advertising signs.



            5.   Permission required. Applicants for
off-premises signs shall acquire permission from the property owner upon
whose land the sign is to be erected.



      (3)   I-94 District.



         (a)   Boundary. The I-94 district shall include parcels
within the BP, GB, HB. CB, and LB zoning districts which meet one of the
following criteria:



            1.   The property is a buildable lot located to
the south of Hudson Boulevard and to the north of Interstate 94; or



            2.   The property’s southern boarder abuts
Hudson Boulevard, and is not directly north, either wholly or partially, of a
developable parcel lying between Hudson Boulevard and Interstate 94.



         (b)   Permits. Signs in the I-94 District may be erected
in conformance with sign regulations governing the underlying zoning district
without additional approvals. Signs proposed to conform to the special
standards established for the I-94 District shall only be authorized through
approval of an interim use permit.



         (c)   Illumination. All forms of illumination which
conform to the general illumination standards for all signs shall be the
permitted within the I-94 Sign District.



         (d)   Maximum total square footage of all sign
surfaces.  The maximum total square footage of all sign surfaces in the I-94
district shall be dictated by the maximum sign sizes for allowable sign types.



         (e)   Wall signs. The least restrictive of the following
may be used to determine the allowable area for wall signs in the I-94
District:



            1.   The total area of all wall signs on any wall
shall not exceed 10% of the area of the wall with a maximum allowable area of
80 square feet; or



            2.   The total area of all wall signs on any wall
shall not exceed 5% of the area of the wall with a maximum allowable area of
300 square feet.



         (f)   Freestanding signs. In lieu of a freestanding sign
meeting underlying zoning requirements, a building site within the I-94
District may have one freestanding sign within 50 feet of the property line
nearest the interstate provided the sign does not exceed 150 square feet per
side (300 square feet total) or 30 feet in height. The base of such a sign
shall be at least 75% of the width of the sign and be constructed of
materials that match those used on the building for which the sign is
installed.



         (g)   Window signs.  Window signs in the I-94 district
shall not cover more than 1/3 of the window area.



         (h)   Awning, canopy, and projecting signs.  One
awning, canopy or projecting sign, in conformance with the underlying zoning
requirements for height, location, and maximum size may also be erected for
each business on a building site in the I-94 District.



   (T)   Substitution clause.  The owner of any sign which is
otherwise allowed by this subchapter may substitute non-commercial speech
signs in lieu of any other commercial speech sign or other non-commercial
speech sign. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent
favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any
particular noncommercial speech over any other noncommercial speech. This
provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.



   (U)   Temporary signs.



      (1)   Special events. Temporary signs may be allowed upon
issuance of a permit for on-site advertising of special events such as
openings and closings, change in management, sales events, or other special
occasions. No more than 4 temporary sign permits may be issued in any
calendar year for a given destination, and each temporary sign permit shall
run for 15 days. Temporary signs for special events shall be subject to the
following regulations:



         (a)   Only 1 on-premises temporary sign shall be allowed
per business or event;



         (b)   Temporary signs shall be in the form, of an
allowable sign type in the underlying zoning district; and



         (c)   Temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and shall not be taller than 10 feet in height.



      (2)   Residential development advertising signs. Independent
of the total allowable sign area for individual properties or residences
within a residential zoning district, one or more additional ground signs may
be erected within a newly established unified residential area development
subject to the following:



         (a)   Minimum development size.



            1.   Projects of less than 25 acres which create
10 or more dwelling units are allowed 1 on-premises ground sign not to exceed
100 square feet of advertising surface;



            2.   Projects of 26 through 50 acres which create
10 or more dwelling units are allowed 1 or 2 on-premises ground signs not to
exceed 200 aggregate square feet of advertising surface on the project site;
and



            3.   Projects over 50 acres which create ten or
more dwelling units are allowed 1, 2, or 3 on-premises ground signs not to
exceed 200 aggregate square feet of advertising surface on the project site.



         (b)   Restrictions.



            1.   No dimension shall exceed 25 feet exclusive
of supporting structures.



            2.   The sign shall not remain once 90% of the
lots in the development have been issued building permits.



            3.   The permit for the sign must be renewed
annually by the Council.



            4.   Only indirect illumination is permitted and
shall only occur during those hours when an on-site sales office or model
home is open for conducting business.



      (3)   Temporary off-premises signs.  Temporary off-premises
signs may be erected if all of the following criteria are met:



         (a)   The destination to which the off-premises sign is
advertising is a property for sale;



         (b)   An agent must be present at the destination
property for sale, and the property must be open for viewing;



         (c)   The sign must be located on private property, and
permission must have been obtained from the private property owner to erect
the temporary sign;



         (d)   The temporary off-premises sign shall not exceed 6
square feet in size; and



         (e)   The temporary off-premises sign shall not cause
the total square feet of signage on a property to exceed the allowed maximum
in the underlying zoning district.



   (V)   Warning signs.  Warning signs which do not exceed the minimum
statutory requirements for size and number may be posted, and shall not count
towards the overall permitted signage on a given property. Increases in
either size or number over minimum statutory requirements shall count against
the overall permitted signage on a given property unless authorized by
conditional use permit which finds sufficient evidence that larger or more
frequent signage is necessary to provide the intended warning.



(Ord. 08-015, passed 7-21-2009)



§ 151.118  SPECIFIC REGULATIONS BY ZONING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Sign setbacks.  Signs shall conform to the set back
regulations listed in Table 1 for the zoning district in which the signs are
located except as may be specifically exempted or restricted in §§ 151.117
and 151.118.



 




Table 1: SETBACKS BY ZONING DISTRICT [1]





 

Base Zoning Districts




A

 

RR

 

R1

 

R2

 

R3

 

R4

 

RE

 

OP

 

GB

 

HB

 

CB

 

LB

 

BP [2]

 

PF




Front lot line

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

1

 

5



Side lot line
 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5



Rear lot line
 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

10

 

5



Vehicular access
 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

15

 

5



[1]: Awning/canopy signs, mural signs, projecting signs, wall signs, or
window signs proposed to be located on a building legally non-conforming to
setback requirements shall be permitted without a variance provided all other
zoning code provisions are met.

[2]: Signs within business parks shall also adhere to the requirements of a
master sign program approved by the City Council in conjunction with the
business park establishment.




 



   (B)  Allowable sign area.  The maximum allowable sign area for an
individual sign and for total site signage is listed in Table 2 by zoning
district. These maximums shall apply except as may be specifically exempted
or restricted in §§ 151.117 and 151.118.



 


Table 2:  ALLOWABLE SIGN AREA BY ZONING DISTRICT





 
Maximum sign area in square feet (per surface) by sign type [1]
 




District(s)
 
Awning/ Canopy Sign
 
Ground Sign [2]
 
Monument Sign[2]
 
Mural Sign
 
Pole Sign[2]
 
Projecting Sign
 
Wall Sign
 
Window Sign
 

Maximum total square footage of all sign surfaces



A, RR, R1, R2, RE, OP[3]
 


 

6

 


 

C

 

6

 


 

6

 

6

 

12 square feet



R3 & R4 [3]
 


 

12

 


 

C

 

12

 


 

12

 

12

 

24 square feet




 



 


Table 2:  ALLOWABLE SIGN AREA BY ZONING DISTRICT





 
Maximum sign area in square feet (per surface) by sign type [1]
 




District(s)
 
Awning/ Canopy Sign
 
Ground Sign [2]
 
Monument Sign[2]
 
Mural Sign
 
Pole Sign[2]
 
Projecting Sign
 
Wall Sign
 
Window Sign
 

Maximum total square footage of all sign surfaces



GB, HB, CB, LB, BP, & PF
 

[4]

 

30

 

45

 

C

 

30

 

6

 

[5]

 

No max

 
1.0 square foot per lineal foot of building parallel or substantially
parallel to public road frontage (excluding alleys). [6]


[1]:   Sign types with empty cells are prohibited in the applicable zoning
district(s). Sign types with a maximum sign area of “C” shall require a
conditional use permit.

[2]:   Ground, monument, or pole signs, where permitted, shall be limited
to 1 per commercial establishment.

[3]:   All sign types in residential districts shall have no more than 2
surfaces.

[4]:   The gross surface of an awning or canopy sign shall not exceed 30%
of the gross surface area of the smallest face of the awning or canopy of
which the sign is to be affixed.

[5]:   On any wall parallel or substantially parallel to a public roadway,
the gross surface area of a wall sign shall not exceed 0.75 square feet for
each lineal foot of building facing the applicable roadway. For walls not
facing a public roadway, the maximum wall sign size shall be 12 square feet.

[6]:   Open sales lots or other approved uses on lots without a building
shall be limited to 30 square feet of total sign surfaces.



 



   (C)   Freestanding sign height.  The maximum allowable sign height
for a freestanding sign is listed in Table 3 by zoning district. These
maximums shall apply except as may be specifically exempted or restricted in
§§ 151.117 and 151.118.



 

Table 3: ALLOWABLE FREESTANDING SIGN HEIGHT IN FEET BY ZONING DISTRICT


 

Base Zoning Districts




Residential Districts

 

Business Districts




A

 

RR

 

R1

 

R2

 

R3

 

R4

 

RE

 

OP

 

GB

 

HB

 

CB

 

LB

 

BP

 

PF



Allowable height in feet
 

5

 

5

 

5

 

5

 

8

 

8

 

5

 

5

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20

 

20




 



(Ord. 08-015, passed 7-21-2009)



§ 151.119  SIGN VARIANCES.



   (A)   Variances from sign provisions shall be administered in
accordance with the zoning code, and shall be subject to the following
additional requirements:



      (1)   The sign(s) shall be compatible with the character of
the adjacent buildings and with the character of the adjacent neighborhood;



      (2)   The sign(s) shall have good scale and proportion in the
visual relationship to buildings and adjacent areas;



      (3)   The material, size, color, lettering, location, and
arrangement of the sign(s) is an integral part of the site and building
design; and/or



   (B)   The colors, materials, and lighting of the sign(s) are
restrained and harmonious, as interpreted by the City Planner.



(Ord. 08-015, passed, 7-21-2009)



MANUFACTURED HOME PARK



§ 151.135  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of §§ 151.135et seq. is to promote health, safety, order,
convenience, and general welfare by enforcing minimum standards for
manufactured home parks, the location and use of the homes and the design,
construction, alteration, and arrangement of homes on the lots, authorizing
the inspection of manufactured home parks, and fixing penalties for
violations.



(1997 Code, § 545.01)



§ 151.136  SCOPE.



   (A)   Lot with occupied dwelling.  No person shall park or occupy a
manufactured home on the premises of a lot with any occupied dwelling.



   (B)   Requirements.  No person shall permit anyone to live or
reside temporarily or permanently on land owned or rented by the person
except in a structure meeting the requirements of the building and zoning
ordinances of this city.



   (C)   Exemptions.



      (1)   The provisions of §§ 151.135et seq. shall not prohibit
temporary use of a manufactured home as a single-family residence, during a
period not to exceed 10 months, while the family occupying the manufactured
home is constructing a residence on the lot on which the manufactured home is
located.  The owner of the lot shall first secure a building permit for the
permanent residence on the lot and a permit for temporary use of a
manufactured home as provided in §§ 151.135et seq.  The Building Official
may issue a permit for temporary use of a manufactured home for a period not
to exceed 10 months from the date of issuing of the permit for the permanent
residence, provided the owner shall enter into an agreement with the city, in
a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, agreeing to remove the manufactured
home from the lot no later than 10 months from the date of issuance of the
permit for the permanent home.  The agreement shall provide that, in the
event the owner fails to remove the manufactured home in accordance with the
provisions of owner's permit, the city may cause the manufactured home to be
removed and stored in a suitable place at the owner's expense.  The
owner’s performance of the agreement shall be secured by a bond or a cash
deposit filed with the Administrator in the amount of $1,000.



      (2)   Nothing in §§ 151.135 et seq. shall prohibit the use
of manufactured homes as provided in the zoning code and § 200.07, Subd.
(4)(E).



(1997 Code, § 545.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.137  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined within §§ 151.135 et seq., common
definitions, words, and phrases used in §§ 151.135 et seq. shall be
interpreted so as to give them the same meaning throughout this code, and are
found in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 545.03)



§ 151.138  PERMITS.



   No person shall attempt to establish, maintain, or operate a
manufactured home park within the city without first obtaining a permit from
the Council.



(1997 Code, § 545.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.139  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   No permit for a park shall be issued by the Council until and
unless the person requesting the permit shall first apply to the City
Administrator on the form of application to be provided by the Administrator,
and shall submit with the application all information and data specified in
§§ 151.135 et seq.



   (B)   The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant,
and shall include the following:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Location and legal description of the manufactured home
park;



      (3)   Complete engineering plans and specifications of the
proposed park including, but not limited to the following:



         (a)   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;



         (b)   Two foot topography sketch of the land;



         (c)   The number, location, and size of all manufactured
home lots;



         (d)   The location and width of roadways and walkways;



         (e)   The location of water and sewer lines and reset
pipes;



         (f)   Plans and specifications of the water supply and
refuse and sewage disposal facilities;



         (g)   Plans and specifications of all buildings
constructed or to be constructed within the manufactured home park;



         (h)   The location and details of lighting and
electrical systems; and



         (i)   A landscaping plan approved by the city, and that
park ground area and recreation equipment be shown on the landscaping plan,
as provided by state statute and § 151.142.



      (4)   A plan for the warning and sheltering or the safe
evacuation to a safe place of shelter of the residents of the park in times
of severe weather conditions, such as tornadoes, high winds, and floods. 
The shelter or evacuation plan shall be developed with the assistance and
approval of the city and shall be posted at conspicuous locations throughout
the park.  Residents of the park must also be given the option of
constructing a shelter under or near their home, approved by the city and
park owners; and



      (5)   Further information as the Council may request to enable
the Council to determine if the proposed park will comply with the legal
requirements and will ensure the protection of the best interests of the city
and its citizens as to health, welfare, and public safety.  Twenty copies of
the application, and all accompanying plans and specifications, shall be
filed.  The Council shall make investigations of the applicant, the plans,
the site, and any other related subjects as it may deem necessary and
proper.  For purposes of this investigation, the Council may use the
services of regular city offices and employees or the Council may employ the
service of outside consultants and experts as it may choose.  This
application shall be required for all area not yet occupied by manufactured
homes prior to the effective date of this section.



(1997 Code, § 545.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.140  FEES.



   Application fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.



(1997 Code, § 545.06)



§ 151.141  HEARING.



   The Council shall provide for a public hearing before granting a park
permit.  Notice of the hearing shall be made by publication in the official
city newspaper.  Publication shall be made at least 10 days prior to the
date of hearing.  All property owners within 350 feet shall also be notified
by mail.



(1997 Code, § 545.07)



§ 151.142  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   A park shall conform to the following requirements.



   (B)   (1)   Location.  The park shall be located on a
well-drained site properly graded to ensure prompt drainage of surface and
storm waters and to ensure freedom from stagnant pools of water.  Surface
waters shall be disposed of according to a plan approved by the city.  The
park shall be serviced by a central sanitary sewer system and a central water
system approved by the Department of Health of the State of Minnesota, and by
the Council.



      (2)   Lot size.  Individual lots shall be provided consisting
of a minimum of 6,000 square feet each, and shall be at least 60 feet wide,
which size lot allows for a maximum length manufactured home of 55 feet. 
Larger homes will require longer lots to comply with the following division
(B)(3) below, and other requirements of §§ 151.135 et seq.



      (3)   Clearance between homes.  Manufactured homes shall be
placed upon lots so that there shall be at least a 20 foot clearance between
homes and 20 feet between the front of the home and the front lot line and 25
feet between the rear of the home and the rear lot line.



      (4)   Location to public road.  No manufactured home shall be
located within 125 feet of the existing or planned-for edge of the traveled
part of a public road.  Under no conditions shall a home be located closer
than 30 feet to a public road right-of-way line.



      (5)   Internal streets.  Internal private streets within the
park shall have a driving surface no less than 32 feet in width and shall
have unobstructed access to a public street, road, or alley, shall meet city
engineering design standards, and be posted 20 mph speed limit.



      (6)   Walkways.  Walkways shall be no less than 2 feet in
width.



      (7)   Driveways and sidewalks.  All driveways and sidewalks
shall be hard surfaced and shall be no closer than 5 feet from park boundary.



      (8)   Utility building.  Each park shall have the utility
buildings as are required by state law.



      (9)   Landscaping.



         (a)   Parks shall be landscaped as the Council shall
approve and direct in the specifications established in the permit.



         (b)   The landscaping may be ordered by the Council as
appears necessary and proper to cause the appearance of the park to harmonize
with the general appearance of the surrounding neighborhood and to provide
borderline screening if deemed advisable.



      (10)   Electric.  Electrical service shall be provided for
each manufactured home, with service to be at least 110 volt, 100 ampere
capacity.



      (11)   Lot markings.  The limits of each manufactured home
lot shall be clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes, markers,
or other suitable means and the manufactured home lot limits shall be the
same as shown on the accepted plans.



      (12)   Parking.  Each lot shall have parking space for at
least 2 automobiles.



      (13)   Open space.  Public open space shall be provided as
set forth in § 153.16.



      (14)   Lights.  A lighting system for the park grounds
approved by the Council shall be installed and lighting provided from sunset
to sunrise.



      (15)   Hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be installed and
connected as necessary.



      (16)   Foundations.  All dwellings shall be placed on a
permanent foundation or anchored to resist overturning, uplift, and sliding
in compliance with the Minnesota State Building Code.



(1997 Code, § 545.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.143  OFFICE.



   Each park shall have an office for the use of the operator distinctly
marked "office" and the marking shall be illuminated during all hours of
darkness.



(1997 Code, § 545.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.144  CHILD-FREE AREA.



   Each park plan may provide for an area of lots within the park reserved
for residents without minor children, not to exceed 1/3 of the individual
lots.



(1997 Code, § 545.10)



§ 151.145  BUILDING PERMITS.



   A building permit shall be required for each manufactured home brought
into a park and any alterations to a structure in a manufactured home park.



(1997 Code, § 545.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.146  OPERATOR.



   The operator or duly authorized agent shall be in attendance at the
park at all times and shall keep the park in a clean, orderly, sanitary
condition.



(1997 Code, § 545.12)



§ 151.147  VIOLATIONS.



   Failure to comply with any provision or requirement of §§ 151.135 et
seq. or with any provision or requirement imposed upon the park or owner or
operator by the terms of the permit or the terms of any contract agreement or
stipulation entered into or imposed by the Council as part of or in
connection with the permit shall be cause for revocation of the park permit
by the Council after a 10-day mailed notice of violation and time and place
of hearing to the owner and operator and a hearing by the Council. 
Compliance with the terms of §§ 151.135 et seq. shall be a condition
precedent to the issuance of a state license and shall run with the license
so as to be an essential part of the license.  Upon revocation of a permit
by the Council, no further occupancy of the manufactured homes in the park
shall be allowed.  However, the Council may allow a reasonable time for
termination of occupancy.  This section shall apply in all respects to any
violation of provisions previously in effect that continue to control
existing occupied park areas.



(1997 Code, § 545.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.148  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with ordinance.  The Building Inspector is
authorized and directed to make inspections as are necessary to determine
satisfactory compliance with §§ 151.135 et seq., including the power to
enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property for inspections.



   (B)   Registration record.  The Building Inspector, the County
Sheriff, or their duly authorized representatives, shall have the power to
inspect the register containing a record of all residents of the manufactured
home park.



   (C)   Access.  It shall be the duty of the park management to give
the Building Inspector free access to all lots at a reasonable time for the
purpose of inspection.



   (D)   Repairs.  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a
manufactured home park to give the owner of the park or owner's agent or
employee access to any part of the manufactured home park at reasonable times
for the purpose of making repairs or alterations that are necessary to effect
compliance with §§ 151.135 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 545.14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.149  FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Requirements.  New manufactured home parks and expansions to
existing manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by § 153.03(F).



   (B)   Existing parks in flood plain districts.  Manufactured homes
in existing manufactured home parks that are located in flood plain districts
are non-conforming uses and may be replaced only if in compliance with the
following conditions:



      (1)   The manufactured home lies in the flood fringe district;



      (2)   The manufactured home is anchored with tie-downs that
comply with requirements of Minnesota Statutes;



      (3)   The manufactured home owner or renter is notified that
the manufactured home site lies in the flood plain and may be subject to
flooding; and



      (4)   The manufactured home park owner develops a flood
emergency plan consistent with the time available after a flood warning. 
The plan shall be filed with and approved by the Council.



(1997 Code, § 545.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.150  STORM SHELTERS.



   (A)   Manufactured home park owners shall adopt regulations relating
to the use and maintenance of storm shelters.  A copy of the regulations or
any amendments thereto shall be kept on file with the Administrator, the
Civil Defense Director, the Fire Chief, and the Washington County Sheriffs
Department.



   (B)   The regulations shall address the following minimum concerns.



      (1)   Maintenance of shelters.  The regulations shall include
a routine maintenance schedule in order to control vandalism and maintain the
shelters in a sanitary and safe manner.  During the storm season, shelters
shall be checked at least once during each business day by a representative
of the manufactured home park owners.  As used herein, storm season means
the period between April 1 and September 15 of each year.



      (2)   Shelter access map.  An access map illustrating the
most convenient route from an individual manufactured home to a designated
storm shelter shall be disseminated in the following manner.



         (a)   A copy shall be delivered to each manufactured
home owner within the park.



         (b)   A copy shall be included with the park "move-in"
information packets for each new tenant.



         (c)   Copies shall be posted on any manufactured home
park community bulletin board.



         (d)   A copy shall be posted in the club house of the
golf facility at the manufactured home park.



         (e)   A copy shall be available at the manufactured home
park office.



      (3)   Storm shelter drills.  Storm shelter drills shall be
conducted at a reasonable time in the spring of each year prior to the storm
season.  The Lake Elmo Civil Defense Director and the Fire Chief shall be
given 72 hours advance notice of any proposed storm shelter drill.  The park
owner shall include within their regulations relating to storm shelter drills
any recommendations of the Civil Defense Director and/or Fire Chief.



      (4)   Periodic review.  On an annual basis, park owners shall
solicit comments from park residents and the Administrator regarding the
effectiveness of current storm shelter regulations or proposals for changes
to the regulations.



(1997 Code, § 545.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



MANUFACTURED HOME PARK CLOSINGS



§ 151.165  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Based upon the difficulty and expense of relocating
manufactured homes and the availability of manufactured home parks within a
reasonable distance of the city, the Council finds that the public health,
safety, and welfare of city residents will be promoted by adopting
regulations relating to the payment of relocation costs and compensation in
the event of the closing of all or a portion of a manufactured home park.



   (B)   The purpose of the regulation is to define the regulations
which will apply to manufactured home park closings and is adopted pursuant
to the authority granted by M.S. § 327C.095, as it may be amended from time
to time.



(1997 Code, § 550.01)



§ 151.166  NOTICE OF CLOSING.



   At least 9 months prior to the anticipated date for the full or partial
park closing, the park owner shall:



   (A)   Personally serve a copy of the closure statement on at least 1
adult resident of each manufactured home within the manufactured home park;
and



   (B)   Personally serve the City Administrator with a copy of the
closure statement, a current resident list, and a plan for funding the
relocation costs and compensation which will be required as a condition of
closing.



(1997 Code, § 550.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.167  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall forward the closure statement to
the Planning Commission for comment.



   (B)   Upon review by the Planning Commission, the City Administrator
shall schedule a public hearing before the Council preceded by 10-days mailed
notice to people whose names appear on the resident list.



   (C)   Failure to notify all park residents shall not invalidate the
public hearing.



   (D)   At the public hearing, the Council shall review the closure
statement, receive comments, and evaluate the impact of the manufactured home
park closing on the park residents, the city's resources, and its
Comprehensive Plan.



(1997 Code, § 550.04)



§ 151.168  CONDITIONS OF CLOSING.



   As a condition of closing, the park owner shall pay relocation costs to
eligible park residents or the park purchaser shall pay compensation to
eligible park residents as provided subsequently in §§ 151.165 et seq. 
Development and/or building permits shall not be issued for subsequent uses
of the manufactured home park property until the park owner has complied with
the city's development regulations and until the park owner and/or park
purchaser have made arrangements, acceptable to the city, for funding
relocation costs and compensation required by §§ 151.165 et seq.



(1997 Code, § 550.05)



§ 151.169  PARK RESIDENT STATEMENT.



   Within 90 days of receipt of a closure notice, a park resident shall
provide the park owner with a written statement of relocation costs or, in
the alternative, a written statement that the park resident cannot relocate
the park resident's manufactured home to another manufactured home park
within a 25 mile radius and the reasons for the conclusion.



(1997 Code, § 550.06)



§ 151.170  ELECTION TO RECEIVE RELOCATION COSTS.



   (A)   Single section manufactured homes.  If a single section
manufactured home can be relocated to another manufactured home park within a
25 mile radius, the park owner shall pay eligible park residents' relocation
casts as defined in §§ 151.165 et seq., or, an amount equal to $3,500,
whichever is less.



   (B)   Double section manufactured homes.  If a double section
manufactured home can be relocated to another manufactured home park within a
25 mile radius, the park owner shall pay eligible park residents' relocation
costs as defined in §§ 151.165 et seq., or, an amount equal to $5,000,
whichever is less.



   (C)   Relocation payments.  The park owner shall make relocation
payments directly to contractors providing the relocation service, but, upon
proof of payment of the relocation costs by an eligible park resident, shall
reimburse the eligible park resident directly for the relocation costs.  The
park owner shall be entitled to receive adequate documentation of relocation
costs, including costs of proposals, invoices, estimates, and contracts for
relocation services.



   (D)   Maximum relocation payment.  The maximum relocation payment
specified in divisions (A) and (B) above shall be adjusted on January 1 of
each year commencing on 1-1-1992, based upon the change in the consumer price
index, Minneapolis-St. Paul, for all urban consumers (CPI-U) as published in
the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor. 
The amount of the adjustment shall be equal to the percentage of change in
the CPI-U on the date of adjustment over the CPI-U in effect on January 1 of
the preceding year.



(1997 Code, § 550.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.171  ELECTION TO RECEIVE COMPENSATION.



   (A)   If a manufactured home cannot be relocated to another
manufactured home park within a 25 mile radius, an eligible park resident
shall elect 1 of the following options by giving written notice to the park
owner who shall forward the notice to the park purchaser, and the
compensation payment provided for in §§ 151.165 et seq. shall be paid
within 30 days prior to the date of the closing on the sale of the
manufactured home park.



   (B)   (1)   Retaining title.  The eligible park resident may
elect to receive compensation in an amount equal to the average relocation
cost provided to eligible park residents for the relocation of similar
housing, in which event the park purchaser shall pay the compensation and the
eligible park resident shall retain title to the manufactured home and be
responsible for its prompt removal from the manufactured home park; or



      (2)   Title transfer.  The eligible park resident may elect
to receive compensation in an amount equal to the estimated fair market value
of the manufactured home as determined by an independent appraiser
experienced in manufactured home appraisals.  The appraisal shall be made no
earlier than 60 days prior to the closing of the park or its conversion to
another use in order to ensure that the current fair market value of the
eligible park residents' manufactured home is appraised.  The park purchaser
and the eligible park resident shall each pay 1/2 of the cost of the
appraisal.  The park purchaser shall pay the compensation to the eligible
park resident upon transfer of clear title to the manufactured home.



(Ord. 97-45, passed 6-28-1999)



(1997 Code, § 550.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.172  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Vacation of manufactured home from park.  Displaced park
residents cannot be required to vacate the manufactured home park until 60
days after conclusion of the public hearing before the Council.



   (B)   Partial closure.  If there is a partial closure of the
manufactured home park and other lots remain available within the same
manufactured home park, the park owner must allow displaced residents an
opportunity to relocate within the manufactured home park unless the
displaced resident's manufactured home, because of its size, is not
compatible with the available lot.



(1997 Code, § 550.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.173  LIMITATION OF RELOCATION COSTS AND COMPENSATION.



   The total amount of relocation cost and compensation to be paid to
eligible park residents shall not exceed 20% of the estimated market value of
the manufactured home park, as stated in the property tax statement for the
year in which the closure statement is served on the City Administrator.  If
the total of the relocation cost and compensation payable to eligible park
residents exceeds this limitation, the relocation costs and compensation
payable to each eligible park resident shall be decreased proportionately so
that the total of the relocation costs and compensation does not exceed the
limitation stated in this section.



(1997 Code, § 550.10)



Exhibit A: Official Sign District Map







 



(Ord. 08-015 passed 7-21-2009)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



   152.01   Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose



   152.02   General provisions



   152.03   Establishment of zoning districts



   152.04   Floodway District (FW)



   152.05   Flood Fringe District (FF)



   152.06   General Flood Plain District



   152.07   Subdivisions



   152.08   Public utilities, railroads, roads and bridges



   152.09   Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks and
placement of recreational vehicles



   152.10   Administration



   152.11   Nonconforming uses



   152.12   Amendments



 



   152.99   Penalty



   Editor's Note:  A Flood Insurance Rate Map has been published for the
community and the regulatory floodway boundary is shown on this map. A
separate Flood  Boundary and Floodway Map has not been published.



§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.



   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State of Minnesota has,
in M.S. Chapters 103F and 462 delegated the responsibility to local
government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the City of Lake Elmo of Washington County, Minnesota does ordain
as follows.



   (A)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   The flood hazard areas of Lake Elmo, Minnesota, are
subject to periodic inundation which results in potential loss of life, loss
of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures or flood protection
and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.



      (2)   Methods used to analyze flood hazards.  This chapter is
based upon a reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which is consistent
with the standards established by the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources.



      (3)   National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This
chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59
-78, as amended, so as to maintain the community's eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.



   (B)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to
promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize those
losses described in division (A) by provisions contained herein.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)



§ 152.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lands to which chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to
all lands within the jurisdiction of Lake Elmo shown on the official zoning
map and/or the attachments thereto as being located within the boundaries of
the Floodway, Flood Fringe, or General Flood Plain Districts.



   (B)   Establishment of official zoning map. The official zoning map
together with all materials attached thereto is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. The attached material shall
include the Flood Insurance Study for Washington County, Minnesota And
Incorporated Areas and Flood Insurance Rate Map panels therein numbered
27163C0261E, 27163C0262E, 27163C0265E, 27163C0266E, 27163C0267E, 27163C0268E
and 27163C0269E, all dated February 3,2010 and prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The official zoning map shall be on file in the
Offices of the City Administrator.



   (C)   Regulatory flood protection elevation. The regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than 1 foot above the
elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused
by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a
floodway.



   (D)   Interpretation.



      (1)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



      (2)   The boundaries of the zoning districts shall be
determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map. Where
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the
district as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions and there is a formal appeal of the decision of the Zoning
Administrator, the Board of Adjustment shall make the necessary
interpretation. All decisions will be based on elevations on the regional
(100-year) flood profile, the ground elevations that existed on the site at
the time the community adopted its initial floodplain ordinance or on the
date of the first National Flood Insurance Program map showing the area
within the 100-year flood plain if earlier, and other available technical
data. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Board of
Adjustment and to submit technical evidence.



   (E)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by
this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.



   (F)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted
within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.



   (G)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of
this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.



   (H)   Definitions. Unless specifically defined in § 11.01 of this
code, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give
this chapter its most reasonable application.



   (I)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference into division (B) above may include flood plain areas that lie
outside of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of
this chapter. If any of these flood plain land areas are annexed into the
city after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain
lands shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the
date of annexation into the city.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)



§ 152.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Districts.



      (1)   Floodway District. The Floodway District shall include
those areas designated as floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in
§ 152.02(B).



      (2)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District shall
include those areas designated as floodway fringe. The Flood Fringe District
shall include those areas shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as adopted in
§ 152.02(B) as being within Zone AE but being located outside of the
floodway.



      (3)   General Flood Plain District. The General Flood Plain
District shall include those areas designated as Zone A or Zone AE without a
floodway on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in § 152.02(B).



   (B)   Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used
and no structure shall be constructed, located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction
of this chapter. Within the Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Flood Plain
Districts, all uses not listed as permitted uses or conditional uses in §§
152.04, 152.05 and 152.06 that follow, respectively, shall be prohibited. In
addition, a caution is provided here that:



      (1)   New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes
and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general
provisions of this chapter and specifically § 152.09.



      (2)   Modifications, additions, structural alterations, normal
maintenance and repair, or repair after damage to existing nonconforming
structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the
general provisions of this chapter and specifically § 152.11.



      (3)   As-built elevations for elevated or flood proofed
structures must be certified by ground surveys and flood proofing techniques
must be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect as specified in the general provisions of this chapter and
specifically as stated in § 152.10.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)



§ 152.04  FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod
farming, and wild crop harvesting.



      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and
airport landing strips.



      (3)   Private and public recreational uses such as golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose
recreational trails.



      (4)   Residential lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play
areas.



   (B)   Standards for Floodway permitted uses.



      (1)   The use shall have a low flood damage potential.



      (2)   The use shall be permissible in the underlying zoning
district.



      (3)   The use shall not obstruct flood flows or increase flood
elevations and shall not involve structures, fill, obstructions, excavations
or storage of materials or equipment.



   (C)   Conditional Uses.



      (1)   Structures accessory to the uses listed in division (A)
above and the uses listed in this division (C)(1) through (8).



      (2)   Extraction and storage of sand, gravel, and other
materials.



      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves, and water
control structures associated with said uses.



      (4)   Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines,
and pipelines.



      (5)   Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.



      (6)   Placement of fill or construction of fences.



      (7)   Recreational vehicles either on individual lots of
record or in existing or new subdivisions or commercial or condominium type
campgrounds, subject to the exemptions and provisions of § 152.09(C).



      (8)   Structural works for flood control such as levees, dikes
and floodwalls constructed to any height where the intent is to protect
individual structures and levees or dikes where the intent is to protect
agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the
10-year frequency flood event.



   (D)   Standards for Floodway conditional uses.



      (1)   All uses. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill
(including fill for roads and levees), deposit, obstruction, storage of
materials or equipment, or other uses may be allowed as a conditional use
that will cause any increase in the stage of the 100-year or regional flood
or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.



      (2)   All floodway conditional uses shall be subject to the
procedures and standards contained in § 152.10(D).



      (3)   The conditional use shall be permissible in the
underlying zoning district.



      (4)   Fill.



         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil, and all other similar
materials deposited or stored in the flood plain shall be protected from
erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.



         (b)   Dredge spoil sites and sand and gravel operations
shall not be allowed in the floodway unless a long-term site development plan
is submitted which includes an erosion/sedimentation prevention element to
the plan.



         (c)   As an alternative, and consistent with division
(4)(b) immediately above, dredge spoil disposal and sand and gravel
operations may allow temporary, on-site storage of fill or other materials
which would have caused an increase to the stage of the 100-year or regional
flood but only after the governing body has received an appropriate plan
which assures the removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the
flood warning time available. The conditional use permit must be title
registered with the property in the Office of the County Recorder.



      (5)   Accessory structures.



         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be designed for
human habitation.



         (b)   Accessory structures, if permitted, shall be
constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of flood waters:



            1.   Whenever possible, structures shall be
constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood
flow; and



            2.   So far as practicable, structures shall be
placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those of adjoining
structures.



         (c)   Accessory structures shall be elevated on fill or
structurally dry flood proofed in accordance with the FP-1 or FP-2 flood
proofing classifications in the State Building Code. As an alternative, an
accessory structure may be flood proofed to the FP-3 or FP-4 flood proofing
classification in the State Building Code provided the accessory structure
constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 500 square feet in size at
its largest projection, and for a detached garage, the detached garage must
be used solely for parking of vehicles and limited storage. All flood proofed
accessory structures must meet the following additional standards:



            1.   The structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure and shall be
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls;



            2.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in a
structure must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or properly flood proofed; and



            3.   To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic
pressure, there must be a minimum of 2 "automatic" openings in the outside
walls of the structure having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. There must be
openings on at least 2 sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings
must be no higher than 1 foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the
structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding
will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.



      (6)   Storage of materials and equipment.



         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the governing body.



      (7)   Structural works for flood control that will change the
course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters shall
be subject to the provisions of M.S. Chapter 103G. Community-wide structural
works for flood control intended to remove areas from the regulatory flood
plain shall not be allowed in the floodway.



      (8)   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway
shall not cause an increase to the 100-year or regional flood and the
technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides
of a stream.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.05  FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).



   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be those uses of land or
structures listed as permitted uses in the underlying zoning use district(s).
If no pre-existing, underlying zoning use districts exist, then any
residential or non residential structure or use of a structure or land shall
be a permitted use in the Flood Fringe District provided such use does not
constitute a public nuisance. All permitted uses shall comply with the
standards for Flood Fringe District permitted uses listed in division (B)
below and the standards for all flood fringe uses listed in division (E)
below.



   (B)   Standards for Flood Fringe permitted uses.



      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be
elevated on fill so that the lowest floor including basement floor is at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation
for structures shall be no lower 1 foot below the regulatory flood protection
elevation and the fill shall extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond
the outside limits of the structure erected thereon.



      (2)   As an alternative to elevation on fill, accessory
structures that constitute a minimal investment and that do not exceed 500
square feet at its largest projection may be internally flood proofed in
accordance with § 152.04(D)(5)(c).



      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill where at any 1 time in
excess of 1,000 cubic yards of fill is located on the parcel shall be
allowable only as a conditional use, unless said fill is specifically
intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division (B)(1) above.



      (4)   The storage of any materials or equipment shall be
elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (5)   The provisions of division (E) below shall apply.



   (C)   Conditional uses. Any structure that is not elevated on fill
or flood proofed in accordance with division (B)(1) and (2) above and or any
use of land that does not comply with the standards in division (B)(3) and
(4) above shall only be allowable as a conditional use. An application for a
conditional use shall be subject to the standards and criteria and evaluation
procedures specified in divisions (D) and (E) below and § 152.10(D).



   (D)   Standards for Flood Fringe conditional uses.



      (1)   Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill
may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory
flood protection elevation. These alternative methods may include the use of
stilts, pilings, parallel walls, etc., or above-grade, enclosed areas such as
crawl spaces or tuck under garages. The base or floor of an enclosed area
shall be considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest
floor if:



         (a)   The enclosed area is above-grade on at least 1
side of the structure;



         (b)   It is designed to internally flood and is
constructed with flood resistant materials; and



         (c)   It is used solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are
subject to the following additional standards:



            1.   Design and certification.  The structure's
design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect as being in compliance with the general design
standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding.



            2.   Specific standards for above-grade, enclosed
areas.  Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under
garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must
stipulate: "A minimum area of "automatic" openings in the walls where
internal flooding is to be used as a flood proofing technique. There shall be
a minimum of 2 openings on at least 2 sides of the structure and the bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above-grade. The automatic
openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than 1 square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would
suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention"; and
"That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in
accordance with the FP-3 or FP-4 classifications in the State Building Code
and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage".



      (2)   Basements, as defined by § 11.01 of this code, shall be
subject to the following:



         (a)   Residential basement construction shall not be
allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.



         (b)   Non-residential basements may be allowed below the
regulatory flood protection elevation provided the basement is structurally
dry flood proofed in accordance with division (D)(3) below.



      (3)   All areas of non-residential structures including
basements to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall
be flood proofed in accordance with the structurally dry flood proofing
classifications in the State Building Code. Structurally dry flood proofing
must meet the FP-1 or FP-2 flood proofing classification in the State
Building Code and this shall require making the structure watertight with the
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy. Structures flood proofed to the FP-3 or
FP-4 classification shall not be permitted.



      (4)   When at any 1 time more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill
or other similar material is located on a parcel for such activities as
on-site storage, landscaping, sand and gravel operations, landfills, roads,
dredge spoil disposal or construction of flood control works, an
erosion/sedimentation control plan must be submitted consistent with §§
150.273 and 150.277. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered
professional engineer.



      (5)   Storage of materials and equipment.



         (a)   The storage or processing of materials that are,
in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human,
animal, or plant life is prohibited.



         (b)   Storage of other materials or equipment may be
allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a
flood warning and in accordance with a plan approved by the city prior to the
placement of any materials or equipment within the flood fringe district.



      (6)   The provisions of division (E) below shall also apply.



   (E)   Standards for all Flood Fringe uses.



      (1)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access
at or above an elevation not more than 1 foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation. If a variance to this requirement is granted, the Board
of Adjustment must specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of
the structure for times of flooding and only after determining that adequate
flood warning time and local flood emergency response procedures exist.



      (2)   Commercial uses.  Accessory land uses, such as yards,
railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities
to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the
absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation
if the area would be inundated to a depth and velocity such that when
multiplying the depth (in feet) times velocity (in feet per second) the
product number exceeds 4 upon occurrence of the regional flood.



      (3)   Manufacturing and industrial uses.  Measures shall be
taken to minimize interference with normal plant operations especially along
streams having protracted flood durations. Certain accessory land uses such
as yards and parking lots may be at lower elevations subject to requirements
set out in division (E)(2) above. In considering permit applications, due
consideration shall be given to needs of an industry whose business requires
that it be located in flood plain areas.



      (4)   Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be
properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable
method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established
criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain
structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation -
FEMA's requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope
protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These
standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation
if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



      (5)   Flood plain developments shall not adversely affect the
hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining flood plain of any tributary
watercourse or drainage system where a floodway or other encroachment limit
has not been specified on the official zoning map.



      (6)   Standards for recreational vehicles are contained in §
152.09(C).



      (7)   All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010; Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty,
see § 152.99



§ 152.06  GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permissible uses.



      (1)   The uses listed in § 152.04(A) shall be permitted uses.



      (2)   All other uses shall be subject to the floodway/flood
fringe evaluation criteria pursuant to division (B) below. Section 152.04
shall apply if the proposed use is in the Floodway District and § 152.05
shall apply if the proposed use is in the Flood Fringe District.



   (B)   Procedures for Floodway and Flood Fringe determinations within
the General Flood Plain District.



      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other
approval within the General Flood Plain District, the applicant shall be
required to furnish such of the following information as is deemed necessary
by the Zoning Administrator for the determination of the regulatory flood
protection elevation and whether the proposed use is within the Floodway or
Flood Fringe District.



         (a)   A typical valley cross-section(s) showing the
channel of the stream, elevation of land areas adjoining each side of the
channel, cross-sectional areas to be occupied by the proposed development,
and high water information.



         (b)   Plan (surface view) showing elevations or contours
of the ground, pertinent structure, fill, or storage elevations, the size,
location, and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing structures on
the site, and the location and elevations of streets.



         (c) Photographs showing existing land uses, vegetation
upstream and downstream, and soil types.



         (d)   Documentation of soil types and soil limitations
on the subject site.



         (e)   Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the
channel or flow line of the stream for at least 500 feet in either direction
from the proposed development.



      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible to submit one copy of
the above information to a designated engineer or other expert person or
agency for technical assistance in determining whether the proposed use is in
the Floodway or Flood Fringe District and to determine the regulatory flood
protection elevation. Procedures consistent with Minn. Regulations 1983,
Parts 6120.5000 - 6120.6200 and 44 Code of Federal Regulations Part 65 shall
be followed in this expert evaluation. The designated engineer or expert is
strongly encouraged to discuss the proposed technical evaluation methodology
with the respective Department of Natural Resources area hydrologist and
watershed district prior to commencing the analysis. The designated engineer
or expert shall:



         (a)   Estimate the peak discharge of the regional flood.



         (b)   Calculate the water surface profile of the
regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the stream channel and
overbank areas.



         (c)   Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store
the regional flood without increasing flood stages more than 0.5 foot. A
lesser stage increase than 0.5 foot shall be required if, as a result of the
additional stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal
degree of encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach shall be
assumed in computing floodway boundaries. For the mapped lake and wetland
basins within the City of Lake Elmo as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
Panels adopted in § 152.02(B), the floodway shall be that area of the
floodplain below the ordinary high water level, as defined in M.S. §
103G.0005, Subd. 14, provided that:



            1.   Compensating flood water storage is provided
below the 100-year flood elevation; or



            2.   A determination is made that any resultant
increase in stage to the 100-year flood level due to loss of flood water
storage below the 100-year flood level meets the criteria for acceptable
stage increase spelled out in this division.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall present the technical
evaluation and findings of the designated engineer or expert to the City
Council. The City Council must formally accept the technical evaluation and
the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary or deny the
permit application. The City Council, prior to official action, may submit
the application and all supporting data and analyses to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, the Department of Natural Resources or the Planning
Commission for review and comment. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries have been determined, the City Council shall refer the
matter back to the Zoning Administrator who shall process the permit
application consistent with the applicable provisions of §§ 152.04 and
152.05.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.07  SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   Review criteria. No land shall be subdivided which is
unsuitable for the reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or
sewage treatment facilities. All lots within the flood plain districts shall
be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation. All subdivisions shall have
water and sewage treatment facilities that comply with the provisions of this
chapter and have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual
building sites no lower than 1 foot below the regulatory flood protection
elevation. For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood
Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the
required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.



   (B)   Floodway/Flood Fringe determinations in the General Flood
Plain District.  In the General Flood Plain District, applicants shall
provide the information required in § 152.06(B) to determine the 100-year
flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries and the
regulatory flood protection elevation for the subdivision site.



   (C)   Removal of special flood hazard area designation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the
special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly
elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA's requirements
incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for
multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be
investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of
special flood hazard area designation will be requested.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.08  PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES.



   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as
gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the flood
plain shall be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or
elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (B)   Public transportation facilities.  Railroad tracks, roads,
and bridges to be located within the flood plain shall comply with §§
152.04 and 152.05. Elevation to the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be provided where failure or interruption of these transportation
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where
such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Limited
access roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.



   (C)   On-site sewage treatment and water supply systems.



      (1)   Where public utilities are not provided:



         (a)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



         (b)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment
systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and
they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of
flooding.



      (2)   Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with
the state's current statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems
shall be determined to be in compliance with this section.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.09  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND PLACEMENT OF
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
manufactured home parks shall be subject to the provisions placed on
subdivisions by § 152.07.



   (B)   The placement of new or replacement manufactured homes in
existing manufactured home parks or on individual lots of record that are
located in flood plain districts will be treated as a new structure and may
be placed only if elevated in compliance with § 152.05. If vehicular road
access for pre-existing manufactured home parks is not provided in accordance
with § 152.05(E)(1), then replacement manufactured homes will not be allowed
until the property owner(s) develops a flood warning emergency plan
acceptable to the governing body.



      (1)     All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.



   (C)   Recreational vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria
specified in division (C)(1) below shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (C)(3) and (4) below.



      (1)   Exemption.  Recreational vehicles are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in
division (C)(2) below and further they meet the following criteria:



         (a)   Have current licenses required for highway use.



         (b)   Are highway ready meaning on wheels or the
internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect
type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks
and the recreational vehicle has no permanent structural type additions
attached to it.



         (c)   The recreational vehicle and associated use must
be permissible in any preexisting, underlying zoning use district.



      (2)   Areas exempted for placement of recreational vehicles:



         (a)   Individual lots or parcels of record.



         (b)   Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds.



         (c)   Existing condominium type associations.



      (3)   Recreational vehicles exempted in division (C)(1) above
lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for
a structural addition to the recreational vehicle or exceeding $500 for an
accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The recreational
vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a
new structure and shall be subject to the elevation/flood proofing
requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in §§ 152.04 and
152.05. There shall be no development or improvement on the parcel or
attachment to the recreational vehicle that hinders the removal of the
recreational vehicle to a flood free location should flooding occur.



      (4)   New commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds
and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the
expansion of any existing similar use exceeding 5 units or dwelling sites
shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   Any new or replacement recreational vehicle will
be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts provided said
recreational vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory
flood protection elevation and proper elevated road access to the site exists
in accordance with § 152.05(E)(1). No fill placed in the floodway to meet
the requirements of this section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year
or regional flood.



         (b)   All new or replacement recreational vehicles not
meeting the criteria of division (4)(a) above may, as an alternative, be
allowed as a conditional use if in accordance with the following provisions
and the provisions of § 152.10(D). The applicant must submit an emergency
plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year
flood. Said plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other
qualified individual, shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel
exist to carry out the evacuation, and shall demonstrate the provisions of
divisions (C)(1)(a) and (b) will be met. All attendant sewage and water
facilities for new or replacement recreational vehicles must be protected or
constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding
in accordance with § 152.08(C).



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.10  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Zoning Administrator. A Zoning Administrator or other official
designated by the governing body shall administer and enforce this chapter.
If the Zoning Administrator finds a violation of the provisions of this
chapter the Zoning Administrator shall notify the person responsible for such
violation in accordance with the procedures stated in § 152.99.



   (B)   Permit requirements.



      (1)   Permit required. A permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall be
secured prior to the erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation
(including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any building,
structure, or portion thereof; prior to the use or change of use of a
building, structure, or land; prior to the construction of a dam. fence, or
on-site septic system; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming
use; prior to the repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire,
tornado, or any other source; and prior to the placement of fill, excavation
of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the flood plain.



      (2)   Application for permit. Application for a permit shall
be made to the Zoning Administrator on forms furnished by the Zoning
Administrator and shall include the following where applicable: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the lot; existing or proposed structures, fill, or storage of
materials; and the location of the foregoing in relation to the stream
channel.



      (3)   State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or
processing an application for a conditional use permit or variance, the
Zoning Administrator shall determine that the applicant has obtained all
necessary state and federal permits.



      (4)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or
nonconforming use. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of any building or premises or part thereof hereafter created,
erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in its use or structure
until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning
Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Construction and use to be as provided on applications,
plans, permits, variances and certificates of zoning compliance.  Permits,
conditional use permits, or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the
basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement,
and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no
other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use, arrangement, or
construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter, and punishable as provided by § 152.99.



      (6)   Certification. The applicant shall be required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Flood
proofing measures shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
registered architect.



      (7)   Record of first floor elevation. The Zoning
Administrator shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to
existing structures in the flood plain. The Zoning Administrator shall also
maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations and
additions to structures are flood proofed.



      (8)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and
the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to the
community authorizing any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. If the
applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters
pursuant to M.S. Chapter 103G, this shall suffice as adequate notice to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources. A copy of said notification shall also be
submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA).



      (9)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or
decrease the 100-year flood elevation. As soon as is practicable, but not
later than 6 months after the date such supporting information becomes
available, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the Chicago Regional Office
of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of said technical or scientific
data.



   (C)   Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   Rules. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the
conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such
boards by state law.



      (2)   Administrative review. The Board of Adjustment shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter in accordance with § 31.10
of this code.



      (3)   Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon
appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this
chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest and only when the
applicable criteria of the zoning code is met. In the granting of such
variance, the Board of Adjustment shall clearly identify in writing the
specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in
this chapter, any other zoning regulations in the city, and in the respective
enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance. No variance
shall have the effect of allowing in any district uses prohibited in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than
those required by state law. The following additional variance criteria of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:



         (a)   Variances shall not be issued by a community
within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.



         (b)   Variances shall only be issued by a community upon:



            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause,



            2.   A determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and



            3.   A determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



         (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.



      (4)   Hearings. Upon fifing with the Board of Adjustment of an
appeal from a decision of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a
variance, the Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing
and give due notice to the parties in interest as specified by § 31.01 of
this code. The Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the Commissioner
of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variances
sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least 10
days notice of the hearing.



      (5)   Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall arrive at a
decision on such appeal or variance in accordance with the procedures
prescribed in the zoning code. In passing upon an appeal, the Board of
Adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator or other
public official. It shall make its decision in writing setting forth the
findings of fact and the reasons for its decisions. In granting a variance
the Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards
such as those specified in division (D)(6) below, which are in conformity
with the purposes of this chapter. Violations of such conditions and
safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is
granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable under §
152.99. A copy of all decisions granting variances shall be forwarded by mail
to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within 10 days of such action.



      (6)   Appeals. Appeals from any decision of the Board of
Adjustment may be made, and as specified in § 31.01 of this code and also by
Minnesota Statutes.



      (7)   Flood insurance notice and recordkeeping. The Zoning
Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that:



         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 on insurance
coverage; and



         (b)   Such construction below the 100-year or regional
flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain
a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance,
and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted
to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.



   (D)   Conditional uses. Applications for a conditional use permit
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the
procedural requirements of the zoning code.



      (1)   Hearings. Upon filing with the city an application for a
conditional use permit, the Zoning Administrator shall submit by mail to the
Commissioner of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed
conditional use sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive
at least 10 days notice of the hearing.



      (2)   Decisions. The In granting a conditional use permit the
city shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those specified in division (D)(6) below, which are in conformity with the
purposes of this chapter. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the conditional use permit is granted,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter punishable under § 152.99. A
copy of all decisions granting conditional use permits shall be forwarded by
mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within 10 days of such action.



      (3)   Procedures to be followed by the city in passing on
conditional use permit applications within all Flood Plain Districts.



         (a)   The applicant is required to submit the following
information and additional information as deemed necessary by the City
Council for determining the suitability of the particular site for the
proposed use:



            1.   Plans drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevation of the lot, existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, flood proofing measures, and the
relationship of the above to the location of the stream channel; and



            2.   Specifications for building construction and
materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel improvement,
storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.



         (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall transmit one copy
of the information described in division (3)(a) above to the City Engineer or
other expert person or agency for technical assistance, where necessary, in
evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities,
the seriousness of flood damage to the use, the adequacy of the plans for
protection, and other technical matters.



         (c)   Based upon the technical evaluation of the
designated engineer or expert, the city shall determine the specific flood
hazard at the site and evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in
relation to the flood hazard.



      (4)   Factors upon which the decision of the city shall be
based. In passing upon conditional use applications, the city shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



         (a)   The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments.



         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands or downstream to the injury of others or they may block bridges,
culverts or other hydraulic structures.



         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions.



         (d)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



         (e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.



         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront
location.



         (g)   The availability of alternative locations not
subject to flooding for the proposed use.



         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.



         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for the area.



         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



         (k)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.



         (l)   Such other factors which are relevant to the
purposes of this chapter.



      (5)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. Upon
consideration of the factors listed above and the purpose of this chapter,
the city shall attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use
permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Modification of waste treatment and water supply
facilities.



         (b)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and
operation.



         (c)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and
deed restrictions.



         (d)   Requirements for construction of channel
modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.



         (e)   Flood proofing measures, in accordance with the
State Building Code and this chapter. The applicant shall submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the flood proofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood
protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)



§ 152.11  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was
lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to
the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in § 11.01 of this
code under SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT, shall be subject to the provisions of
divisions (A)(1) through (5) below.



      (1)   No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged, or
altered in a way that increases its nonconformity.



      (2)   Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use which would result in increasing the flood
damage potential of that structure or use shall be protected to the
regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation
on fill or flood proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4 flood proofing
classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further
restricted in divisions (B)(3) and (6) below.



      (3)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to
any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed
50% of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this
section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions
must include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost
placed on all manpower or labor. If the cost of all previous and proposed
alterations and additions exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure,
then the structure must meet the standards of §§ 152.04 or 152.05 for new
structures depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood
Fringe District, respectively.



      (4)   If any nonconforming use is discontinued for 12
consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to
this chapter. The Assessor shall notify the Zoning Administrator in writing
of instances of nonconforming uses that have been discontinued for a period
of 12 months.



      (5)   If any nonconforming use or structure is substantially
damaged, as defined in § 11.01 of this code , it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable
provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in §§ 152.04, 152.05
and 152.06 will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the
Floodway, Flood Fringe or General Flood Plain District, respectively.



      (6)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in §
11.01 of this code, from any combination of a building addition to the
outside dimensions of the existing building or a rehabilitation,
reconstruction, alteration, or other improvement to the inside dimensions of
an existing nonconforming building, then the building addition and the
existing nonconforming building must meet the requirements of §§ 152.04 or
152.05 for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the
Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.12  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   The flood plain designation on the Official Zoning Map shall
not be removed from flood plain areas unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the
elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to
lands outside the flood plain. Special exceptions to this rule may be
permitted by the Commissioner of Natural Resources if he determines that,
through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.



   (B)   All amendments to this chapter, including amendments to the
official zoning map, must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of
Natural Resources prior to adoption. Changes in the official zoning map must
meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) Technical Conditions
and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The
Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given 10-days written notice of all
hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter and said notice shall
include a draft of the chapter amendment or technical study under
consideration.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional
uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by
law.



   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Such actions may include but are not limited to:



      (1)   In responding to a suspected chapter violation, the
Zoning Administrator and city may utilize the full array of enforcement
actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The Community must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct chapter violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.



      (2)   When a chapter violation is either discovered by or
brought to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the
nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is
reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate
Department of Natural Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency
Regional Office along with the community's plan of action to correct the
violation to the degree possible.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected
party of the requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and
the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the
structure and/or use is under construction or development, the Zoning
Administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted
until a proper permit or approval is granted by the community. If the
construction or development is already completed, then the Zoning
Administrator may either:



         (a)   Issue an order identifying the corrective actions
that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or
structure into compliance with the official controls; or



         (b)   Notify the responsible party to apply for an
after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time
not to exceed 30-days.



      (4)   If the responsible party does not appropriately respond
to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this
chapter and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall
also upon the lapse of the specified response period notify the landowner to
restore the land to the condition which existed prior to the violation of
this chapter.



(Ord. 08-023, passed 1-26-2010)



CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   153.01   Regulations established



   153.02   Generally



   153.03   Definitions



   153.04   Registered land survey



   153.05   Conveyance by metes and bounds and other unapproved
descriptions



   153.06   Platting



   153.07   Preliminary plat



   153.08   Final plat



   153.09   Exceptions to platting



   153.10   Variances; standards; platting



   153.11   Variance procedures



   153.12   Planned Unit Developments (P.U.D.)



   153.13   Design standards; required improvements



   153.14   Park land dedication requirements



   153.15   Required improvements; financial arrangements



   153.16   Fees



   153.17   Violations



§ 153.01  REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED.



   No land shall be subdivided, nor shall any land be platted, in the city
except as provided by this chapter.



(1997 Code, § 400.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.02  GENERALLY.



   (A)   Purpose.  In order to provide for orderly, economic, and safe
development of land, necessary urban services and facilities, and to promote
the public health, safety, morals as to the urban services and facilities,
the following subdivision regulations are adopted by the Council of the
city.  It is the intent of the city to protect the right of landowners to
put their land to its highest and best use and protect each owner's right to
full beneficial use of his or her land insofar as the use and enjoyment may
be accomplished without detriment to the public interest and within the
minimum standards established by this chapter.



   (B)   Scope.  The provisions of this chapter apply to any division
of a tract of land into 2 or more parcels for the purpose of transfer of
ownership, building development, or tax assessment purposes by platting,
re-platting, registered land survey, conveyance, sale, contract for sale or
any other means by which a beneficial interest in land is transferred or any
means by which a tract of land is divided into 2 or more parcels for tax
assessment purposes.



   (C)   Approval necessary for acceptance of subdivision plats. 
Before any plat or subdivision shall be recorded or be of any validity, it
shall be referred to the Planning Commission and approved by the Council as
having fulfilled the requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   Building permits.  No building permits shall be issued for
the construction of any building, structure, or improvement to any land or
lot in a subdivision, as defused in this chapter, until all requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied, with the following exceptions.



      (1)   Building permits may be issued for model homes after
approval of the final plat by the council upon receipt of a signed developers
agreement which shall include security for improvements, both which shall be
in a form approved by the City Attorney.



      (2)   Developer shall agree in writing to indemnify and hold
harmless the city for damages that may occur as a result of the model home
construction prior to the required improvements being completed.



      (3)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city
until the first lift of blacktop is completed.



      (4)   Traffic and parking arrangements relating to model homes
shall be subject to the city's review.



(Am. Ord. 9707, passed 5-20-1997)



   (E)   Conflicts.  Whenever there is a difference between minimum
standards or dimensions required by this chapter or other ordinances of the
city, the most restrictive standards of dimensions shall apply.



   (F)   Flood plain management.



      (1)   No land shall be subdivided which is held unsuitable by
the Council for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply, or
sewage treatment facilities.  All lots within the flood plain shall contain
a building site at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.  All
subdivisions shall have water and sewage disposal facilities that comply with
the provisions of this chapter, and have road access both to the subdivision
and to the individual building sites no lower than 2 feet below the
regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (2)   In the general flood plain district, applicants shall
provide the information required in § 152.11.  The Council shall evaluate
the subdivision in accordance with procedures established in this chapter and
standards contained in § 152.07.



(1997 Code, § 400.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.03  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined in this chapter, common definitions, words,
and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the
same meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code and are found
in § 11.01.



(1997 Code, § 400.04)



§ 153.04  REGISTERED LAND SURVEY.



   No registered land survey of lands in the city shall be recorded with
the Registrar of Titles until the registered land survey shall have been
approved by the city.  The approval shall be indicated by resolution
endorsed on or attached to the registered land survey signed by the chair of
the Planning Commission, Mayor, and City Administrator.  No registered land
survey shall be approved by the city or signed by the officers if the
recording of the registered land survey will result in a subdivision in
violation of any provision, regulation, or requirement of this chapter.



(1997 Code, § 400.05)



§ 153.05  CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS AND OTHER UNAPPROVED



+>DESCRIPTIONS.



   (A)   No conveyance of lands to which the regulations contained in
this chapter are applicable shall be made and no conveyance of land to which
the regulations contained in this chapter are applicable shall be filed or
recorded, if the land is described in the conveyance by metes and bounds or
by reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after 10-3-1968, or
to an unapproved plat made after 10-3-1968.



   (B)   The foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the
land described:



      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record 10-3-1968, or as to
lands within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Old Village prior to its
consolidation with the Town of East Oakdale if the land was a separate parcel
of record 6-4-1974;



      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey,
entered into prior to the time;



      (3)   Has been divided in accordance with § 153.10(B); is a
single parcel of land having not less than 5 acres and having a width of not
less than 300 feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of a
parcel into 2 or more lots or parcels any 1 of which is less than 5 acres in
area or 300 feet in width; and/or



      (4)   Has been approved as an exception to platting pursuant
to § 153.09.



(1997 Code, § 400.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.06  PLATTING.



   (A)   Platting required.  Except as provided in § 153.09, platting
shall be required for the subdivision of a tract of land which is to be
divided into 3 or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of
ownership, building development, or for tax assessment purposes.



   (B)   Pre-application.



      (1)   Sketch plan.  In order to ensure that all applicants
are informed of the procedural requirements and minimum standards of this
chapter and the requirements or limitations imposed by other city ordinances
or plans, prior to the development of a preliminary plat, the subdivider
shall meet with the Planning Commission and prepare a sketch plan which
explains or illustrates the proposed subdivision and its purpose.  The
Planning Commission shall accept the information received, but take no formal
or informal action which could be construed as approval or denial of the
proposed plat.



      (2)   Submission requirements.  The owner shall prepare and
submit a sketch plan, together with any necessary supplemental information. 
The plan shall contain the information set forth below.



   (C)   General provisions (pre-application).



      (1)   Locations of boundary lines in relation to a known
section, quarter section, or quarter quarter section line comprising a legal
description of the property;



      (2)   Names and addresses of all persons having property
interest, the developer, the designer, and surveyor together with the
interested person's registration number;



      (3)   Graphic scale of not less than 1 inch to 100 feet; and



      (4)   Data and north point.



   (D)   Existing conditions.



      (1)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated;



      (2)   Existing zoning classification for land within and
abutting the subdivision;



      (3)   A statement on the acreage and dimensions of the lots;



      (4)   Location widths and names of existing or previously
platted streets or other public ways,



showing type, width, and conditions of improvements, if any, railroad and
utility rights-of-way, parks and other open spaces, permanent buildings and
structures, easements in section and corporate lines within the tract and to
a distance of 300 feet beyond the tract;



      (5)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains,
culverts, or other underground utilities within the tract and to a distance
of 350 feet beyond the tract, the data as grades, invert elevations, and
locations of catch basins, and manholes shall also be shown;



      (6)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided
land, within 350 feet, identified by name and ownership, including all
contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider;



      (7)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical
intervals of not more than 5 feet; water courses, marshes, rock outcrops,
power transmission poles and lines and other significant features shall also
be shown; N.G.V.D. shall be used for all topographic mapping; and



      (8)   The subdivider may be required to file a report prepared
by a registered civil engineer or soil scientist on the feasibility of
individual on-site sewer and water systems on each lot; the report shall
include a soil borings analysis and a percolation test to verify conclusions.



   (E)   Proposed design features.



      (1)   Layout of proposed streets showing right-of-way widths,
center line grade, typical cross-sections, and proposed names of streets in
conformance with all applicable city ordinances and policies; the name of any
street used in the city or its environs shall not be used unless the proposed
street is the logical extension of an already named street, in which event
the same name shall be used.  The names and number shall comply with the
County Uniform Street Numbering System.



      (2)   Areas other than streets, pedestrian ways, utility
easement, intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the
size of the areas in acres.



      (3)   (a)   Provision for surface water disposal, drainage,
and flood control within the boundaries of the proposed property division
consistent with § 150.273 of this code, storm water management and erosion
and sediment control.



   (F)   Supplementary information.



      (1)   The supplementary information as shall reasonably be
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or the Council;



      (2)   Proposed protective covenants;



      (3)   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of
residential buildings with number of proposed dwellings and type of business
or industry, so as to review the effect of the development on traffic, fire
hazards, and congestion of population;



      (4)   If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed
zoning plan for the areas, including dimensions, shall be shown.  The
proposed zoning plans shall be for information only and not vest any rights
in the application for use other than residential;



      (5)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that
which is being proposed for division, the Planning Commission may require
that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the property so
as to show the possible relationship between the proposed division and a
future subdivision.  All subdivisions shall be reasonably consistent with
the existing or potential adjacent subdivisions; and



      (6)   Where structures are to be placed on large or
excessively deep lots, which are subject to replat, the development
subdivision plans shall indicate placement of structures so that lots may be
further subdivided, in addition to a sketch plan that illustrates a way in
which the lots can possibly be resubdivided.



(1997 Code, § 400.07)  (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 153.07  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Filing.  Twenty copies of the preliminary plat and certified
list of property owners located within 350 feet of the subject property
obtained from and certified by a licensed abstractor, shall be filed with the
Administrator.  The required filing fee as established by Council resolution
shall be paid and any necessary applications for variances from the
provisions of this chapter shall be submitted with the required fee.  The
proposed plat shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission
meeting no later than the second regularly scheduled meeting following the
date of filing.  No application shall be accepted by the Administrator for
filing unless all application information required by this chapter is
submitted with the application.



   (B)   Submission requirements.  The applicant shall prepare and
submit a preliminary plat, together with any necessary supplementary
information.  The preliminary plat shall contain the following information.



   (C)   General provision (preliminary plat).



      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision; names shall not duplicate
or too closely resemble names of existing subdivisions; in any case, the name
must be approved by the County Recorder;



      (2)   Location of boundary lines in relation to a known
section, quarter section, or quarter quarter section lines comprising a legal
description of the property;



      (3)   Names and addresses of all persons having any interest
in the property, the developer, designer, and surveyor together with the
interested person's registration number;



      (4)   Graphic scale of plat, not less than 1 inch to 100 feet;



      (5)   Data and north point; and



      (6)   Date of preparation.



   (D)   Existing conditions.



      (1)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated;



      (2)   Existing zoning classifications for land within and
abutting the subdivision;



      (3)   A general statement on the approximate acreage and
dimensions of the lots;



      (4)   Location, widths, and names of all existing or
previously platted streets or other public ways, showing type, width, and
condition of improvements if any, railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks
and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements
and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of 350
feet beyond the tract;



      (5)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains,
culverts, or other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance
of 350 feet beyond the tract; the data as grades, invert elevations, and
locations of catch basins, manholes, shall also be shown;



      (6)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided
land, within 350 feet, identified by name and ownership, including all
contiguous land owned or controlled by the subdivider;



      (7)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical
intervals of not more than 2 feet; water courses, marshes, rock outcrops,
power transmission poles and lines, and other significant feature shall also
be shown; N.G.V.D. shall be used for all topographic mapping; and



      (8)   In plats where public water and sewer are not available,
the City Engineer may require the subdivider to file a report prepared by a
soil scientist or a registered civil engineer on the feasibility of
individual on-site sewer and water systems on each lot.  The report shall
include a soil boring analysis and percolation tests to verify conclusions.



   (E)   Proposed design features.



      (1)   Layout of proposed streets showing right-of-way widths,
center line grade, typical cross-sections, and proposed names of streets in
conformance with all applicable city ordinances and policies. The street
names shall comply with the County Uniform Street Naming and Property
Numbering System, with the following exceptions:



         (a)   Unless a newly proposed street directly extends
from, or is planned to extend from, an existing street, no street name that
already exists in the city or its environs shall be used, regardless if it is
on the same grid as another street.



            1.   Names of north-south avenues shall increase
alphabetically from west to east, following the grid system.



            2.   Names of east-west streets shall follow the
grid numbering system as appropriate, but a different suffix such as Lane,
Place, Way, etc. or a different prefix such as Upper or Lower shall be used.



         (b)   Names of deflecting, continual streets shall not
change, even if the street changes direction, unless an intersection exists.



            1.   The names of deflecting streets shall be
determined according to their relation to an arterial or collector street if
appropriate, otherwise such names shall be determined according to their main
point of entry in to a development or as deemed appropriate by Council.



         (c)   If appropriate, names with the same theme (i.e.,
flowers, nature) are permitted for naming streets in an entire subdivision.



         (d)   All street names shall end with the directional
suffix of North.



      (2)   Locations and widths of proposed alleys and pedestrian
ways;



      (3)   Locations and size of proposed sewer lines and water
mains;



      (4)   Layout, numbers, lot areas, and preliminary dimensions
of lots and blocks;



      (5)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines;



      (6)   When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot
at the building setback line shall be shown;



      (7)   Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian ways, and
utility easements intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use,
including the size of the area or areas in acres;



      (8)   Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision
by extension of any existing community system wherever feasible.  Service
connections shall be stubbed into the property line and all necessary fire
hydrants shall also be provided.  Extensions of the public water supply
system shall be designed so as to provide public water in accordance with the
standards of the city.  In areas where public water supply is not available,
well plans must comply with applicable state regulations and shall be
submitted for the approval of the City Building Official;



      (9)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be
installed in accordance with the standards established by the city;



      (10)   All private sewage treatment systems shall be installed
in accordance with standards established by the city;



      (11)   Surface water disposal, drainage, and flood control
shall be provided within the boundaries of the proposed property division
consistent with § 150.273 of this code, storm water management and erosion
and sediment control.



   (F)   Supplementary information.  The following supplementary
information shall be submitted when deemed necessary by the Planning
Commission:



      (1)   Proposed protective covenants;



      (2)   An accurate soil survey of the subdivision prepared by a
qualified person.  In areas of questionable soil conditions, percolation
tests may be required on a lot-by-lot basis to determine the suitability of
any particular site for building;



      (3)   A statement prepared by a qualified person identifying
tree coverage in the proposed subdivision in terms of type, weakness,
maturity, potential hazard, infestation, vigor, density, and spacing;



      (4)   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of
residential buildings with number of proposed dwelling units and type of
business or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the development on
traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population;



      (5)   If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed
zoning plat for the areas, including dimensions, shall be shown;



      (6)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to that
which is being proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission may
require that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of the
property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed
subdivision and the future subdivision.  All subdivisions shall be shown to
relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivisions;



      (7)   Where structures are to be placed on large or
excessively deep lots which are subject to potential replat, the subdivider
shall provide in the preliminary plat, a sketch plan which indicates minimum
building setback lines and future roadway alignments which would not
interfere with structural placement at the time of future subdivision; and



      (8)   A vegetation preservation and protection plat that shows
those trees proposed to be removed, those to remain, the types and locations
of trees and other vegetation that are to be planted;



         (a)   Developer shall provide a landscape plan which
shows how a subdivision will assume a rural character through the placement
of ponding, berms, trees, and tree seedlings, shrubs, and shrub seedlings and
native grasses;



         (b)   Developer shall plant a minimum of 6 trees, 1 inch
caliper deciduous, or coniferous trees; 3 feet in height per acre unless a
lot within the subdivision is determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
naturally wooded which would, at a minimum, consist of the caliper and height
of trees required by this chapter; and



         (c)   Developer shall provide spaced or clustered
plantings of 1 and 1/2 inch caliper deciduous trees at a rate of 2 per 100
lineal feet on both sides of the street, between 0 feet and 5 feet to the
inside of the right-of-way for rural sections and between 5 feet and 10 feet
to the inside of right-of-way for urban sections.  Four foot conifers may be
substituted.



   (G)   Other information.  Other information shall be provided as
may be reasonably requested by the city staff. Planning Commission, or
Council.



   (H)   Review by staff and other commissions or jurisdictions.



      (1)   The city shall refer copies of the preliminary plat to
the City Engineer, Planner, and Attorney, the Park Commission, and the
appropriate county, state, or other public agencies for their review and
comment.



      (2)   Comment must be received within 30 days or it will be
assumed there are no objections.



   (I)   Hearing.



      (1)   The Planning Commission, upon receipt of the application
shall instruct Administrator to set a public hearing on the proposed
preliminary plat no later than 45 days from the date of filing of the
application.  The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report
its findings and recommendations to the Council.  The Administrator shall
give notice of the hearing.  The notice shall consist of a property
description and a description of the request.  The notice shall be published
in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing
and written notification of the hearing shall be mailed at least 10 days
prior to all owners of land within 350 feet of the boundary of the property
in question.  The Planning Commission, at its discretion, may direct that
notification be sent to property owners at distances of greater than 350 feet.



      (2)   The failure of any property owner to receive notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



   (J)   Planning Commission action.  The Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation to the Council within 30 days following the close of
the public hearing.  If the recommendations of the Planning Commission are
not received within that time, the Council may act on the preliminary plat
without the recommendations.



   (K)   City Council Action.



      (1)   The Council shall act upon the preliminary plat and may
impose the conditions and restrictions as are deemed necessary by the Council
in view of the purpose of this section and the recommendations of the
Planning Commission within 30 days after receiving the recommendations of the
Planning Commission or within 60 days after the close of the public hearing
on the preliminary plat should the Planning Commission fail to forward
recommendations.



      (2)   If the preliminary plat is not approved by the Council,
the reasons for the action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the
council and transmitted to the applicant.  If the preliminary plat is
approved, the approval shall not constitute final acceptance of the layout. 
Subsequent approval will be required of the engineering proposals and other
features and requirements as specified by this chapter to be indicated on the
final plat.  The Council may require revisions in the preliminary plat and
final plat as it deems necessary for the public health, safety, general
welfare, and convenience.



   (L)   Submission of final plat; request for extension.  If the
preliminary plat is approved by the Council, the subdivider must submit the
final plat within 180 days after the approval, or approval of the preliminary
plat shall be considered void, unless a request for time extension is
submitted in writing and approved by the council.



(1997 Code, § 400.08) (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010; Am. Ord. 08-144,
passed 10-4-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.08  FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final plat
shall be submitted for approval as follows.



   (B)   (1)   Submission requirements.  The owner shall submit a
final plat signed and acknowledged by each person owning a legal or equitable
interest in the lands platted, including contract purchasers or those holding
only a security interest such as a mortgagee.  The final plat shall be
prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Minnesota Statutes and
applicable county ordinances.  The final plat shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   Name of the subdivision;



         (b)   Location by section, township, range, county, and
state, and including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision;



         (c)   The location of monuments shall be shown and
described on the final plat;



         (d)   Location of lots, streets, public highways,
alleys, parks, and other features with accurate dimensions;



         (e)   Lots shall be numbered clearly; blocks are to be
numbered, with numbers shown clearly in the center of the block;



         (f)   The exact locations, widths, and names of all
streets to be dedicated;



         (g)   Location width and use of all easements to be
dedicated;



         (h)   Certification by a registered land surveyor in the
form required by M.S. Ch. 505, as it may be amended from time to time, and
the name, address, and registration number of the surveyor;



         (i)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically
on a bar scale), date, and north point;



         (j)   Statement dedicating all easements;



         (k)   Statement dedicating all streets, utility
easements, and other public areas not previously dedicated; and



         (l)   Certificate for approval by the City Planning
Commission and the Council.  The certificate shall be prepared for the
signatures of the Chair and Secretary of the City Planning Commission, and
the Mayor and Administrator.



      (2)   Approval of the City Council.



         (a)   Twenty copies of the final plat shall be submitted
to the Administrator at least 10 days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting at which consideration is requested.  After review of the final plat
by the staff, the final plat shall be approved or disapproved within 60 days
after the filing of the final plat by resolution and conditioned upon the
execution of the development agreement for basic improvements, public
dedication, bonding, and other requirements determined necessary or
appropriate by the Council.  If disapproved, the grounds for any refusal to
approve a plat shall be set forth in the proceedings of the Council and
reported to the applicant.



         (b)   The resolution approving the plat shall authorize
the Mayor and Administrator to execute an endorsement of approval for the
city.  The Mayor and Administrator shall not execute the endorsement until
any development agreement or bonds required by the resolution of the approval
have been approved in writing by the City Attorney.



(Am. Ord. 9705, passed 5-6-1997)



      (3)   Special assessments.  When any existing special
assessments which have been levied against the property described are to be
divided and allocated to the respective lots in the proposed plat, the
Engineer shall estimate the cost of preparing a revised assessment roll,
filing the assessment roll with the County Auditor, and making the division
and allocation.  Upon approval by the Council of the cost, the cost shall be
paid to the City Administrator.



      (4)   Recording final plat.  If the final plat is approved by
the Council, the subdivider shall record it with the County Recorder within
120 days after the approval.  If not filed within 120 days, approval of the
final plat shall be considered void, unless a request for time extension is
submitted in writing and approved by the Council.  The subdivider shall,
immediately upon recording, furnish Administrator with 2 paper prints and 1
reproducible film positive of the plat showing evidence of the recording. 
No building permits shall be issued for construction of any structure on any
lot in the plat until the city has received evidence of the plat being
recorded by the County.



      (5)   Lot acreage.  The subdivider shall provide the city
with a list of all lots, by block, indicating the lot acreage, to the nearing
1/100.  The list shall be certified by the surveyor signing the plat.



(1997 Code, § 400.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.09  EXCEPTIONS TO PLATTING.



   (A)   Minor subdivision. A MINOR SUBDIVISION is a division of land
which results in no more than 4 parcels wherein each resultant parcel
complies with the city's minimum lot dimension and public road frontage
requirements for the zoning district in which the land is located.



   (B)   Lot line adjustment. A LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT is a division of
land which results in no more than 4 parcels wherein each resultant parcel
does not comply with the city's minimum lot dimension and/or public road
frontage requirements for the zoning district in which the land is located.
The City Council hereby waives compliance with the city's platting
regulations for lot line adjustments which satisfy 1 of the following
conditions:



      (1)   Each resultant parcel, when combined with an abutting
parcel through a tax parcel consolidation procedure approved by Washington
County, equals or exceeds the minimum lot dimension requirements and public
road frontage requirements for the zoning district in which the property is
located;



      (2)   In those cases where the City Administrator determines
that it is not reasonably possible for each resultant parcel to comply with
the provisions of division (B)(1) above, each resultant parcel, when combined
with an abutting parcel through a tax parcel consolidation procedure approved
by Washington County, is less non-conforming after the lot consolidation than
it was before the lot consolidation; or



      (3)   In those cases where, in regard to property which is
zoned agricultural or rural residential, the City Administrator determines
that each resultant parcel will equal or exceed minimum lot dimensions for
the zoning district in which the property is located, but that 1 of the
resultant parcels cannot satisfy the minimum public road frontage
requirements for the zoning district in which the property is located, access
to the noncomplying parcel is protected by a restrictive covenant approved by
the City Attorney which includes the city as a beneficiary.



   (C)   Subdivision of property for public purpose. The subdivision of
property resulting from acquisition by governmental agencies for public
improvements or uses.



   (D)   Application for minor subdivision/lot line adjustment. An
application for a minor subdivision or a lot line adjustment shall be
submitted on forms provided by the City Administrator. The applicant will be
responsible for all expenses incurred in obtaining the required information,
which includes the following:



      (1)   Name, address, and telephone number of the property
owner/applicant and evidence of title;



      (2)   A legal description of the parcel which is being
subdivided and legal descriptions for each of the resulting parcels; and, in
regard to lot line adjustments, legal descriptions for the consolidated
parcels;



      (3)   A written description stating the reason for the
request; and



      (4)   A land survey prepared by and signed by a registered
land surveyor describing the minor subdivision and/or lot line adjustment and
showing all buildings, driveways, easements, setbacks, and other pertinent
information including the legal descriptions herein required.



   (E)   Review of minor subdivision.



      (1)   A completed application shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for its review and recommendation to the City Council.



      (2)   The City Council may attach reasonable conditions to its
approval and shall require the conveyance of necessary street, utility, and
drainage easements on forms approved by the City Attorney; and shall require
the payment of a public use dedication fee.



   (F)   Review of lot line adjustment. A completed application shall
be reviewed administratively by the City Administrator who shall make a
written finding in regard to the provisions of division (B) above. The City
Administrator's approval shall be conditioned upon tax parcel consolidation.
Prior to the issuance of any development permits, and no later than 60 days
after administrative review and approval, the applicant shall provide the
City Administrator with the verifications listed below. Failure to provide
the required verifications shall invalidate the City Administrator's approval:



      (1)   Recorded documents or recorded document numbers for the
deeds of conveyance which effectuate the lot line adjustment; and/or



      (2)   Proof that the Washington County Assessor has approved a
tax parcel consolidation and has assigned a new tax parcel number for the
consolidated parcel or parcels.



   (G)   Review of subdivision of property for public purpose. A
completed application, accompanied by a fully executed deed that designates a
governmental agency as a grantee, shall be reviewed administratively by the
City Administrator who shall make a written finding in regard to the
provisions of division (C) above and if the conveyance falls within the
definition of division (C), the City Administrator shall approve the
subdivision. The City Administrator's approval shall be conditioned upon
receipt of a copy of the recorded deed. Failure to provide a copy of the
recorded deed shall invalidate the City Administrator's approval.



(1997 Code, § 400.10)  (Am. Ord. 97-98, passed 12-18-2001; Am. Ord. 08-153,
passed 9-20-2016)



§ 153.10  VARIANCES; STANDARDS; PLATTING.



   (A)   Purpose.  A variance may be granted from the minimum
standards required by this chapter as they apply to specific property where
unusual hardship on the land exists, but variances may be granted only upon
the specific ground set forth in this section.  In granting any variance,
the Planning Commission may recommend, and the Council shall prescribe, the
conditions as it deems necessary and desirable to protect the public
interests.  In no case shall any of the procedural requirements of this
chapter be waived nor shall a variance be deemed to permit any waiver or
avoidance of the procedural requirements.



   (B)   Planning Commission review.  No variance shall be granted
until the matter has been considered by the Planning Commission.  In making
its recommendations, the Planning Commission shall take into account the
nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the
vicinity, number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and
the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in
the vicinity.



   (C)   Findings.  A variance shall be granted only where the Council
finds:



      (1)   That there are special circumstances or conditions
affecting the applicant's land that the strict application of the minimum
standards of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use
of that land;



      (2)   That the granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property; and



      (3)   That the variance required by reason of unusual hardship
relating to the physical characteristics of the land.



(1997 Code, § 400.11)



§ 153.11  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Application.  Requests for a variance or appeal shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator on an official application form.  The
application shall be accompanied by a fee as established from time to time by
resolution of the Council.  The application shall also be accompanied by 20
copies of detailed written and graphic materials necessary for the
explanation of the request.



   (B)   Hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on the variance request in accordance with the standards set forth in the
zoning code.



   (C)   Appearance of applicant before Planning Commission.  The
applicant or a representative of applicant shall appear before the Planning
Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed variance
request.



   (D)   Findings.  The Planning Commission shall make its findings
and recommend the actions or conditions relating to the request as they deem
necessary to carry out the intent.



   (E)   Approval/denial.  Upon receiving the report and
recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Council shall decide whether
to approve or deny the request for a variance.  The Council shall not grant
a variance until it has received the report and recommendation from the
Planning Commission or until 30 days after the application was accepted by
the city.  The Council shall decide whether to approve or deny the request
for a variance or an appeal no later than 60 days after the filing of the
application.



   (F)   Written findings and order.  The Council shall make written
finding of fact and order in granting or denying any application for a
variance or appeal.  In granting any variance or making any order related to
a variance or appeal, the Council shall impose any condition it considers
necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare.



   (G)   Notification of decision.  The Administrator shall notify the
applicant of the Council's decision in writing.



(1997 Code, § 400.12)



§ 153.12  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (P.U.D.).



   (A)   Upon receiving a report from the Planning Commission, the
Council may grant exceptions from the provisions of these regulations in the
case of a Planned Unit Development, provided that the Council finds that the
proposed development is fully consistent with the purpose and intent of these
regulations and in compliance with the Planned Unit Development objectives of
the zoning code.



   (B)   This provision is intended to provide the necessary
flexibility for new land planning and land development trends and techniques.



(1997 Code, § 400.13)  (Am. Ord. 08-072, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 153.13  DESIGN STANDARDS; REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Blocks.



      (1)   In general, intersecting streets, determining block
lengths, shall be provided at the intervals as to serve cross traffic
adequately and to meet existing streets.  Where no existing plats control
the blocks in residential subdivisions, blocks shall not be less than 600
feet nor more than 1,800 feet in length, except where topography or other
conditions justify a departure from this maximum.  In blocks longer than 900
feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block may be required near
the center of the block.  Blocks for business or industrial use may vary
from the elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the
use requires other treatment.



      (2)   The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to
allow 2 tiers of lots of appropriate depth.  Blocks intended for business or
industrial use shall be of the width as to be considered most suitable for
their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and
deliveries.



      (3)   Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from
the elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use
requires other treatment.  In those cases, off-street parking for employees
and customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited access
to the street system.  Space for off-street loading shall also be provided
with similar access.  Extension of roads, railroad access right-of-way, and
utilities shall be provided as necessary.



   (B)   Lots.



      (1)   Area.  The minimum lot area, width, and depth shall not
be less than that established by the zoning code in effect at the time of
adoption of the final plat.



      (2)   Corner lots.  Corner lots for residential use shall
have additional width to permit appropriate building setback from both
streets as required in the zoning code.



      (3)   Side lot lines.  Side lines of lots shall be
approximately at right angles to street lines or radial to curved street
lines.



      (4)   Frontage.  Every lot must have a minimum frontage on a
public street accepted for maintenance purposes by the city (or to be
accepted upon completion of construction by the applicant), other than an
alley, as required in the zoning code.  No subdivision shall be permitted
which will result in a lot with less than the minimum frontage on a public
street s required by the zoning code except where a variance is granted as
provided by this chapter.  In no case shall a variance to this frontage
requirement be granted which would permit access to a lot by means of an
easement or private road except as provided in § 153.10.



      (5)   Setback lines.  Setback or building lines shall be
shown on all lots intended for residential use and shall not be less than the
setback required by the zoning code.



      (6)   Water courses.  Lots abutting a water course, drainage
way, channel, or stream shall have additional depth and width, as required
under the provisions of the zoning code for the shoreland and wetland system
districts.



      (7)   Features.  In the subdividing of any land, due regard
shall be shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, water courses,
historic spots, or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.



      (8)   Lot remnants.  All remnants of lots below minimum size
left over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots,
rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.



      (9)   Frontage on 2 streets.  Double frontage, or lots with
frontage on 2 parallel streets, shall not be permitted except where lots back
on arterial streets or highways, or where topographic or other conditions
render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.  Double frontage lots shall have
an additional depth of at least 20 feet in order to allow space for screen
planting along the back lot line.



      (10)   Turn-around access.  Where proposed residential lots
abut a collector or arterial street, they should be platted in a manner as to
encourage turn-around access and egress on each lot.



      (11)   Minimum lot line.  No lot shall have a total width at
the front or rear lot line of less than 30 feet.



      (12)   Large lot planning.  In any area where lots are
platted in excess of 24,000 square feet or 160 feet in width at the minimum
building setback line, a preliminary resubdivision plan may be required
showing a potential and feasible way in which the lot or lots may be
resubdivided in future years for more intensive use of the land, the
placement of buildings or structures upon the lots shall allow for potential
resubdivision.



      (13)   Shoreland.



         (a)   Land suitability.  No land shall be subdivided
which is held unsuitable by the city for the purposed use because of
flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formations with severe
limitation for development, severe erosion potential, inadequate water supply
or sewage disposal capabilities.



         (b)   Inconsistent plats reviewed by Commissioner of
Natural Resources.  All plats which are inconsistent with the Municipal
Shoreland Ordinance shall be reviewed by the Commissioner before approval by
the city may be granted.  Review shall require that the proposed plats be
received by the Commissioner at least 10 days before a hearing is called by
the city for consideration of approval of a final plat.



         (c)   Copies of plats supplied to Commissioner.  Copies
of all plats within shoreland areas shall be submitted to the Commissioner
within 10 days of final approval by the city.



   (C)   Easements.



      (1)   Width and location.  An easement for utilities at least
10 feet wide, shall be provided along all lot lines.  If necessary for the
extension of main water or sewer lines or similar utilities, easements of
greater width may be required along lot lines or across lots.  See §
150.277(A)(2)(e) of this code for other applicable easement regulations.



      (2)   Continuous utility easement locations.  Utility
easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties. 
These easements, when approved, shall not subsequently be changed without the
approval of the Council after a public hearing.



      (3)   Provisions for drainage.  Easements shall be provided
along each side of the center line of any water course or drainage channel
whether or not shown in the Comprehensive Plan, to a width sufficient in the
judgment of the Council to provide proper maintenance and protection and to
provide for storm water runoff and installation and maintenance of storm
sewers.  They shall be dedicated to the city by appropriate language in the
owner’s certificate.  See § 150.277(A)(2)(e) of this code for other
applicable easement regulations.



   (D)   Erosion and sediment control.  Erosion and sediment control
plans shall be provided in accordance with § 150.277(B) of this code.



   (E)   Drainage.  A complete and adequate drainage system design, in
accordance with the Watershed District, § 150.277(A) of this code, and Local
Storm Water Management Plan, approved by the City Engineer, shall be required
for the subdivision.



   (F)   Monuments for plats.



      (1)   Official monuments, as designated or adopted by the
County Surveyor's Office or approved by the County District Court for use as
judicial monuments, shall be set at each corner or angle on the outside
boundary of the final plat or in accordance with a plan as approved by the
City Engineer.  The boundary line of the property to be included with the
plat must be fully dimensioned, all angles of the boundary excepting the
closing angle to be indicated, all monuments and surveyor's irons to be
indicated, each angle point of the boundary perimeter to be so monumented.



      (2)   Twenty-four inch long pipes or steel rods shall be
placed at each lot and at each intersection of street center lines.  All
United States, state, county, or other official bench marks, monuments, or
triangular stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position and shall be recorded on the plat.



      (3)   A second monumentation shall be required following the
final grading and completion of streets, curbs and utility improvements for a
plat in order to ensure that all irons and monuments are correctly in place.



      (4)   (a)   Proof of the final monumentation shall be in
the form of a surveyor's affidavit that the monumentations complete.  The
surveyor's affidavit shall be submitted to the county; and



         (b)   Surveyor's office and to the city within 1 year
from the date of recording the plat or prior to the issuance of building
permits, whichever event occurs first.



   (G)   Sanitary sewer and water distribution and public utilities.



      (1)   Sanitary sewers and water facilities shall be installed
in accordance with the standards and specifications as provided for in the
City's Comprehensive Sewer Plan and Water Supply and Distribution Report, and
other city plans, and shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Engineer.



      (2)   Where city water facilities are not available for
extension into the proposed subdivision. the Council may, by ordinance, grant
a franchise for the water facilities, to serve all properties within a
subdivision where a complete and adequate neighborhood water distribution
system is designed in conjunction with the subdivision, and complete plans
for the system are submitted for the approval of the Council.



      (3)   Where city sewer and water facilities are not available
for extension into proposed subdivision, the Council may permit the use of
individual water and sewer systems in accordance with all appropriate state
and local regulations.



      (4)   Telephone, electric, and/or gas service lines are to be
placed underground in accordance with the provisions of all applicable city
ordinances.  Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by action of the
Council.



   (H)   Streets, alleys, and curbs.



      (1)   Streets, continuous.  Except for cul-de-sacs, streets
shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent
subdivisions, or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided
tracts, or shall be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest
subdivided tracts.  The arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets
shall be considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of
traffic, to topographic conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public
convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed
uses of the area to be served.



      (2)   Local streets and dead-end streets.  Local streets
should be so planned as to discourage their use by non-local traffic. 
Dead-end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs shall be permitted where
topography or other physical conditions justify their use.  Cul-de-sacs
shall include a terminal turn-around which shall be provided at the closed
end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than 60 feet.



         (a)   Temporary cul-de-sacs shall comply with the
following standards.



            1.   The plat shall be reviewed after 3 years, by
the City Planner, in order to determine if the cul-de-sac shall remain
temporary.  The City Planner shall review the status of the temporary
cul-de-sac every 3 years.



            2.   The street shall not exceed 1,000 feet in
length in subdivisions in which lots are less than 2.5 acres in size.



            3.   The street shall not exceed 2,640 feet in
length in subdivisions in which lots are 2.5 acres or greater.



            4.   The cul-de-sac shall be designated as
"temporary" on the final plat, with an easement shown on the final plat
identifying where the road will extend.



            5.   The cul-de-sac shall not have landscaped or
natural islands within it.



            6.   The street shall not serve more than 20 home
sites.



         (b)   Permanent cul-de-sacs shall comply with the
following standards.



            1.   The street shall not exceed 600 feet in
length in subdivisions in which lots are less than 2.5 acres in size.



            2.   The street shall not exceed 1,320 feet in
length in subdivisions in which lots are 2.5 acres or greater in size.



            3.   The cul-de-sac may have landscaped islands or
natural open space areas.  Maintenance responsibilities of these areas shall
be defined and recorded in the covenants, on the deeds, and in developers
agreements.



         (c)   Temporary, platted cul-de-sacs which abut land
proposed for development shall be removed by the developer.



      (3)   Street plans for future subdivisions.  Where the plat
to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for
development by the subdivider, a tentative plan for a proposed future street
system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and submitted by the
subdivider.



      (4)   Provisions for resubdivision of large lots and
parcels.  When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots
or parcels, the lots or parcel shall be arranged to permit the logical
location and openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with
provision for adequate utility connections for the resubdivision.



      (5)   Street intersections.  Under normal conditions, streets
shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles,
except where topography or other conditions justify variations.  Under
normal conditions, the minimum angle of intersection of streets shall be 60
degrees, with 90 degree intersections preferred.  Street intersection jogs
with an offset of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.



      (6)   Subdivisions abutting collector or minor arterial
streets.  Wherever a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing or
planned collector or minor arterial street as designated on the city's
thoroughfare plan, the lots shall access onto local streets wherever
possible.  Local streets may be existing or provided with the subdivision.



      (7)   Alleys.  Except in the case of a planned unit
development, either a public or private alley may be required in a block
where commercially zoned property abuts a major thoroughfare or a major
street.  Alleys in residential areas other than those zoned for multiple
family use shall not be permitted.



      (8)   Half streets.  Dedication of half streets shall not be
approved, except where it is essential to the reasonable development of the
subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of these
regulations, where it is found that it will be practical to require the
dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, or
where it becomes necessary to acquire the remaining half by condemnation so
that it may be improved in the public interest.



      (9)   Street grades.  Except upon the recommendation of the
engineer that the topography warrants a greater maximum, street grades shall
not exceed the following.



 

Minor Arterials
 
5%


Collector Streets
 
6%


Local, Marginal Access, and Cul-de-Sac Streets
 
8%


Minimum Grade of Not Less Than
 
0.5%



 



      (10)   Curb radius.  The minimum curb radii for arterials,
collector streets, local streets, and alleys shall be as follows.

 

Arterial Streets
 
25 feet


Collector Streets
 
20 feet


Local Streets
 
15 feet


Alleys
 
6 feet



 



      (11)   Reverse curves.  Tangents of at least 50 feet in
length shall be introduced between reverse curves on collector streets.



      (12)   Reserve strips.  Reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be prohibited except under conditions accepted by the Council.



      (13)   Minimum right-of-way widths.



 


Street

 

Width





Principal Arterial
 
150 feet to 300 feet


Intermediate Arterial
 
100 feet to 300 feet


Minor Arterial
 
80 feet to 120 feet


Collector Street
 
80 feet


Commercial or Industrial Service Street
 
80 feet


Local Street
 
60 feet


Marginal Access Street
 
50 feet


Cul-de-Sac
 
60 feet; turn-around radius of 60 feet




 



      (14)   Adding width to existing streets.  Where a subdivision
abuts or contains an existing street of inadequate width, sufficient
additional width shall be provided to meet the above standards.



      (15)   Additional right-of-way and roadway widths. 
Additional right-of-way and roadway widths may be required to promote public
safety and convenience when special conditions require it or to provide
parking space in areas of intensive use.



      (16)   Street improvements for plats.



         (a)   The City Engineer shall determine when the full
width of the right-of-way shall be graded, including the subgrade in
accordance with the provisions for construction as outlined in the design
standards.



         (b)   All streets shall be improved in accordance with
the standards and specifications for street construction established by the
Council.



      (17)   Curb and gutter.  Curb and gutter shall be provided
when required in accordance with the City of Lake Elmo Engineering Design
Standards.



   (I)   General improvements.



      (1)   Trees and boulevard sodding shall be planted in
accordance with city standards.



      (2)   Streets signs shall be installed at each intersection in
accordance with city standards.



      (3)   Driveway approaches, sidewalks, or pedestrian pathways
shall be installed in accordance with city standards.



      (4)   Street lighting fixtures shall be installed in
accordance with city standards.



      (5)   The Council may require sidewalks along both sides of
all streets in areas where the residential density equals or exceeds 3
dwelling units per nit acre of land or in any commercial, industrial, or
other business areas if the Council determines that sidewalks are required
for public safety.



(1997 Code, § 400.14)  (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 153.14  PARK LAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Dedication of land for park and open space use. In all new
residential subdivisions, a percentage of the gross area of all property
subdivided shall be dedicated for parks, playgrounds, trails, public open
space, or other public recreational use. For non-residential developments,
the city requires a payment in lieu of land dedication as established by
resolution of the City Council. Such percentage or fee shall be in addition
to the property dedicated for streets, alleys, waterways, pedestrian ways or
other public use pursuant to this chapter. The following schedule describes
the required dedication by zoning district. This schedule is based upon
density of the development allowed in each district and is intended to
equalize the amount and value of land dedicated for parks per dwelling unit
in the various districts.



 


Zoning Districts

 

Minimum Required Land Dedication



R1, R2, R3, and R4
 

10%



RS, V-LDR, LDR, MDR, HDR
 

10%



RE
 

7%



RR and AG
 

4%




 



 


Zoning Districts

 

Minimum Required Land Dedication



GB, LB, HB, BP, CB,
 

Fee as set by Council resolution



C, CC, LC, VMX
 

Fee as set by Council resolution



RR and AG with OP Conditional Use Permit
 

7%



RR and AG with OP-A Conditional Use Permit
 

10%




 



   (B)   Land title. Public land dedications, which are not dedicated
to the city on a plat, shall be conveyed to the city by warranty deed free
and clear of all liens or encumbrances. The subdivider shall provide proof of
title, in a form acceptable to the city, prior to the conveyance of the
property.



   (C)   Land acceptability. The city must approve the location and
configuration of any park land which is proposed for dedication and shall
take into consideration the suitability of the land and for its intended
purpose; the future needs of the city for parks, playgrounds, trails, or open
space; and the recommendations of the city’s Parks Commission. The
following properties shall not be accepted for park land dedications:



      (1)   Land dedicated or obtained as easements for streets,
sewer, electrical, gas, storm water drainage and retention areas, or other
similar utilities and improvements;



      (2)   Land which is unusable or of limited use; and/or



      (3)   Land within a protected wetland or within a flood plain
area unless the Council determines that all of the following criteria are
satisfied:



         (a)   Would be in the best interests of the general
public;



         (b)   Would be valuable resource for environmental
preservation, educational, or habitat preservation purposes;



         (c)   Has an exceptional aesthetic value; and



         (d)   Would not become financially burdensome to the
city as a result of maintenance or preservation requirements.



   (D)   Cash contribution in lieu of land dedication - residential
subdivisions larger than three lots. In lieu of the land dedication for
residential subdivisions larger than three lots, the city may elect to
require the subdivider to contribute a cash equivalent payment to the
city’s Park and Open Space Fund, or may require the developer to satisfy
the park land dedication requirement by a combination of land and cash
contribution. For all residential subdivisions of three or more parcels, the
required cash equivalent payment shall be an amount equal to the fair market
value of the percentage land dedication for the zoning district in which the
subdivided property is located. The city shall determine the fair market
value of the land by reference to current market data, if available, or by
obtaining an appraisal from a licensed real estate appraiser; the subdivider
shall pay for the cost of the appraisal. The fair market value determination
of the appraiser shall be conclusive.



   (E)   Cash contribution in lieu of land dedication - minor
residential subdivisions and commercial development. Required cash equivalent
payments for residential subdivisions resulting in 3 or fewer parcels or for
commercial development projects shall be as determined from time to time by
Council resolution.



   (F)   Payment of cash contribution. Cash contribution payments shall
be made to the city prior to final plat approval for commercial developments
or residential subdivision of more than 3 parcels, or prior to the city’s
approval of the deeds of conveyance in those cases where a residential
subdivision will result in 3 or fewer lots.



   (G)   Previously subdivided property from which a park dedication or
cash in lieu contribution has been received, upon resubdivision with the same
number of lots, is exempt from park dedication requirements. If, as a result
of the resubdivision of the property, the number of lots is increased, the
park dedication or cash in lieu contribution shall be applied only to the net
increase in the number of lots.



   (H)   (1)   Any cash contribution so paid to the city shall be
placed in a special fund. The money shall be used only for:



         (a)   The acquisition and development or improvement of
parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands or open space
based on the approved park systems plan;



         (b)   Redevelopment or rehabilitation of existing park
facilities or sites; or



         (c)   Debt service in connection with land previously
acquired or improvements thereto previously constructed.



      (2)   No funds shall be used for ongoing operation or
maintenance of existing parks or recreational facilities or sites.



   (I)   Lands designated for public use on Comprehensive Plan or
official maps. Where all or a portion of the area included in a proposed
subdivision has been designated as a park, playground, recreational area,
proposed school site, or other public ground in the city’s Comprehensive
Plan or in an official map adopted pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan, the
subdivider shall notify the appropriate governmental unit of the proposed
subdivision of the property. The notice shall be given prior to submittal of
the development application to the city. Prior to the city’s review of the
preliminary plat, the subdivider shall advise the city in writing of the
status of the negotiations regarding the designated area.



(1997 Code, § 400.15)  (Am. Ord. 08-072, passed 3-5-2013; Am. Ord. 08-167,
passed 2-7-2017; Am. Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.15  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS; FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS.



   (A)   Improvements.  All sanitary sewer, water main and storm sewer
facilities, streets, concrete curb, gutters, sidewalks, sodding, drainage
swales, and other public utilities ("improvements") shall be made and
constructed on or within the subdivided lands or where otherwise required and
dedicated to the city and shall be designed in compliance with city standards
by a registered professional engineer.



   (B)   Plans and specifications approval.  Plans and specifications
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval prior to construction. 
All of the improvements shall be completed by the developer and acceptable to
the City Engineer and shall be free and clear of any lien, claim, charge, or
encumbrance, including any for work, labor, or services rendered in
connection therewith or material or equipment supplied therefor.



   (C)   Improvement warrantees and guarantees.  Developer shall
warrant and guarantee the improvements against any defect in materials or
workmanship for a period of 2 years following completion and acceptance.  In
the event of the discovery of any defect in materials or workmanship within
the 2-year period, the defect shall be promptly repaired or corrected, and
the warranty and guarantee for the entire project shall be extended for 1
additional year beyond the original 2-year period, for a period of 3 years
following the completion and acceptance.  Defects in material or workmanship
shall be determined by the City Engineer.



   (D)   Required inspections of improvements.  Improvements that are
to be installed shall be inspected during the course of construction by the
City Engineer, at the developer's expense.  Notice shall be given to the
City Engineer a minimum of 24 hours prior to the required inspection. 
Failure to provide City Engineer with required notice shall result in a
stop-order issued to the project.  If developer proceeds with work within
the development without required inspection, City Engineer shall have the
discretion to accept or reject all or part of the improvement, by giving
appropriate written notice to the developer.



   (E)   Acceptance of improvements.  Acceptance of improvements by
the City Engineer may be subject to the reasonable conditions as Engineer may
impose at the time of acceptance.  Developer, through his or her engineer,
shall provide for competent daily inspection during the construction of all
improvements.  As-built drawing, Whitehall include service and valve ties,
on reproducible mylar shall be delivered to the Engineer within 60 days of
completion of the improvements together with a written certification from a
registered engineer that all improvements have been completed, inspected, and
tested in accordance with city-approved plans and specifications.



   (F)   Changes to construction plans and specifications.  All
changes to the construction plans and specifications must be approved by the
City Engineer.



   (G)   Clean-up obligations; street signs. 



      (1)   Developer shall remove all soil and debris from and
clean all streets within the lands developed in accordance with §
150.277(B)(2)(d) of this code.



      (2)   In the event there are or will be constructed on the
property, 2 or more streets, and if permanent street signs have not been
installed, developer shall install temporary street signs in accordance with
recommendations of the Maintenance Department, prior to the issuance of any
permit to build upon the property.



   (H)   Erosion control.  Erosion control shall be provided with the
installation of utilities and street curbs in accordance with the City of
Lake Elmo Engineering Design Standards.



   (I)   Developers agreement/security.  Subsequent to approval by the
Council and before execution by the city of the final plat or other
appropriate forms of city approval, developer shall:



      (1)   Enter into a developer's agreement whereby developer
shall undertake performance of the obligations imposed by this chapter, or by
Council condition, and containing the other terms and provisions and in the
form as shall be acceptable to the City Attorney, including, but not limited
to, provisions for default including fines and penalties; and



      (2)   Submit a bond, letter of credit, or cash deposit
("security") which guarantees completion of all improvements within the times
specified by the City Engineer.  The amount of the security shall be 125% of
the estimated construction cost of the improvements, subject to reduction
thereof to an amount equal to 25% of the cost of the improvements after
acceptance thereof by the City Engineer, and receipt of as-built drawings. 
The security shall be in the form and contain the other provisions and terms
as may be required by the City Engineer and/or City Attorney.  The
developer's registered engineer shall make and submit for approval to the
City Engineer, a written estimate of the costs of the improvements.



   (J)   Petitions for improvements by city.  With the approval of the
Council, and instead of the obligations imposed by divisions (A) through (I)
above, developer may enter into an agreement signed by 100% of all owners of
the land to be developed, requesting the city to install some or all of the
improvements, request all of the costs be assessed against the property, and
waiving the rights to appeal from the levied special assessments.  Upon
approval by the Council, the city may cause the improvements to be made and
special assessments for all costs of the improvements to be levied on the
land, except any land that is or shall be dedicated to the public.  The
special assessment shall be payable over a term of 5 years unless otherwise
authorized by the Council.  Prior to the award of any contract by the city
for the construction of any improvement, developer shall have entered into a
contract for rough grading of streets included in the improvement to a
finished subgrade elevation, and including the other terms as required by
Council.  Developer's obligation with respect to the rough grading work
shall be secured by a bond, letter of credit, or the deposit which shall
guarantee completion, and payment for all labor and materials expended in
connection with the rough grading.  The amount of the security shall be 125%
of the cost of the rough grading and shall be in the form and contain the
further terms as may be required by the City Engineer and/or City Attorney.



   (K)   City Attorney approval.  No final plat shall be approved by
the Council without first receiving a report signed by the City Attorney
certifying that the agreements and documents required under this chapter meet
the requirements of the city.  The City Treasurer shall also certify that
all fees required to be paid to the city in connection with the plat have
been paid.



   (L)   Warranty bond.  The city shall require a developer to submit
a warranty bond or equivalent in the amount equal to the original cost of the
improvements, which shall be in force a minimum of 2 years following final
acceptance of any required improvements and shall guarantee satisfactory
performance of the improvements, unless waived by the Council.



(1997 Code, § 400.16) (Am. Ord. 08-024, passed 4-20-2010)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 153.16  FEES.



   (A)   The Council shall by ordinance, adopted from time to time,
establish fees to be paid by the applicant to defray the administrative costs
and expenses incurred by the city in processing development applications,
applications for variance or appeals under the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Fees to be paid by the applicant shall include all
administrative, engineering, legal, and consulting fees and materials costs
reasonably incurred in the review of the proposed subdivision and the
processing of the applications or appeals.



(1997 Code, § 400.17)



§ 153.17  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats.  It shall be a violation
of this chapter to sell, trade, offer to sell, trade, or otherwise convey am
lot or parcel of land as part of, or in conformity with any plan, plat, or
replat of any subdivision or area located within the city unless the plan,
plat, or replat shall first have been approved by the city in writing as
provided by this chapter and in the case of a plat, replat, or registered
land survey unless the survey is recorded in the office of the County
Recorder or Registrar of Titles.



   (B)   Misrepresentation as to construction, supervision, or
inspection of improvements.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
represent that any improvement upon any of the streets, alleys, or avenue of
the addition or subdivision or any sewer in the addition or subdivision has
been constructed according to the plans and specifications approved by the
Council, or has been supervised or inspected by the city, when the
improvements have not been so constructed, supervised, or inspected.



(1997 Code, § 400.18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 154:  ZONING CODE



Section



   154.01   Zoning Code adopted by reference.



§ 154.01  ZONING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The City of Lake Elmo zoning regulations are presently undergoing
comprehensive revision. The current regulations are adopted by reference as
if set forth in full herein, and are available for inspection during regular
business hours in the City Planning Department.



APPENDIX A:  FEE SCHEDULE



 


Application/Fee/Permit Type

 

Fee 2015

 

Escrow or Additional Charge

 

Department





Accessory bldg. forward of primary structure (§ 154.092)
 

$200

 


 

Planning



Administrative citations
 


 


 

Administration



   General code violations
 


 


 

Administration



      1st offense
 

$100 per violation

 


 

Administration



      2nd offense within one year from the first citation
 

$200 per violation

 


 

Administration



      3rd offense within one year from the first citation
 

$500 per violation

 


 

Administration



      4th offense or subsequent offenses may be subject to criminal
prosecution or any other legal remedy available to the city. An
administrative citation may also be issued independently or concurrent to any
other legal action take by the city.
 


 

Administration



   Building and safety code violations
 


 


 




      1st offense
 

$100 per violation

 


 

Building



      2nd offense within one year from the first citation
 

$500 per violation

 


 

Building



      3rd offense within one year from the first citation
 

$1,000 per violation

 


 

Building



      4th offense or subsequent offenses may be subject to criminal
prosecution or any other legal remedy available to the city. An
administrative citation may also be issued independently or concurrent to any
other legal action take by the city.
 


 

Building



Amateur radio antenna
 

$875

 


 

Planning



Appeal (to Board of Adjustment and Appeals)
 

$250

 


 

Administration



Bee keeping permit
 

$25

 

Valid for 2 years from issuance

 

Administration



Building demolition
 


 


 

Administration



   Residential
 

$200

 


 

Building



   Commercial
 

$300

 

Building



Burning permit
 


 


 

Fire



   Residential
 

$45

 


 

Fire



   Commercial
 

$80

 


 

Fire



   Illegal burn
 

See notes

 

Additional fees may be incurred based on Wash. Cty. chief’s fee schedule
and # of responding units

 

Fire



Chicken keeping permit
 

$25

 

Initial permit expires on 12/31 of 2nd year

 

Administration



Comprehensive Plan amendment
 

$1,300

 


 

Planning



Conditional use permit (CUP)

(new or amended)
 

new $1,050



amended $500

 

Wireless communication facilities escrow $6,000



Flood plain ordinance escrow $500

 

Planning



CONTRACTOR LICENSE FEES
 


 


 




   Demolition
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   Driveway
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   Excavator
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   HVAC
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   Irrigation
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   Sewer/water line installer
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   Sign installer
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   Solid waste hauler
 

$120

 


 

Licensing



COPY SERVICES (paper/electronic)
 


 


 

Administration



   Copies (B & W)
 

$.25 per page

 

100 pages or more are charged at actual cost of production

 

Administration



   Copies (B&W) 11 x 17
 

$1 per page

 

Administration



   Copies (color)
 

$.50 per page

 

Administration



   Copies (color) 11 x 17
 

$2 per page

 

Administration



   Data DVD fee
 

$15

 


 

Administration



   GIS scaled aerial
 

$25

 


 

Administration



   Existing maps
 

$5

 


 

Administration



   Custom (per hour rate)
 

$70

 


 

Administration



   Plan size maps (larger than 11 x 17)
 

$15

 


 

Administration



   Development standards specifications & details
 

$55

 


 

Administration



   Video reproduction
 

$10

 


 

Administration



Culverts in developments with rural section
 

$160

 


 

Administration



Daycare inspection fee
 

$60

 

Plus 1% of value. Minimum $100

 

Fire



Dog license
 


 


 

Licensing



   Altered
 

$20

 


 

Licensing



   Unaltered
 

$25

 


 

Licensing



   Late fee
 

$2.50 per month

 

Maximum $10

 

Licensing



   Service dogs license
 

No charge

 


 

Licensing



   Duplicate license or tag
 

$1

 


 

Licensing



   First impound - unlicensed dog
 

$60

 

All impound fees plus $20/day boarding fee

 

Licensing



   First impound - licensed dog
 

$42

 

Licensing



   First impound - cat
 

$42

 

Licensing



   Subsequent dog/cat impound
 

$85

 

Plus boarding fee - $20/day

 

Licensing



Driveway
 


 


 

Planning



   Residential
 

$70

 


 

Planning



   Commercial
 

$160

 


 

Planning



Easement encroachment
 

$150

 

Staff and recording fee

 

Planning



Electronic fund withdrawal/bill payment
 

Fee and transaction charge

 


 

Administrati on



Environmental review
 


 


 




   Village area AUAR fee
 

$230

 
Per REC unit. To be charged to development applications that increase the
number of REC units above existing conditions within the village AUAR area.
The fee will be based on the difference between the proposed and existing REC
units.

Fee to be paid as part of a developer’s agreement for larger projects or at
the time a building permit is issued for smaller projects.

Once paid, the same land will not be charged again.
 

Planning



Erosion Control
 


 


 

Building



   Re-inspection fee (portal to portal from city hall: 1 hr. min.)
 

$50 per hour

 

$5,000 security

 

Building



Excavating and grading ≥ 50 cubic yards, up to 400 cubic yards
 

$125

 

$500 security

 

Building



Excavating and grading ≥400 cubic yards
 

$500

 

$500 fee escrow plus security $1,500 per acre with $1,500 minimum

 

Engineering



False alarms (12 month period*)
(*1-3 no charge)
 


 


 

Fire



   Residential
 


 


 

Fire



      4-6 false alarms
 

$110

 


 

Fire



      In excess of 6 false alarms
 

$185

 


 

fire



   Commercial
 


 


 

Fire



      4-6 false alarms
 

$315

 


 

Fire



      In excess of 6 false alarms
 

$520

 


 

Fire



   Fire alarm systems (new or rework including low voltage systems)
 

1.2% of value

 

Minimum $100

 

Fire



Flood plain district delineation
 

$500

 


 

Planning



Fuel tank removal (underground)
 

$250

 


 

Administration



Fuel tank install
 

2% of value of work

 

Minimum $100

 

Administration



HVAC
 


 


 

Building



   Residential
 

$60/unit

 

Up to 3 units, max fee $180

 

Building



   Commercial
 

$60/unit

 

Up to 3 units or 1% of total valuation, which ever is greater.

 

Building



Interim use permit (IUP)
 


 


 

Planning



   Fee
 

$1,050

 


 

Planning



   Renewal
 

$300

 


 

Planning



Land use escrow
 

$2,500

 

Escrow agreement

 

Planning



Liquor license
 


 


 

Licensing



   Club on-sale intoxicating
 

$100

 


 

Licensing



   On sale intoxicating
 

$1,500

 


 

Licensing



   Off-sale intoxicating
 

$200

 


 

Licensing



   Off-sale non-intoxicating
 

$150

 


 

Licensing



   On-sale intoxicating - 2nd bldg
 

$750

 


 

Licensing



   On-sale non-intoxicating
 

$100

 


 

Licensing



   Investigation
 

$350

 


 

Licensing



   On-sale Sunday intoxicating
 

$200

 


 

Licensing



   Temporary intoxicating
 

$25

 


 

Licensing



   Wine
 

$300

 


 

Licensing



Lot line adjustment
 

$325

 


 

Planning



Manufactured home parks
 


 


 

Planning



   Fee
 

$1,000

 


 

Planning



   New
 

$1,200

 

Plus $2,500 fee escrow

 

Planning



   Move home out of city
 

$200

 


 

Building



   Move into city
 

$200

 


 

Building



Massage therapy premises license
 


 


 

Licensing



   Application fee
 

$100

 

Fee includes one therapist

 

Licensing



   Investigation fee
 

$100

 


 

Licensing



Massage therapy practitioner license
 


 


 

Licensing



   Application fee
 

$50

 


 

Licensing



   Investigation fee
 

$25

 


 

Licensing



Massage therapy premises license renewal
 

$50

 

Fee includes one therapist

 

Licensing



Massage therapy practitioner license renewal
 

$25

 


 

Licensing



Massage therapy license amendment
 

$25

 


 

Licensing



Minor subdivision
 

$525

 


 

Planning



Moving house or primary structure into city
 

$520

 

Plus security with amount to be determined by city with recommendation from
Building Official

 

Administrati on



Moving accessory structure into city
 

$305

 

Plus security to be determined by the city with recommendation from Building
Official

 

Administrati on



Other inspections and fees
 


 


 

Building



   Inspection outside of business hours
 

$100 (2 hr. min.)

 


 

Building



   Re-inspection fees assessed
 

$50 per hour

 


 

Building



   Inspections with no fee assigned
 

$50 per hour

 


 

Building



   Construction escrow
 

$5,000

 

Or determined by Building Official

 

Building



   Cancelled or refunded permits
 

$25

 


 

Building



   Work without permit
 

see notes

 

investigative fee to equal permit fee

 

Building



   Duplicate inspection card
 

$25

 


 

Building



Park dedication
 


 


 

Planning



   Residential - up to 3 lots
 

$ 3,600 per lot

 

4 or more lots per § 153.14

 

Planning



   Commercial
 

$4,500 per acre

 


 

Planning



Parking lots
 


 


 




   New commercial
 

$175

 

$500 fee escrow. Security $1,500 per acre with $1,500 min.

 

Planning



   Existing commercial
 

$200

 

Planning



Platting
 


 


 




   Sketch plan review (subdivision)
 

$500

 

$3,500 fee escrow

 

Planning



   Preliminary plat (subdivision)
 

$1,850

 

$10,000 fee escrow

 

Planning



   Final plat (subdivision)
 

$1,250

 

$8,000 fee escrow

 

Planning



   Concept Plan (OP Development)
 

$1,250

 

$5,000 (<100 units) fee escrow



$7,500 (>100 units) fee escrow

 




   Preliminary plat review (OP Development)
 

$1,850

 




   Final plat (OP Development)
 

$1,250

 




 
 


 

(City will retain escrows to reimburse review costs for each stage of
development review)

 

Planning



Planned unit development
 


 


 

Planning



   General concept plan
 

$1,250

 

$7,500 fee escrow

 

Planning



   Development stage plan
 

$1,850

 

$7,500 fee escrow

 

Planning



   Final plan
 

$1,250

 

$7,500 fee escrow

 

Planning



 
 


 

(City will retain escrows to reimburse review costs for each stage of
development review)

 

Planning



Plumbing
 


 


 

Administrati on



   Residential
 

$60/unit

 

Up to 3 units, max fee $180

 

Building



   Commercial
 

$60/unit

 

Up to 3 units or 1% of total valuation, whichever is greater.

 

Building



Private roads (permitted only in AG zone)
 

$150

 


 

Engineering



Real estate searches
 

$15/search

 

For special assessment or utility search

 

Administration



Restrictive soils and wetland restoration

   protection and preservation permit
 

$800

 

$1,500 fee escrow

 

Planning



Retaining walls over 4'
 

$150

 

Based on valuation, $100 minimum

 

Building



Returned check (NSF)
 

$25

 


 

Administration



Right-of-way permit
 


 


 

Engineering



   Annual registration
 

$200

 

$5,000 security

 

Engineering



   Excavation permit
 

$275 + $0.60/foot

 


 

Engineering



   Joint trench permit (per lot per utility)
 

$275 + $0.60/foot

 


 

Engineering



   Obstruction permit
 

$275

 


 

Engineering



   Permit extension
 

$100

 


 

Engineering



   Delay penalty (per calendar day)
 

$25

 


 

Engineering



Roofing
 


 


 

Building



   Residential
 

$150

 


 

Building



   Commercial
 

See notes

 

Based on valuation

 

Building



SAC charge (city) (sewer availability charge)
 

$3,000

 

Per REC unit: collected at time of plat for new lot or at time of connection
for existing.

 

Engineering



SAC charge (Met Council) (sewer availability charge)
 

$2,485

 

Per REC unit: $2,485 to Met Council at time of connection.

 

Engineering



Sewer connection charge
 

$1,000

 

Per REC unit

 

Engineering



Sewer lateral benefit charge
 

$5,800

 

Per REC unit connecting to a trunk sewer main and that has never been assessed

 

Engineering



Sewer rate
 

$4.50/1,000 gal.

 


 

Administrati on



   201 off-site maintenance fee
 

$75/unit/quarter

 


 

Administrati on



Siding
 


 


 

Building



   Residential
 

$150

 


 

Building



   Commercial
 

See notes

 

Based on valuation

 

Building



Signs
 


 


 

Planning



   Permanent
 

$180

 


 

Planning



   Temporary
 

$75

 


 

Planning



   Temporary renewal
 

$25

 


 

Planning



   Re-inspection fee
 

$25

 


 

Planning



Special event permit
 

$75

 

City must be listed as additional insured

 

Planning



Sprinkler system (inspection fee)
 

1.2% of value

 

Minimum $100

 

Building



Sprinkler system (re-inspection fee)
 

$50

 


 

Building



Surface water
 


 


 

Administrati on



   Residential
 

$50

 


 

Administrati on



   Nonresidential (commercial, etc.)
 

$50

 

Utility rate factor per code

 

Administrati on



   Review fee
 

$125

 

$75 review/$50 Storm Water Fund

 

Administrati on



Vacations (streets or easements)
 


 


 

Planning



   Easements
 

$515

 

$500 fee escrow

 

Planning



   Streets
 

$515

 

$500 fee escrow

 

Planning



Variance
 

$750

 


 

Planning



   Shoreland variance
 

$1,500

 


 

Planning



Water availability charge (WAC)
 

$3,000

 

Per REC unit; collected at time of plat for new lot or at time of connecting
for existing.

 

Engineering



Water connection charge
 

$1,000

 

Per REC unit

 

Administration



Water equipment/set up
 


 


 

Administration



   Meter (3/4" or less)
 

$350

 

Additional fees apply to larger sized meters

 

Administration



   Driveway curb stop lid
 

$100

 

Administration



   Disconnect service
 

$80

 

Administration



   Reconnect service
 

$80

 

Administration



Water lateral benefit charge
 

$5,800

 

Per REC unit connecting to a trunk water main and that has never been assessed

 

Engineering



Water Usage
 


 


 

Administration



   Residential - quarterly rate
 

$25 base

 


 

Administration



      Plus rate per 1,000 gallons
 


 


 

Administraion



         0 - 15,000 gallons
 

$2.00

 


 

Administration



         15,001 - 30,000 gallons
 

$2.60

 


 

Administration



         30,001 - 50,000 gallons
 

$3.38

 


 

Administration



         50,001 - 80,000 gallons
 

$4.39

 


 

Administration



         80,001+ gallons
 

$5.71

 


 

Administration



    Commercial - quarterly rate
 

$25 base

 


 

Administration



      Plus rate per 1,000 gallons
 


 


 

Administration



         0 - 15,000 gallons
 

$3.11

 


 

Administration



         15,001 - 30,000 gallons
 

$3.26

 


 

Administration



         30,001 - 50,000 gallons
 

$3.77

 


 

Administration



         50,001 - 80,000 gallons
 

$5.00

 


 

Administration



         80,001+ gallons
 

$6.63

 


 

Administraion



   Hotel/motel - quarterly rate
 

$25 base

 

For metered non- irrigation (domestic) consumption

 

Administration



      Plus rate per 1,000 gallons
 


 


 

Administration



         0 - 30,000 gallons
 

$3.11

 


 

Administration



         30,001 - 50,000 gallons
 

$3.26

 


 

Administration



         50,001 + gallons
 

$4.00

 


 

Administration



   Delinquent accounts
 


 


 

Administration



      Regular
 

6% per quarter

 

Plus $25 or 8%, whichever is greater, if certified to county for collection
with taxes

 

Administration



      Storm water
 

10% per year

 

Administration



   Bulk water purchase
 


 


 

Administration



      Water from hydrant
 

$61.20 for first 5,000 gallons

 

Plus $3.26 per additional 1,000 gallons

 

Administration



      Sod installation (new construction)
 

$61.20 for first 5,000 gallons

 

Up to 45 days. Resident must contact city in advance

 

Administration



      Swimming pool fill
 

$61.20 for first 5,000 gallons

 

Plus $3.26 per 1,000 gallons and $15 per labor hour

 

Administration



Wind generator
 

$850

 

$2,000 fee escrow

 

Planning



Wireless communications permit
 

$500

 

$6,000 fee escrow

 

Planning



Zoning amendment (text or map)
 

$1,245

 


 

Planning



Zoning Certification Letter
 

$25

 


 

Planning



Zoning Permit - Certificate of zoning compliance
 


 


 

Planning



   Accessory structures <200 sf
 

$75

 


 

Planning



   Fence (less than 6')
 

$75

 


 

Planning



   Swimming pool
 

$75

 


 

Planning



   Other
 

$75

 


 

Planning




Definition of terms



   * FEE ESCROW.  City will maintain a fee escrow to cover all city
review costs. Application fees include all professional fees and expenses
incurred by the city.



   **SECURITY.  City will retain a security escrow to ensure completion
of work as directed by the approved permit/application and compliance with
the State Building Code and the City of Lake Elmo Municipal Code.





 



(Ord. 97-202, passed 12-4-2007; Am. Ord. 08-004, passed 2-22-2008; Am. Ord.
08-009, passed 9-26-2008; Am. Ord. 08-013, passed 1-20-2009; Am. Ord. 08-022,
passed 1-26-2010; Am. Ord. 08-036, passed 12-7-2010; Am. Ord. 08-037, passed
1-4-2011; Am. Ord. 08-045, passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. 08-056, passed
3-6-2012; Am. Ord. 08-068, passed 2-5-2013; Am. Ord. 08-084, passed 7-2-2013;
Am. Ord. 08-097, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 08-101, passed 2-18-2014; Am.
Ord. 08-103, passed 2-18-2014; Am. Ord. 08-114, passed 8-5-2014; Am. Ord.
08-115, passed 12-16-2014; Am. Ord. 08-127, passed 12-15-2015; Am. Ord.
08-132, passed 4-5-2016)



APPENDIX B:  ELECTRICAL INSPECTION FEES



 


Item Description

 

Fees






Minimum fee (does not include state surcharge)

 

$38.50




Single Family dwelling and Multi-family dwelling with individual service

 

$148.50




Multi-family dwelling with common service, each unit

 

$77.00




Swimming pool, spa, fountain

 

$84.00




Finish basement, rough-in and final inspection

 

$77.00




Amperes service, generators and other power supplies and feeders to separate
structures



   0-400 amperes



   401-800 amperes



   More than 800 amperes

 




$38.50



$66.00



$110.00




0 to 200 ampere circuits

 

$6.60




More than 200 ampere circuits

 

$16.50




Street, parking and outdoor lighting standard

 

$5.50




Traffic signals

 

$5.50




0-10 KVA transformers for light, heat and power

 

$16.50




More than 10 KVA transformers for light, heat and power

 

$33.00




Transformers for electronic power supplies, signs and outline lighting

 

$5.50




Alarm communication, remote control and signal circuits less than 50 volts
each

 

$0.83




Electrical re-inspection 2nd trip

 

$38.50




Investigation fee for electrical work started without permit.  Equal to
permit fee

 





Residential service change (fuses to breakers, service upgrade, etc.)

 

$75.00




Hourly rate per State of Minnesota Fee Schedule/ special inspections

 





State surcharge

 

$5.00





 



(Ord. 08-049, passed 7-19-2011; Am. Ord. 08-094, passed 11-19-2013)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Table



   I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



TABLE I:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 


Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Description






97-106

 

4-2-2002

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




97-132

 

6-18-2004

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




97-136

 

7-6-2004

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




97-144

 

1-4-2005

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




97-159

 

6-21-2005

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




97-162

 

9-6-2005

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




97-193

 

6-19-2007

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-001

 

1-8-2008

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-002

 

1-22-2008

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-039

 

3-1-2011

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-102

 

2-18-2014

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-106

 

4-1-2014

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-118

 

4-21-2015

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-120

 

5-19-2015

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-129

 

2-16-2016

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-131

 

1-19-2016

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-134

 

4-19-2016

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-149

 

12-6-2016

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-161

 

12-20-2016

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-165

 

2-7-2017

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-170

 

2-21-2017

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-176

 

5-2-2017

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map




08-180

 

7-5-2017

 

Amendment to Zoning District Map





 


 











PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to 1997 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Cites
 
Code Section




12.25
 
33.01, 33.03


12.31
 
33.05


13.37(b)
 
94.60


Ch. 13
 
31.01


Ch. 13D
 
31.01


13D.01, Subd. 6
 
31.01


13D.04, Subd. 2
 
31.01, 31.04


13D.04, Subd. 4
 
31.01


14.57 to 14.69
 
52.17, 111.25, 111.29, 111.54


16B.59 to 16B.75
 
151.001


16B.62, Subd. 2
 
151.002, 151.003


16B.70
 
11.02, 151.015


18.46, Subd. 13
 
91.24


Ch. 38
 
110.70


84
 
70.01


84C.01-.05
 
150.180


Ch. 86B
 
97.21


86B.005
 
97.21


86B.201, Subd. 3
 
97.21


86B.313
 
97.21


93.44 to 93.51
 
11.01


103B
 
150.270


103F
 
150.250, 152.01


103F.201
 
150.256


103F.401
 
150.270


103F.441
 
150.270


103G
 
150.250, 152.04, 152.10


103G.0005, Subd. 14
 
152.06


103G.245
 
150.255


103G.291
 
50.40


103G.298
 
50.40


105.37, Subd. 6
 
150.218


105.37, Subd. 14 and 15
 
11.01


115
 
150.250


115.07
 
11.01


116
 
150.250


116B
 
11.01


118A.02, Subd. 1
 
31.01


Ch. 146A
 
114.07


Ch. 147
 
114.04


Ch. 148
 
114.04


168B
 
71.01


168B.01 to 168.101
 
92.01


168B.011, Subd. 2
 
92.01


169
 
71.01


201
 
30.15


216B.02, Subds. 4 and 6
 
94.02


216B.34
 
94.61


216D
 
94.20


216D.01-09
 
94.42, 94.63


237.162
 
94.01, 94.02


237.163
 
94.01, 94.02


238
 
94.02


278.01 - 278.03
 
114.05


299F.011
 
151.041


300.03
 
94.02


300.06
 
94.21


303.06
 
114.11


308.08
 
11.01


326B
 
151.001


326B.121, Subd. 2(d)
 
151.002


326B.133 Subd. 1
 
151.002


326B.138, Subd. 1
 
151.003


327.31, Subd. 3
 
11.01


327C.095
 
151.165


331A.01, Subd. 10
 
31.03


331A.08, Subd. 3
 
31.03


333.01
 
114.11


340A
 
111.17


340A.301
 
111.51


340A.409
 
111.18


340A.801
 
111.18


340A.802
 
111.18


Ch. 343
 
95.002


346.155, Subd. 7
 
95.046 , 95.078


349
 
110.40, 110.41


349.11 - 349.60
 
114.07


349.12, Subd. 24
 
110.40, 110.46


349.166
 
110.46, 110.49


349A.01 - 349A.15
 
114.07


378.32
 
97.24


394
 
150.250


412.121
 
31.01


412.151
 
31.03


412.191
 
31.03


412.831
 
31.01


427.01
 
31.01


427.02
 
31.01


427.09
 
31.01


429
 
150.219, 151.116


429.101
 
91.26


444.075
 
53.01


444.075, Subd. 3
 
51.032


Ch. 462
 
150.250, 150.270, 152.01


459.20
 
97.24


462.359
 
11.01


471.193
 
32.110


471.709
 
114.04


473.121, Subd. 24
 
51.032


505
 
153.08


505.02, Subd. 1
 
150.257


561.01
 
95.026


609
 
130.01


609.33, Subd. 1
 
11.01


617.241
 
113.02


645
 
10.18


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1997 CODE



 

1997 Code
 
2005 Code




100.03
 
10.18


100.05
 
30.01


105.01
 
11.02


105.03
 
11.02


105.04
 
11.02


105.05
 
11.02


105.06
 
11.02


105.07
 
11.02


105.08
 
11.02


110.01
 
92.01


110.02
 
92.02


150
 
11.01


200.01
 
31.01-31.09


200.02
 
31.25-31.34


200.03
 
32.001-32.010


200.04
 
30.02


200.05
 
30.03


200.06
 
30.04


205.01
 
30.15


205.02
 
30.16


205.03
 
30.17


210.01
 
32.025


210.02
 
32.026


210.03
 
32.027


210.04
 
32.028


210.05
 
32.029


210.06
 
32.030


210.07
 
32.031


210.08
 
32.032


210.09
 
32.033


210.10
 
32.034


210.11
 
32.035


210.12
 
32.036


210.13
 
32.037


210.14
 
32.038


210.15
 
32.039


210.16
 
32.040


210.17
 
32.041


210.18
 
32.042


215.01
 
32.055


215.02
 
32.056


215.03
 
32.057


215.04
 
32.058


215.05
 
32.059


215.06
 
32.060


215.07
 
32.061


215.08
 
32.062


215.09
 
32.063


215.10
 
32.064


215.11
 
32.065


215.12
 
32.066


225.01
 
32.080


225.02
 
32.081


225.03
 
32.082


225.04
 
32.083


225.05
 
32.084


225.06
 
32.085


225.07
 
32.086


225.08
 
32.087


225.09
 
32.088


225.10
 
32.089


225.11
 
32.090


225.12
 
32.091


225.13
 
32.092


225.14
 
32.093


225.15
 
32.094


225.16
 
32.095


225.17
 
32.096


225.18
 
32.097


230.01
 
32.110


230.02
 
32.111


230.03
 
32.112


230.04
 
32.113


230.05
 
32.114


230.06
 
32.115


230.07
 
32.116


230.08
 
32.117


230.09
 
32.118


230.10
 
32.119


230.11
 
32.120


230.12
 
32.121


230.13
 
32.122


230.14
 
32.123


230.15
 
32.124


230.16
 
32.125


230.17
 
32.126


230.18
 
32.127


230.19
 
32.128


240.01
 
32.140


240.02
 
32.141


240.03
 
32.142


240.04
 
32.143


240.05
 
32.144


240.06
 
32.145


240.07
 
32.146


240.08
 
32.147


240.09
 
32.148


240.10
 
32.149


240.11
 
32.150


240.12
 
32.151


240.13
 
32.152


240.14
 
32.153


240.15
 
32.154


240.16
 
32.155


310.01
 
150.200


310.02
 
150.201


310.04
 
150.202


310.05
 
150.203


315.01
 
150.215


315.02
 
150.216


315.03
 
150.217


315.04
 
150.218


315.05
 
150.219


320.01
 
150.230


320.02
 
150.231


320.03
 
150.232


320.04
 
150.233


320.05
 
150.234


320.06
 
150.235


320.07
 
150.236


320.08
 
150.237


320.09
 
150.238


325.01
 
150.250


325.02
 
150.251


325.03
 
150.252


325.04
 
150.253


325.05
 
150.254


325.06
 
150.255


325.07
 
150.256


325.08
 
150.257


400.02
 
153.01


400.03
 
153.02


400.04
 
153.03


400.05
 
153.04


400.06
 
153.05


400.07
 
153.06


400.08
 
153.07


400.09
 
153.08


400.10
 
153.09


400.11
 
153.10


400.12
 
153.11


400.13
 
153.12


400.14
 
153.13


400.15
 
153.15


400.16
 
153.15


400.17
 
153.16


400.18
 
153.17


505.01
 
151.015


505.02
 
151.016


505.03
 
151.017


505.04
 
151.018


505.05
 
151.019


505.06
 
151.020


505.09
 
151.023


505.11
 
151.025


505.13
 
151.027


515.01
 
151.055


525.01
 
151.085


530.01
 
151.100


545.01
 
151.135


545.02
 
151.136


545.03
 
151.137


545.04
 
151.138


545.05
 
151.139


545.06
 
151.140


545.07
 
151.141


545.08
 
151.142


545.09
 
151.143


545.10
 
151.144


545.11
 
151.145


545.12
 
151.146


545.13
 
151.147


545.14
 
151.148


545.15
 
151.149


545.16
 
151.150


550.01
 
151.165


550.02
 
11.01


550.03
 
151.166


550.04
 
151.167


550.05
 
151.168


550.06
 
151.169


550.07
 
151.170


550.08
 
151.171


550.09
 
151.172


550.10
 
151.173


600.01
 
50.01


600.02
 
50.02


600.03
 
50.03


600.04
 
50.15


600.05
 
50.16


600.06
 
50.17


600.07
 
50.18


600.08
 
50.30


600.09
 
50.31


600.10
 
50.32


600.11
 
50.33


600.12
 
50.34


600.13
 
50.35


600.14
 
50.36


600.15
 
50.36


600.16
 
50.37


600.17
 
50.36


600.18
 
50.38


600.19
 
50.39


600.21
 
50.41


600.22
 
50.42


600.23
 
50.43


600.24
 
50.44


600.25
 
50.45


600.26
 
50.46


600.27
 
50.47


600.28
 
50.47


700.02
 
51.001


700.04
 
51.004


705.01
 
51.020


705.02
 
51.021


705.03
 
51.022


705.04
 
51.022


705.05
 
51.024


705.06
 
51.025


705.08
 
51.026


705.09
 
51.027


705.10
 
51.028


705.11
 
51.029


705.12
 
51.030


705.13
 
51.031


705.14
 
51.032


710.02
 
51.045


710.05
 
51.046


710.06
 
51.047


710.07
 
51.048


710.08
 
51.049


720.02
 
51.065


720.03
 
51.066


800.02
 
52.01-52.21


800.03
 
52.40


805.01
 
52.55


805.02
 
52.56


805.03
 
52.57


805.04
 
52.58


805.05
 
52.59


805.06
 
52.60


805.07
 
52.61


805.08
 
52.62


805.09
 
52.63


805.10
 
52.64


805.11
 
52.65


810.01
 
52.75


810.02
 
11.01, 52.76


900.01
 
90.01


900.02
 
11.01


900.03
 
90.02


900.04
 
90.03


900.06
 
90.04


900.07
 
90.05


905.01
 
91.01


905.03
 
91.02


905.04
 
91.03


905.05
 
91.04


905.06
 
91.05


905.07
 
91.06


910.01
 
91.20


910.02
 
91.21


910.03
 
91.22


910.04
 
91.23


910.05
 
91.24


910.06
 
91.25


910.07
 
91.26


910.08
 
91.27


910.09
 
91.28


910.10
 
91.29


1000.01
 
71.01


1000.02
 
71.02


1005.01
 
72.01


1005.04
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


1005.05
 
72.02


1100.01
 
110.01


1100.02
 
110.02


1100.03
 
110.03


1100.04
 
110.04


1100.05
 
110.05


1100.06
 
110.06


1100.07
 
110.07


1100.08
 
110.08


1100.09
 
110.09


1105.01
 
11.01


1105.02
 
110.20


1105.03
 
110.21


1105.04
 
110.22


1105.05
 
110.23


1105.06
 
110.24


1105.07
 
110.25


1110.01
 
110.40


1110.02
 
110.41


1110.03
 
110.42


1110.04
 
110.43


1110.05
 
110.44


1110.06
 
110.45


1110.07
 
110.46


1110.08
 
110.47


1110.09
 
11.01, 110.48


1110.10
 
110.49


1200.01
 
111.15


1200.02
 
111.16


1200.03
 
111.17


1200.04
 
111.18


1200.05
 
111.19


1200.06
 
111.20


1200.07
 
111.21


1200.08
 
111.22


1200.09
 
111.23


1200.10
 
111.24


1200.11
 
111.25


1200.12
 
111.26


1200.13
 
111.27


1200.14
 
111.28


1205.01
 
111.40


1205.02
 
111.41


1205.03
 
111.42


1205.04
 
111.43


1205.05
 
111.44


1205.06
 
111.45


1205.07
 
111.46


1205.08
 
111.47


1205.09
 
111.48


1205.10
 
111.49


1205.11
 
111.50


1205.12
 
111.51


1205.13
 
111.52


1205.14
 
111.53


1210.01
 
111.01


1210.02
 
111.01


1210.03
 
111.01


1305.01
 
112.01


1305.02
 
112.02


1305.03
 
112.03


1305.04
 
112.04


1305.05
 
112.05


1305.06
 
112.06


1305.07
 
112.07


1305.08
 
112.08


1305.09
 
112.09


1305.10
 
112.10


1305.11
 
112.11


1305.12
 
112.12


1305.13
 
112.13


1310.01
 
130.30


1310.02
 
130.31


1310.03
 
130.32


1320.01
 
11.01


1320.23
 
11.01


1330.01
 
130.01


1335.01
 
96.02


1335.02
 
96.03


1335.03
 
96.04


1335.04
 
96.05


1335.05
 
96.06


1335.06
 
96.07


1335.07
 
96.08


1335.08
 
96.09


1335.09
 
96.10


1335.10
 
96.01


1335.12
 
96.11


1335.13
 
96.12


1340.01
 
11.01


1340.02
 
150.001


1340.03
 
150.001


1340.04
 
150.002


1340.05
 
150.003


1340.06
 
11.01


1345.01
 
150.020


1345.02
 
11.01


1350.01
 
150.035


1350.03
 
150.036


1350.04
 
150.037


1350.05
 
150.038


1355.01
 
11.01


1355.02
 
97.01


1355.03
 
97.02


1355.04
 
97.03


1355.05
 
97.04


1355.06
 
97.05


1355.07
 
97.06


1355.08
 
97.07


1355.09
 
97.08


1365.01
 
150.070


1365.02
 
150.071


1365.03
 
150.072


1365.04
 
150.073


1365.05
 
150.074


1365.06
 
150.075


1370.01
 
130.45


1370.02
 
130.46


1370.03
 
130.47


1370.04
 
130.48


1375.01
 
130.60


1380.01
 
97.20


1380.03
 
97.21


1380.04
 
97.22


1380.06
 
97.23


1385.01
 
150.090


1385.03
 
150.091


1385.04
 
150.092


1385.05
 
150.093


1385.06
 
150.094


1395.01
 
150.140


1395.02
 
11.01


1395.03
 
150.141


1400.01
 
93.01


1400.02
 
93.02


1405.01
 
93.20


1405.02
 
93.21


1405.03
 
93.22


1405.04
 
93.23


1405.05
 
93.24


1405.06
 
93.25


1405.07
 
93.26


1405.08
 
93.27


1410.01
 
93.40


1410.02
 
93.41


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




–
 
- -
 
70.01, 70.02


9705
 
5-6-1997
 
153.08


9706
 
5-20-1997
 
151.019


9707
 
5-20-1997
 
153.02


97-14
 
9-2-1997
 
32.035


97-16
 
9-16-1997
 
150.254, 150.255


97-17
 
9-16-1997
 
11.01, 150.035-150.038


97-18
 
9-16-1997
 
93.26


97-29
 
4-21-1998
 
50.03, 50.16, 50.32, 50.35, 50.36, 50.42, 50.47


97-30
 
5-20-1998
 
11.01


97-41
 
9-21-1999
 
52.01–52.21, 52.40


97-43
 
5-4-1999
 
151.015


97-45
 
6-28-1999
 
151.171


–
 
2-15-2000
 
11.01


–
 
2-15-2000
 
150.140, 150.141


9756
 
6-20-2000
 
94.01–94.06, 94.20-94.22, 94.35-94.43, 94.55-94.68


9757
 
7-18-2000
 
11.01


9759
 
8-15-2000
 
11.01


9761
 
9-5-2000
 
11.01


97-67
 
1-2-2001
 
32.027


9768
 
1-2-2001
 
111.26


97-70
 
1-16-2001
 
32.027


97-72
 
- -
 
11.01


97-73
 
4-4-2001
 
11.01


97-75
 
- -
 
153.15


97-80
 
5-5-2001
 
11.01, 52.75, 52.76


97-82
 
- -
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


97-83
 
- -
 
151.027


97-84
 
- -
 
150.155–150.160


9785
 
- -
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


97-87
 
10-2-2001
 
11.01


97-89
 
11-20-2001
 
11.01


97-90
 
10-2-2001
 
11.01


97-94
 
11-7-2001
 
31.10


97-96
 
1-15-2002
 
32.027


97-97
 
1-15-2002
 
54.01–54.10


97-98
 
12-18-2001
 
153.09


97-101
 
- -
 
111.54


97-102
 
- -
 
111.29


97-103
 
3-19-2002
 
11.01


97-104
 
3-19-2002
 
150.038


97-105
 
4-2-2002
 
51.003


97-106
 
4-26-2002
 
11.01, 110.40-110.49, TSO Table I


97-114
 
9-17-2002
 
32.090


97-116
 
4-1-2003
 
11.01, 52.76


97-118
 
4-1-2003
 
151.041


97-119
 
6-17-2003
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


97-121
 
7-15-2003
 
151.001–151.003


97-122
 
7-15-2003
 
11.01, 53.01-53.09


97-124
 
11-18-2003
 
51.005


97-128
 
5-18-2004
 
52.19


97-132
 
6-18-2004
 
TSO Table I


97-134
 
7-6-2004
 
11.01


97-136
 
7-6-2004
 
TSO Table I


97-137
 
8-4-2004
 
11.01


97-139
 
9-7-2004
 
11.01


97-140
 
9-7-2004
 
11.01


97-141
 
9-21-2004
 
32.067


97-144
 
1-4-2005
 
TSO Table I


97-146
 
2-1-2005
 
97.06


97-147
 
2-15-2005
 
32.027


97-148
 
2-15-2005
 
32.082


97-150
 
3-1-2005
 
97.21


97-152
 
3-15-2005
 
Ch. 74, Sched. I


97-157
 
5-17-2005
 
151.001


97-159
 
6-21-2005
 
TSO Table I


97-162
 
9-6-2005
 
TSO Table I


97-164
 
12-20-2006
 
11.01, 70.01, 70.02


97-166
 
3-6-2006
 
50.41


97-169
 
5-2-2006
 
11.01


97-171
 
5-26-2006
 
151.001


97-177
 
9-1-2006
 
50.16, 50.17


97-179
 
9-19-2006
 
71.01, 72.01, Ch. 73, Sched. II


97-181
 
10-3-2006
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


97-186
 
11-8-2006
 
11.01


97-193
 
6-19-2007
 
TSO Table I


97-194
 
6-19-2007
 
31.11


97-198
 
8-21-2007
 
113.01 - 113.04, 113.99


97-199
 
11-5-2007
 
11.01


97-200
 
11-5-2007
 
32.027


97-201
 
11-20-2007
 
31.01, 31.02, 31.04, 31.07


97-202
 
12-4-2007
 
151.015, Appendix A


97-207
 
12-11-2007
 
Adopting Ordinance


08-001
 
1-8-2008
 
TSO I


08-002
 
1-22-2008
 
TSO I


08-004
 
2-22-2008
 
Appendix A


08-005
 
2-4-2008
 
150.254, 150.255


08-006
 
6-17-2008
 
11.01


08-007
 
6-17-2008
 
11.01


08-008
 
8-19-2008
 
11.01


08-009
 
9-26-2008
 
Appendix A


08-010
 
11-18-2008
 
11.01


08-013
 
1-20-2009
 
Appendix A


08-014
 
5-19-2009
 
97.21


08-015
 
7-21-2009
 
11.01, 151.115 - 151.119


08-016
 
6-16-2009
 
150.270 - 150.284


08-017
 
10-6-2009
 
11.01


08-018
 
11-4-2009
 
50.40


08-019
 
11-4-2009
 
11.01, 150.110 - 150.123


08-022
 
1-26-2010
 
Appendix A


08-023
 
1-26-2010
 
11.01, 152.01 - 152.12, 152.99


08-024
 
4-20-2010
 
94.36, 150.202, 150.218, 150.234, 150.235, 150.255, 151.017, 151.027, 152.05,
153.06, 153.07, 153.13, 153.15


08-025
 
6-1-2010
 
11.01


08-026
 
7-6-2010
 
11.01


08-028
 
7-20-2010
 
10.99


08-029
 
9-21-2010
 
51.001 - 51.005


08-031-A
 
10-5-2010
 
11.01


08-032
 
10-19-2010
 
11.01


08-036
 
12-7-2010
 
Appendix A


08-037
 
1-4-2011
 
Appendix A


08-038
 
1-25-2011
 
32.082


08-039
 
3-1-2011
 
TSO I


08-040
 
4-19-2011
 
11.01


08-041
 
4-5-2011
 
53.01 - 53.09


08-042
 
5-3-2011
 
11.01


08-043
 
5-3-2011
 
150.273, 150.277


08-045
 
6-21-2011
 
Appendix A


08-046
 
6-21-2011
 
32.027, 32.035


08-047
 
7-5-2011
 
11.01


08-048
 
7-19-2011
 
151.002


08-049
 
7-19-2011
 
Appendix B


08-050
 
7-19-2011
 
97.21


08-50
 
11-1-2011
 
97.21


08-052
 
8-9-2011
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


08-053
 
8-9-2011
 
Ch. 74, Sched. I


08-054
 
11-1-2011
 
110.70


08-055
 
11-15-2011
 
110.70


08-056
 
3-6-2012
 
Appendix A


2012-057
 
5-15-2012
 
53.04


2012-58
 
7-17-2012
 
97.21, 97.23


2012-59
 
6-5-2012
 
11.01, 150.300 - 150.314


2012-61
 
9-4-2012
 
150.255


2012-63
 
10-2-2012
 
150.255


2012-064
 
12-4-2012
 
114.01, 114.03 - 114.16, 114.99


08-65
 
1-15-2013
 
151.022


08-66
 
1-15-2013
 
150.076 - 150.078


08-067
 
2-5-2013
 
114.02, 114.07


08-068
 
2-5-2013
 
Appendix A


08-069
 
2-19-2013
 
115.01 - 115.08


08-072
 
3-5-2013
 
153.12, 153.14


08-074
 
9-17-2013
 
97.20 - 97.25


08-075
 
5-7-2013
 
150.325 , 150.326


08-081
 
6-4-2013
 
111.22


08-082
 
6-18-2013
 
11.01


08-084
 
7-2-2013
 
Appendix A


08-088
 
10-15-2013
 
95.001 - 95.028 , 95.040 - 95.046 , 95.060 , 95.075 - 95.078


08-090
 
10-15-2013
 
150.277


08-092
 
10-15-2013
 
32.081


08-093
 
11-19-2013
 
151.002


08-094
 
11-19-2013
 
Appendix B


08-096
 
12-3-2013
 
93.20 - 93.27


08-097
 
12-17-2013
 
Appendix A


08-099
 
2-5-2014
 
93.26


08-100
 
2-18-2014
 
95.006 , 95.090 , 95.105 - 95.113 , 95.125 - 95.129 , 95.999


08-101
 
2-18-2014
 
Appendix A


08-102
 
2-18-2014
 
TSO I


08-103
 
2-18-2014
 
Appendix A


08-106
 
4-1-2014
 
TSO I


08-107
 
5-6-2014
 
11.01


08-108
 
6-17-2014
 
11.01, 50.17


08-109
 
5-20-2014
 
93.26


08-110
 
5-20-2014
 
11.01


08-114
 
8-5-2014
 
Appendix A


08-115
 
12-16-2014
 
Appendix A


08-118
 
4-21-2015
 
TSO I


08-120
 
5-19-2015
 
TSO I


08-127
 
12-15-2015
 
Appendix A


08-129
 
2-16-2016
 
TSO I


08-131
 
1-19-2016
 
TSO I


08-132
 
4-5-2016
 
Appendix A


08-133
 
4-5-2016
 
31.01 - 31.11


08-134
 
4-19-2016
 
TSO I


08-135
 
4-27-2016
 
11.01


08-138
 
6-21-2016
 
11.01


08-139
 
6-21-2016
 
51.022


08-141
 
7-5-2016
 
10.99


08-142
 
8-2-2016
 
130.15


08-143
 
7-5-2016
 
31.02, 31.04


08-144
 
10-4-2016
 
153.07


08-147
 
7-19-2016
 
151.001 - 151.003, 151.015, 151.017, 151.020, 151.025, 151.027, 151.041,
151.085


08-149
 
12-6-2016
 
TSO I


08-150
 
8-16-2016
 
31.01 - 31.11


08-153
 
9-20-2016
 
153.09


08-159
 
12-6-2016
 
51.001 - 51.005


08-161
 
12-20-2016
 
TSO I


08-164
 
1-3-2017
 
31.04


08-165
 
2-7-2017
 
TSO I


08-167
 
2-7-2017
 
153.14


08-168
 
3-21-2017
 
11.01


08-170
 
2-21-2017
 
TSO I


08-172
 
4-18-2017
 
32.029, 32.032


08-174
 
5-2-2017
 
130.45 - 130.49


08-175
 
5-2-2017
 
153.14


08-176
 
5-2-2017
 
TSO I


08-177
 
6-20-2017
 
95.111


08-180
 
7-2-2017
 
TSO I


I-1
Lake Elmo, MN Code of Ordinances
CHAPTER 154: ZONING CODE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS ........................................................................................................ I-1
§ 154.001 TITLE. ..................................................................................................................................... I-1
§ 154.002 PURPOSE. .............................................................................................................................. I-1
§ 154.003 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION. .............................................................................................. I-1
§ 154.004 JURISDICTION. ....................................................................................................................... I-1
§ 154.005 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. ...................................................................................................... I-1
§ 154.006 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION. .............................................................. I-2
§ 154.007 SEVERABILITY AND VALIDITY. ............................................................................................... I-2
§ 154.008 EFFECTIVE DATE. ................................................................................................................... I-2
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................................................... II-1
§ 154.009 INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE. ........................................................................................... II-1
§ 154.010 INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN TERMS. ................................................................................ II-1
§ 154.011 GENERAL DEFINITIONS. ........................................................................................................ II-1
§ 154.012 ZONING USE TYPES AND CLASSIFICATIONS. ........................................................................ II-1
ARTICLE III. ZONING DISTRICTS ........................................................................................................... III-1
§ 154.030 CLASSIFICATIONS. ................................................................................................................ III-1
§ 154.031 BOUNDARIES. ...................................................................................................................... III-1
§ 154.032 ZONING DISTRICT MAP. ...................................................................................................... III-1
§ 154.033 R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. ........................................................................ III-1
§ 154.034 GB – GENERAL BUSINESS. ................................................................................................... III-3
§ 154.035 OP - OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DISTRICT. .................................................................... III-12
§ 154.036 OZD - OVERLAY ZONING USE DISTRICT. ............................................................................ III-13
I-2
ARTICLE IV. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS ....................................................... IV-1
§ 154.080 ADDITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS TO MINIMUM AREA, HEIGHT, AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................................................................................................................. IV-1
§ 154.081 PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS ON REQUIRED YARDS. ..................................................... IV-2
§ 154.082 SETBACKS. .......................................................................................................................... IV-3
§ 154.083 HEIGHT. .............................................................................................................................. IV-3
ARTICLE V. ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ........................................................... V-1
§ 154.100 DIRECTOR OF PLANNING. .................................................................................................... V-1
§ 154.101 APPLICATIONS REVIEW PROCESS. ....................................................................................... V-1
§ 154.102 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS. ..................................................................................... V-3
§ 154.103 PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES. ............................................................................. V-4
§ 154.104 PLANNING COMMISSION. ................................................................................................... V-7
§ 154.105 ZONING AMENDMENTS. ..................................................................................................... V-7
§ 154.106 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS. .............................................................................................. V-8
§ 154.107 INTERIM USE PERMITS. ..................................................................................................... V-11
§ 154.108 APPEALS AND THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. ................................................................... V-13
§ 154.109 VARIANCES. ....................................................................................................................... V-14
§ 154.110 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT..................................................................................... V-16
ARTICLE VI. NON-CONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES ............................................ VI-1
§ 154.150 APPLICATION. ..................................................................................................................... VI-1
§ 154.151 NON-CONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. ............................................... VI-1
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL REGULATIONS ................................................................................................. VII-1
§ 154.200 PURPOSE. .......................................................................................................................... VII-1
§ 154.201 APPLICABILITY. .................................................................................................................. VII-1
§ 154.203 ESSENTIAL SERVICES. ......................................................................................................... VII-1
§ 154.205 FENCING REGULATIONS. ................................................................................................... VII-1
I-3
§ 154.210 OFF-STREET PARKING. ....................................................................................................... VII-3
§ 154.211 OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS. ......................................................................................... VII-15
§ 154.212 SIGN REGULATIONS. ........................................................................................................ VII-16
§154.213 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, GENERALLY. ................................................ VII-45
§154.214 POLE CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS.................................................................................... VII-46
ARTICLE VIII. ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ...................................................... VIII-1
§ 154.250 PURPOSE. ......................................................................................................................... VIII-1
§ 154.257 TREE PRESERVATION. ....................................................................................................... VIII-1
§ 154.258 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS. .......................................................................................... VIII-7
ARTICLE IX. SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ............................................................................. IX-1
§ 154.300 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY. ............................................................................................ IX-1
§ 154.301 STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND RELATED USES. .......................................................... IX-1
§ 154.303 STANDARDS FOR SERVICES. ................................................................................................ IX-2
§ 154.304 STANDARDS FOR FOOD SERVICES. ...................................................................................... IX-3
§ 154.305 STANDARDS FOR AUTOMOTIVE/VEHICULAR USES. ............................................................ IX-3
§ 154.306 STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR RECREATION USES................................................................. IX-5
§ 154.307 STANDARDS FOR INDOOR RECREATION/AMUSEMENT. ..................................................... IX-6
§ 154.308 STANDARDS FOR ALTERNATIVE ENERGY ............................................................................. IX-6
§ 154.310 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES. ................................................................................. IX-10
ARTICLE X. ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP ............................................................................. X-1
§ 154.350 DIVISION INTO DISTRICTS. .................................................................................................... X-1
§ 154.351 ZONING MAP. ....................................................................................................................... X-1
§ 154.352 CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. ...................................................................... X-2
ARTICLE XI. RURAL DISTRICTS .............................................................................................................. XI-1
§ 154.400 PURPOSE. ............................................................................................................................ XI-1
I-4
§ 154.401 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND INTERIM USES. ............................................................... XI-2
§ 154.402 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS. .................................................. XI-3
§ 154.403 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE. ............................ XI-5
§ 154.404 SITE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. ................................................................. XI-5
§ 154.405 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. ................................................................................. XI-8
§ 154.406 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, RURAL DISTRICTS. ..................................................................... XI-8
§ 154.407 ACCESSORY USES. ................................................................................................................ XI-9
§ 154.408 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES NOT LISTED. ............................................................ XI-10
ARTICLE XII. URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ...................................................................................... XII-1
§ 154.450 PURPOSE AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS. ........................................................................... XII-1
§ 154.451 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES. ............................................................................... XII-2
§ 154.452 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS. ................................................. XII-5
§ 154.453 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE. ........................... XII-6
§ 154.454 SITE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. ................................................................ XII-7
§ 154.455 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS. .................................................................. XII-12
§ 154.456 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. .............................................................................. XII-12
ARTICLE XIII. VILLAGE MIXED USE DISTRICT .................................................................................... XIII-1
§ 154.500 PURPOSE AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTION ................................................................. XIII-1
§ 154.501 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES .............................................................................. XIII-1
§ 154.502 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS .............................. XIII-5
§ 154.503 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE XIII-1
§ 154.504 GENERAL SITE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS –VILLAGE DISTRICTS ........... XIII-2
§ 154.505 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES ....................................... XIII-3
§ 154.506 VMX DISTRICT DESIGN AND DEMOLITION REVIEW .......................................... XIII-7
§ 154.507 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES ...................................................................... XIII-8
I-5
ARTICLE XIV COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .................................................................................................. XIV-2
§ 154.550 PURPOSE AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS. ........................................................................ XV-18
§ 154.551 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL AND INTERIM USES. ............................................................ XV-19
§ 154.552 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS. .............................................. XV-23
§ 154.553 GENERAL SITE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS, COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS. ............................ XV-24
§ 154.554 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES. ........................................................... XV-24
§ 154.555 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS. ............................................................... XV-26
ARTICLE XIV. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC DISTRICTS ..................................................................... XVI-27
§ 154.600 PF – PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. ............................................................... XVI-27
ARTICLE XV. OPEN SPACE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS ........................................................ XVII-1
§ 154.650 PURPOSE. ........................................................................................................................ XVII-1
§ 154.651 INTENT. ............................................................................................................................ XVII-1
§ 154.652 DEFINITIONS. ................................................................................................................... XVII-1
§ 154.653 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS. ........................................................................................ XVII-1
§ 154.654 REFLECTION ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. ................................................................ XVII-2
§ 154.655 PREREQUISITES FOR OPEN SPACE PUDs. ........................................................................ XVII-2
§ 154.656 USES WITHIN OPEN SPACE PUDs. ................................................................................... XVII-2
§ 154.657 OPEN SPACE PUD DESIGN. .............................................................................................. XVII-3
§ 154.658 OPEN SPACE PUD DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. ............................................................. XVII-7
§ 154.659 RESERVED. ..................................................................................................................... XVII-10
§ 154.660 OPEN SPACE PUD REVIEW CRITERIA ............................................................................. XVII-10
§ 154.661 OPEN SPACE PUD REVIEW PROCEDURE........................................................................ XVII-10
§ 154.662 OPEN SPACE PUD AMENDMENTS. ................................................................................ XVII-19
§ 154.663 PUD CANCELLATION. ..................................................................................................... XVII-20
§ 154.664 ADMINISTRATION. ........................................................................................................ XVII-20
I-6
ARTICLE XVI. RESERVED .............................................................................................................. XVIII-21
ARTICLE XVII. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REGULATIONS .............................................. XIX-1
§ 154.750 INTENT. .............................................................................................................................. XIX-1
§ 154.751 IDENTIFIED OBJECTIVES. ................................................................................................... XIX-1
§ 154.752 ALLOWED DEVELOPMENT. ................................................................................................ XIX-2
§ 154.753 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS. ............................................................................................. XIX-3
§ 154.754 DENSITY. ............................................................................................................................ XIX-3
§ 154.755 COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS. .................................................................. XIX-6
§ 154.756 PHASING AND GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE. .............................................................. XIX-6
§ 154.757 CONTROL OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT FOLLOWING COMPLETION. ..................... XIX-7
§ 154.758 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. ................................ XIX-7
§ 154.759 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR GENERAL CONCEPT PLAN, PRELIMINARY PLAN AND FINAL PLAN.......................................................................................................................................... XIX-9
§ 154.760 CITY COSTS. ...................................................................................................................... XIX-14
ARTICLE XVIII. SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT ....................................................... XX-1
§ 154.800 SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT. .............................................................. XX-1
ARTICLE XIX. CLOSED LANDFILL RESTRICTED .................................................................................. XXI-1
§ 154.801 CLOSED LANDFILL RESTRICTED .......................................................................................... XXI-1
§ 154.802 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND INTERIM USES. .............................................................. XXI-1
§ 154.803 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS.................................................. XXI-1
§ 154.804 SITE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. ................................................................ XXI-1
ARTICLE XX. DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS – RESTRICTIONS ON NUISANCE AND HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES........................................................................................................................ XXII-1
§ 154.900 MINIMUM STANDARDS; PURPOSES. ............................................................................... XXII-2
§ 154.901 PRINCIPAL BUILDING. ....................................................................................................... XXII-2
§ 154.902 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE STRUCTURES. .............................................................................. XXII-2
I-7
§ 154.903 TRAFFIC CONTROL. ........................................................................................................... XXII-2
§ 154.904 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. ........................................................................... XXII-3
§ 154.905 EXPLOSIVES. ..................................................................................................................... XXII-3
§ 154.906 FALLOUT SHELTERS. ......................................................................................................... XXII-3
§ 154.907 DWELLING UNITS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS. .................................. XXII-3
§ 154.908 RADIATION AND ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED. ............................................ XXII-4
§ 154.910 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION OFFICE .............................................................................. XXII-5
§ 154.911 RECREATION VEHICLES. .................................................................................................... XXII-5
§ 154.912 RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREA. ..................................................................................... XXII-6
§ 154.913 AGRICULTURAL SALES BUSINESSES. ................................................................................. XXII-9
§ 154.914 AGRICULTURAL ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES. ............................................................ XXII-10
§ 154.915 ENFORCEMENT. .............................................................................................................. XXII-11
§ 154.999 PENALTY. ........................................................................................................................ XXII-11
I-1
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, cited and referenced to as the City’s zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
This chapter is adopted for the purposes of:
A. Protecting the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare;
B. Implementing the City of Lake Elmo Comprehensive Land Use Plan;
C. Promoting orderly development of the residential, commercial, industrial, recreational and public areas;
D. Conserving the natural and scenic beauty and attractiveness of the city;
E. Conserving natural resources in the city;
F. Minimizing environmental pollution; and
G. Conserving energy through the siting of buildings and encouragement of solar and earth-sheltered structures where appropriate.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.003 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authorization contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462, or successor statutes.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.004 JURISDICTION.
This chapter shall be applicable to all lands and waters within the corporate limits of Lake Elmo, Minnesota.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.005 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
Except as in this chapter specifically provides, no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose in any manner which is not in conformity with this chapter.
I-2
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012) Penalty, see §154.999
§ 154.006 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION.
The following rules of construction and interpretation apply to this chapter:
A. Minimum Requirements. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, chapter, statute, resolutions or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall prevail.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.007 SEVERABILITY AND VALIDITY.
It is hereby declared to be the intention that the several provisions of this chapter are severable in accordance with the following:
A. Severability. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter.
B. Validity. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building, or structure, such judgment shall not affect other property, buildings or structures.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.008 EFFECTIVE DATE.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of passage and approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
II-1
ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS
§ 154.009 INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE.
The purpose of this article is to define general terms used in this zoning ordinance, to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses permitted within various zoning districts, and to establish the rules for interpretation of language in this ordinance.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.010 INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN TERMS.
In the construction of this zoning ordinance, the following rules shall be observed and applied, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
A. The present tense shall include the future.
B. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular.
C. The word “shall” is mandatory, and not discretionary.
D. The word “may” is permissive.
E. The word “should” is advisory.
F. The word “building” includes the word “structure.”
G. The words “used for” shall include the phrases “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “maintained for,” and “occupied for.”
H. The word “lot” shall mean “zoning lot” unless otherwise specified in this ordinance.
I. The words “lot,” “parcel,” or “premises” may be used interchangeably.
J. All stated and measured distances shall be taken to the nearest integral foot. If a fraction is one-half (1/2) foot or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.011 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined in this chapter, common definitions, words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code and are found in § 11.01.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.012 ZONING USE TYPES AND CLASSIFICATIONS.
A. Rules of Interpretation for Zoning Use Types and Classifications.
1. Purpose of Use Types. The purpose of the Use Types is to establish a classification system for land uses and a consistent set of terms defining uses
II-2
permitted within various zoning districts. The Use Types section also facilitates the process of determining the applicable use type of any activity not clearly within any defined use type.
2. Interpretation. In the event of any question as to the appropriate use type of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Planning Director shall have the authority to determine the appropriate use type. In making such a determination, the Planning Director shall consider the operational and physical characteristics of the use in question and shall consider the classification contained in the most recent edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. In addition, the Planning Director shall consider the specific requirements of the use in common with those included as examples of use types. Those examples, when included in use type descriptions, are intended to be illustrative, as opposed to exclusive lists. The Planning Director may also determine that a proposed use or activity is sufficiently different from any use type listed below and will require an amendment to the text of this chapter.
3. Determinations in Writing. The Planning Director shall make such determinations of appropriate Use Types in writing, which shall include an explanation of the reasons for the determination.
4. Appeal. A determination of the Planning Director may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the procedures for administrative appeals outlined in § 31.10.
B. Use Types and Classifications.
1. Residential and Related Uses.
a. Family Living
Live-Work Unit. A dwelling unit in combination with a shop, office, studio, or other work space within the same unit, where the resident occupant both lives and works.
Manufactured Home Park. A development on a site under a single ownership which consists of two or more spaces for the placement of manufactured homes for dwelling or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a fee is charged for the utilization of such space.
Multi-Family Residential. A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. The term includes cooperative apartments and condominiums, but not condominium-hotels. (See CONDOMINIUM and CONDOMINIUM-HOTEL under § 11.01.)
Secondary Dwelling. A residential dwelling unit, but not a manufactured home, located on the same lot as a single family dwelling unit, either within the principal structure, above a detached garage, or within a detached structure.
II-3
Single Family Attached. A building containing one dwelling unit attached to another building containing only one dwelling unit, with each building on a separate lot.
Single Family Detached. A building containing only one dwelling unit, surrounded by landscape area or yards on all sides.
Two-Family or Duplex. A building on a single lot or adjacent lots containing two dwelling units, either side-by-side or stacked vertically.
b. Group Living
Congregate Housing. A dwelling providing shelter and services for the elderly, which may include meals, housekeeping, and personal care assistance and minor medical services, but not intermediate, long term, or extended nursing care for residents.
Correctional Facilities. A public or privately operated use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined, designed to isolate those individuals from a surrounding community.
Group Home. A residence shared by six or fewer handicapped persons in addition to resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential.
Group Residential Facility. A licensed public or private establishment, which, for gain or otherwise, regularly provides one or more dependents with 24-hour a day substitute for the care, food, lodging, training, education, supervision, rehabilitation, and treatment they need, but which for any reason cannot be furnished in the dependent’s own home. This term includes, but is not limited, to state institutions under the control of the Commissioner of Public Welfare, foster homes, maternity shelters, group homes as defined herein with seven or more residents, schools for handicapped children, and homes for battered children or battered spouses.
Halfway House. An establishment providing accommodations, rehabilitation, counseling, and supervision to persons suffering from alcohol, drug addiction or other similar disorders, or to persons re-entering society after being released from a correctional facility or other institution.
Semi-Transient Accommodations. Semi-transient accommodations include boarding houses, rooming houses, fraternity and sorority houses, or lodging rooms, as defined by this chapter. Semi-transient accommodations do not include CONDOMINIUM-HOTELS, as defined in § 11.01.
2. Public and Civic Uses
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbarium’s, crematories,
II-4
mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Colleges and Universities. Institutions of higher learning which offer courses of general or specialized study leading to a degree or certificate. They are certified by the State Board of Higher Education or by a recognized accrediting agency. Colleges tend to be in campus-like settings or on multiple blocks. Accessory uses include offices, housing for students, food service, laboratories, health and sports facilities, theaters, meeting areas, parking, maintenance facilities, and support commercial. Examples include universities, liberal arts colleges, community colleges, nursing and medical schools not accessory to a hospital, and seminaries.
Community Services. Establishments of a public, nonprofit, or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community. Generally they provide the service on the site or have employees at the site on a regular basis. The service is ongoing, not just for special events. Community centers or facilities may incorporate membership provisions, and are open to the general public to join at any time {for instance, any senior citizen could join a senior center). The use may also provide special counseling, education, or training of a public, non-profit, or charitable nature. Accessory uses may include offices, meeting areas, food preparation areas, parking, health and therapy areas, day care uses, and athletic facilities. Examples include libraries, museums, senior centers, community centers, social service facilities, early childhood learning facilities, and other special educational services.
Day Care Center. Any facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection, and guidance to 14 or more individuals during only part of a 24 hour day. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public and private educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a full 24 hour period.
Public Assembly. Facilities owned and operated by a public or quasi-public agency accommodating public assembly for non-recreation purposes. Typical uses include auditoriums, convention facilities, exhibition facilities, convention halls, or armories.
Religious Institutions. Establishments that are intended to primarily provide meeting areas for religious activities. Accessory uses include Sunday school facilities, parking, caretaker’s housing, and group living facilities such as convents. Examples include churches, temples, synagogues, and mosques.
Schools, Public and Private. Establishments at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high, or high school level that provide state mandated basic education. Accessory uses include play areas, cafeterias, recreational and sport facilities, auditoriums, and before or after school day care. Examples include public and private daytime schools, boarding schools, and military academies. Exemptions: 1) preschools are classified as day care facilities, and 2) business and trade schools are classified as educational services.
3. Services
II-5
Business Center. A building or group of buildings planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity, with common on-site parking for a group of commercial service establishments, with office uses also permitted. In the central business district, the requirement for common on-site parking need not be met in order to classify a development as a business center.
Business Services. Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing, building maintenance, office equipment rental and leasing, photo finishing, business supply services, and computer programming/data processing services.
Communication Services. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephone mechanisms. Excluded from this use type are facilities classified as essential services or broadcasting and communications towers. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunications service centers, telegraph service offices or film and sound recording facilities.
Educational Services. Establishments engaged in furnishing specialized academic or technical courses, normally on a fee basis, such as vocational or correspondence schools, barber college, data processing schools, or secretarial schools, along with non-degree granting schools such as post-secondary colleges and universities, martial arts, music, art, ceramic, and dramatic, schools, and dance instruction.
Financial Institution. Provision of financial and banking services to consumers or clients. Walk-in and drive-in services are generally provided on site. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan associations, savings banks, credit unions, lending establishments, and drive-up automatic teller machines (ATMs).
Funeral Home. Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the dead for burial, and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries.
Lodging. See Transient Accommodations.
Medical Facilities. Establishments engaged in providing diagnostic services, extensive medical treatment (including surgical services), and other hospital services, as well as continuous nursing service, including general medical and surgical hospitals, specialty hospitals, medical laboratories, bio-medical research and development, outpatient care facilities, medical schools and associated dormitories, medical appliance sales, and similar uses, but not including animal hospitals.
Membership Organization. Organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members included such uses as trade associations, business associations, professional membership organizations, labor unions, civic or fraternal organizations, but not including churches, hospitals, golf and country clubs, or credit unions.
II-6
Nursing and Personal Care. Establishments primarily engaged in providing intermediate or long-term nursing and health related care to individuals, typically classified as nursing homes.
Offices. A building or portion of a building use for office purposes by a business, service, professional, or institutional establishment, including medical offices or clinics, studios for those involved in art, sculpture, music, and the like, and all other establishments similar in character.
Personal Services. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel, such as barber shops, clothing rental, salons and health clubs, photographic studios, cleaning and garment services (but not including power laundries or dry cleaning plants) or coin operated laundries.
Repair and Maintenance Shop. Establishments engaged in miscellaneous repair services, primarily of household oriented products such as radios, televisions, washers and dryers, furniture (including re-upholstery), small engine repair, bicycles, or locksmiths.
Self Service Storage Facility. An establishment designed and utilized for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to tenants who have sole private access to such space for storing personal property.
Trade Shop. Any lot, land, building, or structure that serves as the headquarters for contractors involved in specialized activities such as plumbing, painting, plastering, masonry, carpentry, roofing, well drilling, landscaping and the like, where tools, equipment and materials used in the business are stored. The category also includes establishments involved in specialized trades such as sheet metal, sign painting, drapers, and exterminators.
Transient Accommodations, Lodging. Establishments in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is open primarily to transient guests, as distinguished from semi-transient boarding or rooming facilities. Typical uses include hotels, motels, and inns. Meeting and restaurant facilities may be included accessory to this use type. Condominium-hotels shall be considered as a type of transient accommodation.
Transportation Services. Establishments furnishing services related to the arrangement of persons and goods movements, such as freight forwarding, parking services or the rental/leasing of automobiles or two-axle trucks.
Veterinary Service. Establishments engaged in the practice of veterinary medicine, dentistry or surgery, along with those providing animal related services such as kennels, grooming, or breeding services.
4. Food Service
Drinking and Entertainment. Establishments primarily engaged in the selling of drinks for consumption on the premises, where entertainment may be provided and the incidental sale of prepared food for consumption on the premise is permitted. These establishments may often charge a fee or admission charge for
II-7
the entertainment provided. Included in this category are bars, beer gardens, discotheques, nightclubs, taverns, and dance halls.
Drive-In Restaurant. An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation of food and beverages, for either take-out, delivery, or table service, served in disposable containers at a counter and a drive-up or drive through service facility or which offers curb service.
Fast Food Restaurant. An establishment primarily engaged in the preparation of food and beverages, for either take-out, delivery, or table service, served in disposable containers at a counter. This use type does not employ a drive-up or drive-through service facility, and does not offer curb service.
Standard Restaurant. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and/or beverage to customers in a ready to consume state, and whose principal method of operation includes one or both of the following: 1) customers, normally provided with an individual menu, are served their food and beverage by restaurant employees at the same table or counter at which the food and/or beverage are consumed, 2) a cafeteria-type operation where food and beverage generally are consumed within the restaurant building.
5. Sales of Merchandise
Garden Center (Retail Agriculture). Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in retail or wholesale (bulk) sale, from the premises, of trees, shrubs, seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, and plant materials primarily for agricultural, residential, and commercial consumers. Such establishments typically sell products purchased from others, but may sell some material which they grow themselves. Typical uses include nurseries, retail greenhouses, plant stores, and lawn and garden centers.
Neighborhood Convenience Store. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of frequently or recurrently needed goods for household consumption, such as prepackaged food and beverages, and limited household supplies and hardware. Convenience stores shall not include fuel pumps or the selling of fuel for motor vehicles. Typical uses include neighborhood markets and country stores.
Retail Trade. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. These establishments are characterized by the following: 1) they buy and receive as well as sell merchandise; 2) they may process some products, but such processing is incidental or subordinate to the selling activities; and 3) they predominantly sell to customers for their own personal or household use. Retail trade is divided into the following subcategories for the purposes of this chapter.
1. General retail
2. Antiques and collectibles store
3. Art gallery
II-8
4. Bicycle sales and repair
5. Book store, music store
6. Clothing and accessories
7. Craft or needlework shop
8. Drugstore, pharmacy
9. Electronics and appliance sales and repair
10. Florists
11. Specialty food store, including bakery, butcher shop, delicatessen, and the like.
12. Jewelry store
13. Hardware store
14. Newsstands, magazine sales
15. Pet store
16. Photographic equipment and supplies
17. Picture framing
18. Secondhand store, thrift or consignment store
19. Sporting goods store
20. Stationery store
21. Tobacco store
22. Video rental or sales
23. Building supplies sales
24. Furniture and appliance sales, rental, showrooms
25. Grocery, supermarket
26. Liquor store
27. Warehouse club sales
Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity with shared access, customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision of goods delivery separated from customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements.
Wholesaling. Establishments engaged primarily in selling merchandise to retailers, or to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business customers, or to other wholesalers, or on a mail order basis to individuals or firms, or which serve as agents or brokers buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, individuals and companies.
6. Automotive/Vehicular Uses
II-9
Automobile Maintenance Service. Repair of automobiles, non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, oil and lubrication services and similar repair and service activities where minor repairs and routine maintenance are conducted.
Automobile Parts/Supply. Retail sales of automobile parts and accessories. Typical uses include automobile parts and supply stores which offer new and factory rebuilt parts and accessories, and include establishments, which offer minor automobile repair services as an accessory use.
Car Wash. Washing and cleaning of vehicles. Typical uses include automatic conveyor machines and self-service car washes.
Commercial Vehicle Repair. Repair of construction equipment, commercial trucks, agricultural implements and similar heavy equipment, including automobiles, where major engine and transmission repairs are conducted. Typical uses include automobile and truck repair garages, transmission shops, radiator shops, body and fender shops, equipment service centers, machine shops, and other similar uses where major repair activities are conducted.
Gasoline Station. Any place of business with fuel pumps and underground storage tanks that provide fuels and oil for motor vehicles. A neighborhood convenience store associated with automobile fuel sales shall be considered a gasoline station.
Parking Facility. Any structure associated with a non-residential use whose purpose is to provide the required off-street parking spaces for a principal use, or any site utilized for parking which constitutes the principal use on a parcel of land. This category also includes community Lots, which are established to meet the parking needs in a residential area, and park + ride lots.
Sales and Storage Lots. Establishments engaged in the display for sale or lease of automobiles, trucks, machinery, recreational vehicles and manufactured homes, including auto dealerships or the farm commercial storage of privately owned trailers, boats, campers, or similar vehicles.
7. Outdoor Recreation
Campgrounds and Trailering. Establishments engaged in providing overnight or short-term sites for the placement of recreational vehicles or temporary housing, with or without facilities such as water and electricity.
Golf Course. A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses and shelters. Included would be executive or par 3 golf courses. Specifically excluded are independent driving ranges or miniature golf facilities, which are classified as outdoor recreation facilities.
Marina. A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing and launching of private pleasure craft that may include the sale of fuel and incidental supplies for the boat owners, crews, and guests.
II-10
Outdoor Entertainment. An outdoor facility developed for entertainment, amusement, or tourist purposes which typically involve large areas of land and concentrated traffic peaks oriented towards events at the facility, including drive-in theaters, amphitheaters, outdoor concert halls, or theme parks.
Outdoor Recreation Facility. A commercial recreation facility that is primarily an open-air facility, such as baseball fields, swimming pools, skating rinks, golf driving ranges, or miniature golf facilities.
Parks and Open Areas. Uses of land focusing on natural areas, large areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community gardens, or public squares. Lands tend to have few structures. Accessory uses include, but are not limited to, clubhouses, maintenance facilities, concessions, caretaker’s quarters, gazebos, pavilions, band shells, and parking. Examples include parks, public squares, plazas, recreational trails, botanical gardens, boat launching areas, nature preserves, and land used for grazing that is not part of a farm or ranch.
Restricted Recreation. Commercial recreation facilities that are of greater nuisance than conventional outdoor athletic facilities because of 1) the noise and traffic volumes they may generate, 2) the glare they produce, or 3) the potential danger they may create from flying objects or the use of weapons. This category includes such uses as amusement parks, racetracks {auto, go-cart, motorcycle) or ranges (skeet, rifle, or archery).
8. Indoor Recreation/Entertainment
Adult establishment. See § 113.02.
Indoor Athletic Facility. A commercial recreation facility that provides completely enclosed or indoor recreation space, such as racquet clubs, indoor skating rinks, swimming pools, or gymnasiums.
Indoor Recreation. Establishment primarily engaged in activities intended to provide personal amusement, with the largest number of patrons typically during the evening hours or on weekends, and where food and refreshments may be provided as an incidental service, including such uses as bowling alleys, billiard, pool, or bingo parlors, amusement arcades, and indoor theaters (live or motion picture).
9. Agricultural and Related Uses
Agricultural Entertainment Business. An agricultural sales business that combines the elements and characteristics of agriculture and tourism, which is not necessarily located in an existing building. Examples of agricultural entertainment include: corn mazes, hay rides, sleigh rides, petting farms, on-farm tours, agricultural related museums, demonstrations of farming practices, techniques and methods, fee-based fishing and hunting, horseback riding, nature trails, haunted barns and similar activities which are related to agriculture.
Agricultural Production. Establishments engaged in the production of crops, plants or vines, including agro forestry, or establishments which are engaged in
II-11
the keeping, grazing, or feeding of livestock for sale, value increase, or livestock increase.
Agricultural Sales Business. The retail sale of fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs, trees, or other agricultural, floricultural, or horticultural products. The operation may be indoors or outdoors, include pick-your-own or cut-your-own opportunities, and may involve the ancillary sale of items considered accessory to the agricultural products being sold or accessory sales of unprocessed foodstuffs; home processed food products such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces; or baked goods and homemade handicrafts. The floor area devoted to the sale of accessory items shall not exceed 25% of the total floor area. No commercially packaged handicrafts or commercially processed or packaged foodstuffs shall be sold as accessory items. No activities other than the sale of goods as outlined above shall be allowed as part of the agricultural sales business.
Agricultural Services. Establishments that perform services which support or assist the agricultural community, such as soil preparation services, crop services, farm management services, or breeding services on a fee or contract basis, along with experimental farms for research or educational purposes. This category is intended to apply where agricultural land is located, and may include buildings and other structures that provide office, warehouse, and storage areas for these establishments.
Agricultural Support. Establishments engaged in farm equipment sales and repair, farm produce sales and supply (feed grain, elevators) and small-scale farm product processing, such as cider mills, dairies, poultry or meat processing.
Forestry Operations. The use of land for the raising and harvesting of timber, pulpwood or other forestry products for commercial purposes, including the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper or grinder to process the timber cut from that parcel or contiguous parcels. Excluded from this definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development approved by the City which shall be considered accessory to the development of the property.
Greenhouse, Non Retail. A building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or translucent material, cloth, or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants.
Wayside Stand. A temporary structure or vehicle used for the seasonal retail sale of agricultural goods, floriculture, and horticulture produced by the operator of the wayside stand, which is clearly a secondary use of the premises and does not change the character thereof.
10. Alternative Energy
Solar Farm. A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity, whether by photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or other conversion technology, for the principal purpose of sales of generated electricity to off-site customers.
II-12
Wind Generator. A machine which generates energy/power from the wind.
11. Industrial and Extractive Uses
Heavy Industrial. Establishments involved in the manufacture, fabrication, processing, compounding, or assembling of materials from raw material or previously processed material. These uses have severe potential for adversely affecting surrounding land uses due to potential environmental impacts related to noise, smoke/particulate emissions, vibration, noxious gases, odor, glare/heat, fire/explosion hazards and waste disposal. In addition, these uses may generate large amounts of truck or auto traffic, may involve the use of large unenclosed production areas, or may require large, tall structures that are unsightly. Heavy industrial uses typically involve primary production processes in the area of paper products (pulp mills), food processing (slaughterhouse, meat packing plant), chemicals (manufacture of inorganic chemicals, resins, plastics, paints, fertilizers, explosives, ink), petroleum products (refineries, bulk storage), primary metals (blasting, smelting, rolling), machinery and equipment manufacturer (auto assembly, engines, construction equipment), leather (storing, curing, tanning), gravel based products (manufacture of bricks, concrete, abrasives), and lumber products (saw mills).
Landfill. A disposal site employing an engineered method of disposing solid wastes in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying cover material over all exposed waste at the end of each operating day.
Laundry Plant. Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, cleaning, or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, and linen supply services.
Light Industrial. Establishments involved in the processing, fabrication, assembly, or compounding of products where the process involved is relatively clean and nuisance free, usually completely enclosed, and with limited environmental effects. These uses can be made compatible with surrounding areas through landscape screening and through separation required by yard and height limitations. Typically, these uses result in the creation of finished products for sale on a wholesale basis to retailers or directly on a retail basis, and include uses in the following areas: lumber products (millwork, cabinet-making), electronics, textiles, printing and publishing services, bottling works, carpet and rug cleaning, furniture manufacture, paper (final processing of stationery, bags, etc., from purchased bulk stock), light metal finishing and light machining, rubber and plastics (compounding processed resins, molding plastics), gravel based products (pottery, cutting, finishing granite, firing and decorating clay products), and ice manufacturing.
Motor Freight and Warehousing. Establishments engaged primarily in either the storage or shipment of goods and materials, including terminal facilities for handling freight, and maintenance facilities in which the trucks (including tractor
II-13
trailer units) involved with the operation of the business are stored, parked and serviced. Materials within a warehouse or terminal facility may be combined, broken down, or aggregated for trans-shipment or storage purposes where the original material is not chemically or physically changed.
Non-Production Industrial. Establishments that normally are considered industrial in character even though they are not involved in the manufacturing or processing of products. These uses generate negative impacts largely through their need for outside storage of equipment and materials, the large expanse of land needed for this storage, and the creation of dirt, dust and noise, along with intermittent truck traffic. These uses generally can be made compatible through landscape screening and the imposition of limited performance standards, and thus are not objectionable in most industrial or commercial districts. The types of uses categorized here include contractor’s yards, lumberyards, utility yards, and public maintenance shops and yards.
Research and Testing. Establishments or other facilities for carrying on investigation in the natural or physical sciences, or engineering and development as an extension of investigation with the objective of creating end products, on a contract or fee basis, and including pilot plant operation.
Resource Extraction. A use involving on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, mining, and soil mining. Specially excluded from this use type shall be grading and removal of dirt associated with an approved site plan or subdivision.
Salvage/Recyclable Center. Land or buildings where waste, discarded, salvaged, or recyclable materials are bought, sold, stored, exchanged, sorted, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled on a commercial basis, including but not limited to, scrap metal, aluminum, rags, paper, rubber products, glass products, lumber products and products resulting from the wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles. Any site containing two or more unregistered, inoperable motor vehicles is classified as a salvage center.
Closed Landfill Management. The use associated with the responsibility and obligation of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) to take necessary response actions on the property as provided in Minnesota Statutes § 115B.412, Sub. 115B.39-43.
12. Utilities, Transportation and Communications
Air transportation. Establishments engaged in domestic, emergency, or foreign transportation of passengers or goods by air, including airports, flying fields, rotorcraft terminals, as well as any associated terminal facilities.
Broadcasting or Communication. Any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of radio, television, radar, cellular telephone, personal paging device, specialized mobile radio (SMR), and similar services. A broadcasting or communication facility usually consists of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support tower or other structure used to achieve the necessary elevation, and the
II-14
transmission or reception devices or antenna. Broadcasting or communication facilities include wireless communications facilities and wireless communications towers as defined in § 11.01.
Essential Services. Overhead, aboveground or underground electrical, gas, steam or water transmission or distribution systems and structures of collection, communication, supply or disposal systems and structures used by public utilities or governmental departments or commissions or as are required for the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewer pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes and accessories in connection therewith but not including buildings.
Local Transit. Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing local and suburban passenger transportation, including taxicabs, passenger charter services, school buses, and terminals (including service facilities) for motor vehicle passenger transportation.
Railroad Transportation. Establishments engaged in domestic freight and passenger transportation by rail, and including railroad yards, freight stations and switching yards.
13. Accessory Uses
Bed and Breakfast. A private, owner-occupied residence that contains no more than five (5) guestrooms where lodging, with or without meals, is provided for compensation. Guest stays shall be limited to 30 days.
Commercial Wedding Ceremony Venue. A use involving a location to conduct wedding ceremonies, not including receptions, and usually operated in exchange for remuneration by providing the venue to the public.
Domestic Pets. The keeping of small domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, birds, rodents, fish, and the like, not primarily for produce or value increase, but rather for show, sport, or as pets.
Family Day Care. A residence licensed by the Minnesota Department of Human Services in which no more than 10 children at any one time receive care, maintenance and supervision by someone other than their relatives or legal guardians for less than 24 hours per day.
Group family day care. A residence licensed by the Minnesota Department of Human Services in which at least 11 but not more than 14 children receive care, maintenance and supervision by someone other than their relatives or legal guardians for less than 24 hours per day.
Home Occupations. Home Occupations. Any gainful occupation or profession engaged in by the occupant(s) and up to one non-occupant employee of a dwelling when carried on within a dwelling unit or in an accessory building, provided that no signs other than those allowed by the City’s sign regulations regarding home occupations are present.
II-15
Kennel, Private. The keeping, breeding, raising, showing or training of 4 or more dogs over six months of age for personal enjoyment of the owner or occupants of the property, and for which commercial gain is not the primary objective.
Merchandise Parties. Private parties held for the purpose of soliciting sales. Merchandise parties shall include but not be limited to Tupperware, Mary Kay, and Avon parties.
Stable, Private. The keeping, breeding, or raising of horse or ponies exclusively for the personal use and enjoyment of the owner or occupant of the property or the riding of horses or ponies by the owner or occupant of the property and their guests.
Solar Energy System. A device or structural design feature, a primary purpose of which is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, cooling, water heating, or for power generation.
Swimming Pools. Any permanently located pool, used for swimming and/or
bathing which is over 24 inches in depth, or which has a surface area exceeding 150 square feet.
Temporary Sales. Any isolated or occasional display and sale of used personal property or home-crafted items conducted on residential premises by the occupant of the residential property. Temporary sales shall include rummage sales, basement sales, yard sales, porch sales, craft sales, garage sales, and seasonal boutiques.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-107, passed 5-6-2014; Am. Ord. 08-135, passed 4-27-16; Am. Ord. 08-136, passed 6-14-16; Am. Ord. 08-198, passed 2-7-2018; Am. Ord. 08-199, passed 2-7-2018; Am. Ord. 08-197, passed 2-7-2018)
III-1
ARTICLE III. ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 154.030 CLASSIFICATIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, all land in the city is divided into zoning districts. The zoning districts shall be identified by the following classifications, including those districts identified in §154.350:
(A)
R-2
One- and Two-Family Residential
(B)
GB
General Business
(C)
OP
Open Space Preservation District
(D)
OZD
Overlay Zoning Use District
(1997 Code, § 300.07 Sub. 1) (Am. Ord. 97-192, passed 6-19-2007; Am. Ord. 97-195, passed 7-17-2005; Am. Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-098, passed 2-05-14)
Cross-reference:
Open Space Preservation District, see Ch. 150
§ 154.031 BOUNDARIES.
Please see § 154.351.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.032 ZONING DISTRICT MAP.
Please see § 154.351.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.033 R-2 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
A. Permitted uses and structures.
1. One-family detached dwellings; and
2. Two-family dwellings, provided they do not exceed 50% of the units in a block.
B. Accessory uses and structures.
1. Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures;
III-2
2. Private garages, carports, screen houses, conservatories, playhouses, swimming pools, and storage buildings for use by occupants of the principal structure, subject to specific standards of §§ 154.092 and 154.093;
C. (Am. Ord. 97-38, passed 11-17-1998)
1. Temporary real estate tract office for the purpose of selling lots on the tract upon which it is located; and
2. Home occupations.
D. Minimum district requirements.
R-2 Zoning District
Lot Size
One-Family: 1-1/2 acre per unit without sanitary sewer; 7,500 feet per unit with sanitary sewer
Two-Family: 1-1/2 acre per unit without sanitary sewer; 6,000 square feet per unit with sanitary sewer
Lot Width
One-Family: 75 feet at front yard setback line with sanitary sewer; 125 feet without sanitary sewer
Two-Family: 100 feet at front yard setback line with sanitary sewer; 200 feet without sanitary sewer
Building setback from property lines (Also see § 154.082)
Front:
30 Feet
Side (Interior):
10 Feet
Side (Corner):
25 Feet
Rear:
40 Feet
Arterial Street:
50 Feet
Primary Building Height (Also see § 154.083)
35 Feet
Accessory Buildings and Structures
See §§ 154.092 and 154.093
Accessory Building and Structures Height (Also see § 154.083)
14 feet
Off-Street Parking (Also see § 154.095)
3 Spaces per Unit
Septic Drainfield Regulations (Also see §§ 51.002 through 51.008)
All lots must have at least 1 acre of land suitable for septic drainfields and area sufficient for 2 separate and distinct drainfield sites. Placement of the second required drainfield between the trenches of
III-3
the first drainfield is prohibited.
Maximum Width of Primary Dwelling
All dwelling units must be at least 20 feet wide through the main living area of the structure.
Footings
The primary structure must have continuous frost footings. Continuous frost footings are not required for porches, decks, and other appendages so long as proper post type footings per existing Building Codes are constructed.
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage
Maximum Width of Driveways
See § 93.26
Signage
See §§ 154.212
(1997 Code, § 300.07 Sub. 4.D) (Am. Ord. 97-192, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 154.034 GB – GENERAL BUSINESS.
A. Permitted uses and structures.
1. The following service/office uses:
General Business – Service/Office
Accounting
Advertising
(Sign fabrication not permitted use)
Alterations
Apparel Cleaning Pick-up Stations
Apparel Repair and Alterations
Architectural
Art Gallery
Auditing
Bakeries
(With production of bakery goods limited to retail sales)
Barber Services
Beauty Shops
Bookkeeping
Business and Management Consultant Offices
III-4
Business Associations
Cafes and Restaurants - Drive-up window
(Menu boards and intercom systems prohibited; Adequate vehicle stacking must be provided)
Cafes and Restaurants
(Limited to full table service operations)
Charitable
Chiropractic
Civic, Social and Fraternal Association Offices and Halls
Collection and Adjustment Services
General Business – Service/Office
Credit Reporting (Consumer and Mercantile)
Dental
Detective and Protective Agencies
Duplication
Educational
Employment Agencies
Engineering
Finance
Galleries
Governmental Offices
Insurance
Investment
Labor Unions
Legal
Libraries
Mailing
Medical
Medical Services
(The compounding, dispensing or retail sale of drugs, prescription items, patient or proprietary medicine, sick room supplies, prosthetic devices or items relating to any of the foregoing when conducted in the building occupied primarily by medical, dental, osteopathic, chiropractic or
III-5
optometric offices)
Optometric
Osteopathic
Photo Gallery
Professional Membership Organizations
Real Estate
Religious
Scientific Research
(Excluding laboratory facilities)
Shoe Repair
General Business – Service/Office
Stenographic Service
Therapeutic Massage
(See licensing requirements in § 114.01)
Welfare Offices
(Am. Ord. 97-170, passed 5-2-2006; Am. Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)
2. The following retail uses:
General Business - Retail
Antiques and Secondhand Merchandise
Apparel and Related Accessories
Automobile Repair and Services
Automobiles and Automobile Accessories
Bicycles
Books
Building Supplies
Cameras and Photographic Supplies
Cigars and Cigarettes
Drugs and Proprietary Items
Electrical Supplies
Flowers and Floral Accessories
Food and Grocery Products
Furniture
III-6
Gifts, Novelties and Souvenirs
Glass
Heating Equipment
Home Furnishings and Related Equipment
Jewelry
Liquors
Marine Craft and Accessories
Newspapers and Magazines
Nursery and Garden Supplies
General Business – Retail
Optical Goods
Paint
Pets
Plumbing Equipment
Sporting Goods
Stationery
Wallpaper
3. The following repair/service uses:
General Business – Repair/Service
Clock Repair
Electrical Repair and Supplies
Equipment–Rental and Leasing
Food Catering
Furniture Repair
Heating
Household Appliances
Jewelry Repair
Landscaping
Plumbing
Radio
III-7
Reupholstery
Television
Watch Repair
4. The following office uses (excluding equipment storage):
General Business - Office
Air Conditioning Contractor
Building Construction Contractor
Carpentry Contractor
General Business - Office
Decorating Contractor
Heating Contractor
Masonry Contractor
Painting Contractor
Plastering Contractor
Plumbing Contractor
Roofing Contractor
Sheet Metal Contractor
Stone Work Contractor
Tile Setting Contractor
Wallpaper Contractor
Water Well Drilling Contractor
Wood Flooring Contractor
5. Uses permitted by conditional use permit.
General Business - Conditional Use
Bed and Breakfast Facility
15 Beds Maximum
Boarding Care Facility
15 Residents Maximum
Day Care Centers
40 Children Maximum
Family Entertainment Centers
Fitness Studio
Maximum floor area not to exceed 5,000 square feet
III-8
Kennels
Nursing Care Facility
15 Residents Maximum
Open Sales Lots
Manufacturing
Any industrial manufacturing operation in existence within the city at the effective date of this chapter, including manufacture of wood products and plastic products, may continue the use as a conforming use without a conditional use permit. Nothing in this provision shall otherwise be construed to require the city to authorize any manufacturing use in the General Business Zone after the effective date of this chapter.
General Business - Conditional Use
Veterinary Clinics
(Am. Ord. 97-20, passed 10-21-1997; Am. Ord. 97-86, passed 10-2-2001; Am. Ord. 97-88, passed 10-2-2001; Am. Ord. 97-138, passed 9-7-2004; Am. Ord. 2012-064, passed 12-4-2012)
6. General requirements.
a. All storage, services, repair or processing shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building or behind opaque fence or wall not less than 6 feet high, except the outdoor display of merchandise;
b. Incineration of waste matter shall be conducted in approved equipment located within the building wherein the permitted use is conducted;
c. Where a proposed GB development abuts on RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or RE district other than at a public street line, buffer provision shall be established. There shall be provided a protective strip of not less than 35 feet in width. The protective strip shall not be used for parking, off- street loading or storage and shall be landscaped. The protective strip must be approved by the Council as being in harmony with the residential neighborhood and providing sufficient screening of the commercial area;
d. All lots must have at least 1 acre of land suitable for septic drainfields and area sufficient for 2 separate and distinct drainfield sites. Placement of the second required drainfield between the trenches of the first drainfield is prohibited; and
e. Must meet all requirements of §§ 51.002 through 51.008.
B. Accessory uses. Uses which are clearly incidental and subordinate to the allowed uses.
(Am. Ord. 97-38, passed 11-17-1998)
C. Minimum district requirements.
III-9
1. The Old Village District shall be defined as the Old Village Sign District described in § 151.117(S)(1)(a).
General Business
Lot Size
1-1/2 acres (except as required by Interstate Corridor Overlay District, §§ 150.230 - 150.238)
Lot Width
150 Feet Minimum
Building Setback from property lines: (Also see § 154.082)
Front:
10 Feet Minimum
No setback required for properties located in the Old Village District and south of Minnesota State Highway 5
Side (Interior):
20 Feet Minimum
No setback required for properties located in the Old Village District and south of Minnesota State Highway 5
Side (Corner):
50 Feet Minimum
Rear:
50 Feet Minimum
Building Height (Also see § 154.083)
35 Feet Maximum
Maximum area to be covered by buildings, parking lots, driveways and other hard surfaces:
Up to 4 acres
40% of lot size
Larger than 4 acres to 8 acres
35% of lot size
Larger than 8 acres
25% of lot size
Lot Configuration
Maximum lot depth to width dimension ratio shall be no more than 3:1
Lot Size
Covered Area Lot Configuration
Maximum Width of Driveways See § 93.26
Signage
See §§ 154.212
Septic Drainage Regulation (Also see §§ 51.002 through 51.008)
All newly subdivided lots shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet of land dedicated for septic system use and suitable for that use. This land may comprise up to 2 separate areas, each of which
III-10
is contiguous to the 1.25-acre building site or contained within it, and each of which contains at least 10,000 contiguous square feet.
Placement of the second required drainfield between the trenches of the first drainfield is prohibited.
(1997 Code, § 300.07 Subd. 4.H) (Am. Ord. 08-030, passed 10-5-2010)
D. Performance standards.
1. Purpose and intent.
a. It is the purpose and intent of the city, by the adoption of the performance standards of this division, to ensure commercial buildings constructed within the city are of a high quality of exterior appearance, consistent with the terms of Non-Residential Development Policy #5 of the 2000-2020 Lake Elmo Comprehensive Plan. It is the finding of the city that a limited selection of primary exterior surfacing materials meets this standard of quality.
b. It is the further finding of the city that several specific exterior surfacing materials are appropriate, and of sufficient quality, to be utilized only as accent materials in varying percentages. The variations of percentage of specific accent materials relates to a finding by the city as to the relative quality and rural character of those respective accent materials.
2. Architectural and site plan submittals. New building proposals shall include architectural and site plans prepared by registered architect and shall show the following as a minimum:
a. Elevations of all sides of the buildings;
b. Type and color of exterior building materials;
c. Typical general floor plans;
d. Dimensions of all structures; and
e. Location of trash containers, heating, cooling and ventilation equipment and systems.
3. Applicability – structure additions and renovation.
a. Additions to existing structures resulting in an increase of gross floor area of the structure of less than 100%; and/or installation of replacement exterior surfacing of any portion of an existing structure shall be exempt from the standards of this division where it is found that the new or replacement exterior surfacing proposed is identical to that of the existing structure.
b. Where additions to an existing structure result in an increase in the gross floor area of the existing structure of 100% or greater, the entire structure (existing structure and structure addition) shall be subject to the standards of this division.
III-11
4. Performance standards – primary exterior surfacing.
a. The primary exterior surfacing of structures shall be limited to natural brick, stone, or glass. Artificial or thin veneer brick or stone less than nominal 4 inches thick shall not qualify as complying with this performance standard.
b. Primary exterior surface shall be defined as not less than 70% of the sum of the area of all exterior walls of a structure nominally perpendicular to the ground. All parapet or mansard surfaces extending above the ceiling height of the structure shall be considered exterior surface for the purposes of this division. Windows and glass doors shall be considered a primary surface, but the sum area of this glass shall be deducted from the wall area for purposes of the 70% primary/30% accent formulas of this chapter. Doors of any type of material, except glass, shall not be considered a primary exterior surface.
c. Each wall of the structure shall be calculated separately and, individually comply with the 70/30 formula.
5. Performance standard – exterior surfacing accents. Not more than 30% of the exterior wall surfacing, as defined by division (D)(4) above, may be of the following listed accent materials, but no single accent material, except natural wood, may comprise more than 20% of the total of all accent materials; and, no combustible materials shall be used:
a. Cedar, redwood, wood siding;
b. Cement fiber board;
c. Standing seam metal;
d. Architectural metal;
e. Stucco;
f. Poured in place concrete (excluding “tilt-up” panels);
g. Architectural metal panels; and
(Am. Ord. 97-175, passed 6-20-2006)
h. Porcelain or ceramic tile.
6. Performance Standard – Accessory Structures. All accessory structures shall comply with the exterior surfacing requirements specified by this division (D).
7. Performance Standard – HVAC Units and Exterior Appurtenances. All exterior equipment, HVAC and trash/recycling and dock areas shall be screened from view of the public with the primary exterior materials used on the principal structure.
8. Performance Standard – Visible Roofing Materials. Any roofing materials that are visible from ground level shall be standing seam metal, fire-treated cedar shakes, ceramic tile, clay tile, concrete or slate.
9. Applicability – New Construction. The standards of this division shall be applicable to all structures and buildings constructed in the city, on and after the
III-12
effective date of this chapter. The performance standards of this division shall not be in any manner minimized by subsequent planned unit development plans or agreement.
(Am. Ord. 97-108, passed 5-7-2002; Am. Ord. 97-192, passed 6-19-2007)
§ 154.035 OP - OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DISTRICT.
A. Provisions regulating the OP Open Space Preservation District were repealed and replaced with the regulations now in Article XVI: Open Space Planned Unit Developments. (08–152, passed 10-04-2016)
B. Buffer Setbacks In OP Developments
Buffer setbacks shall be applied from the edge of the existing open space preservation developments as follows.
Buffer Setbacks in OP Developments (in feet)
North
Edge
South Edge
West Edge
East Edge
Exception Parcel(s)
St. Croix’s Sanctuary
200
50
50
100
Discover Crossing
200
100
50
100
Whistling Valley I
25
200
N/A
N/A
Whistling Valley 1I
25
100
85
N/A
Whistling Valley III
50
100
100
N/A
Farms of Lake Elmo
100
50
100
25
Prairie Hamlet
200
50
50
100
Fields of St. Croix I
50
N/A
200
100
Fields of St. Croix 1I
N/A
200
200
N/A
N/A
The Homestead
50
50
200
50
Tapestry at Charlotte’s Grove
50
50
200
50
100
III-13
Tamarack Farm Estates
100
100
100
100
Sunfish Ponds
100
100
100
200
Hamlet on Sunfish Lake
50
100
50
50
Cardinal Ridge
100
200
50
50
Wildflower Shoves
100
200
100
200
Heritage Farms
50
N/A
N/A
50
N/A
Tana Ridge (Res. 2009-033)
N/A
N/A
50
50
Parkview Estates (Res. 2009-033)
50; except Lot 9, Block 5 use 20 ft
N/A
N/A
50
§ 154.036 OZD - OVERLAY ZONING USE DISTRICT.
The following overlay districts are designed to promote orderly development or to protect some specific sensitive natural resources. These district regulations are in addition to, rather than in lieu of, regulations imposed by the existing basic zoning use districts. These districts are defined and established as follows:
A. Flood Plain – See §§ 151.01 through 151.14 of this Code;
B. Restrictive Soils Overlay District – See §§ 150.200 through 150.203 of this Code;
C. Wetland Protection and Preservation Overlay District – See §§ 150.215 through 150.219 of this Code;
D. Shoreland District – See §§ 154.800 of this Code;
E. Interstate Corridor Overlay District – See §§ 150.230 through 150.238 of this Code;
F. Airport (reserved); and
G. Open Space Development Overlay District – See §§ 150.175 through 150.190 of this Code
(1997 Code, § 300.07 Subd. 4.P) (Am. Ord. 97-192, passed 6-19-2007)(08–152, passed 10-04-2016)
IV-1
ARTICLE IV. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 154.080 ADDITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS TO MINIMUM AREA, HEIGHT, AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
A. Existing Lot. An existing lot is a lot or parcel of land in a residential district which was of record as a separate lot or parcel in the office of the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles, on or before the effective date of this chapter. Any such lot or parcel of land which is in a residential district may be used for single-family detached dwelling purposes, provided the area and width of the lot are within 60% of the minimum requirements of this chapter; provided, all setback requirements of this chapter must be maintained; and provided, it can be demonstrated safe and adequate sewage treatment systems can be installed to serve the permanent dwelling. Any 1-acre lot which was of record before October 16, 1979 may be used for single-family detached dwelling purposes regardless of ownership of adjacent parcels, provided the lot meets all other requirements of this chapter.
B. Reductions in Lot Size for Municipal Purposes. Any lot that has been reduced in size due to the acquisition of property for municipal purposes that would otherwise meet the requirements of an existing lot as described in division (A) above, may be used for a single-family detached dwelling, provided that the lots is not reduced in size by more than 10% of the minimum district requirements due to the municipal land acquisition and further provided the lot conforms to all other zoning district and subdivision standards for the district in which it is located. This provision shall apply to the subdivision of lots in existence prior to the adoption of this division that would have otherwise met the zoning district standards for lot size and that meet all requirements of this section.
C. Contiguous Parcels. If, in a group of 2 or more contiguous lots or parcels of land owned or controlled by the same person, any individual lot or parcel does not meet the full width or area requirements of this chapter, the individual lot or parcel cannot be considered as a separate parcel of land for purposes of sale or development, but must be combined with adjacent lots or parcels under the same ownership so that the combination will equal 1 or more parcels of land, each meeting the full lot width and area requirements of this chapter.
D. Subdivision of Lots. Any lot or parcel of land subdivided by any means after the effective date of this chapter for purposes of erecting a structure, must be approved as required by the subdivision ordinance.
E. Lake and Stream Frontage Lots. All lots having frontage on a lake or stream shall be subject to the provisions of the shoreland management ordinance as well as the regulations provided by this chapter. All lots on unclassified bodies of water in the shoreland management ordinance shall meet the minimum setback requirements for a General Development Lake, except as provided in the Shoreland management section.
F. Lots in the Flood Plain. All lots in a designated flood plain shall be subject to the flood plain ordinance as well as the regulations provided by this chapter.
IV-2
G. Reduction of Required Yard or Lot Size Prohibited. No yard or lot shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make it less than the minimum required by this chapter, and if the existing yard or lot is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced. No required yard or lot currently used for a building or dwelling group shall be used to satisfy minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
H. Sloping on Erodible Building Sites. On sites with slopes of greater than 25% or on easily erodible soils as defined on the community soils maps and compiled by the County Soils Conservation Agent, no structure shall be constructed.
I. Minimum Area Requirements for Lots Without Public Sanitary Sewer. In areas without public sanitary sewer, but where public sanitary sewer is proposed in the city’s Capital Improvement Program, single- and 2-family homes shall demonstrate suitable soil conditions for adequate on-site sewage treatment area.
1. In areas without public sanitary sewer where public sanitary sewer is not proposed in the City Capital Improvement Program or Comprehensive Plan, single- and 2-family homes shall demonstrate suitable soil conditions for a minimum-on-site sewage treatment area of 1 acre per dwelling unit.
2. A building permit shall not be issued for a lot which either does not meet the minimum acres of acceptable soils for on-site sewage treatment; or does not have enough acceptable soils within the lot or under legal contract to construct at least 2 complete septic/drainfield treatment systems.
J. Lot Width on a Public Street. All lots or parcels shall have direct adequate physical access for emergency vehicles along the frontage of the lot or parcel on a dedicated and approved public roadway to the width derived from applying the lot width requirement in each zoning district.
(1997 Code, § 300.09) (Am. Ord. 08-042, passed 5-3-2011)
§ 154.081 PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS ON REQUIRED YARDS.
The following shall be permitted encroachments into setback and height requirements, except as restricted by other sections of this chapter.
A. In any yards
1. Posts, off-street open parking, flutes, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves (up to 3 feet), gutters, awnings, open terraces, steps, chimneys, flag poles, open fire escapes, sidewalks, fences, essential services exposed ramps (wheelchair), patios, stoops, decks not requiring railings in accordance with state building codes, or similar features, provided they do not extend above the height of the ground floor level of the principal structure or to a distance less than 5 feet from any lot line nor less than 1 foot from any existing or proposed driveway; yard lights and nameplate signs; trees, shrubs, plants, floodlights or other sources of light illuminating authorized illuminated signs, or light standards for illuminating parking areas, loading areas, or yards for safety and security reasons; provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property.
IV-3
2. Porches as defined in § 11.01 may encroach up to 6 feet into a required front yard setback or side corner yard, but in no case shall be setback less than 10 feet from the front property line. A porch is not allowed in a side or rear yard setback.
B. Side and Rear Yards. Fences; walls and hedges 6 feet in height or less; bays not to exceed a depth of 3 feet or containing an area of more than 30 square feet; fire escapes not to exceed a width of 3 feet.
C. Corner Lots. Nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of 2-1/2 and 10 feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets within 100 feet of the intersection.
D. Off-Street Parking. In no event shall off-street parking space, structures of any type, buildings, or other improvements cover more than 75% of the lot area. In no event shall the landscaped portion of the lot be less than 25% of the entire lot as a result of permitted encroachments. In Shoreland areas, no more than 1/3 of lot areas shall be covered with improvements.
(1997 Code, § 300.10) (Am. Ord. 08-017, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. 08-154; passed 10-4-2017)
§ 154.082 SETBACKS.
A. Front Setbacks. Where adjacent residential structures on the same side of the street between intersections have front yard setbacks different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the immediately adjacent structures. If there is only 1 immediately adjacent structure, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required setback and the setback of the adjacent structure. In no case shall the required front yard setback exceed the required minimum established within the districts of this chapter.
B. Side and Rear Setbacks. Subject to regulations contained in the Building Code and other applicable regulations, side and rear setback requirements may be waived, provided party walls are used and the adjacent buildings are constructed as an integral unit and are part of an approved shopping center, townhouse development, or other similar development. The waiver shall only be by issuance of a variance.
C. Setbacks from Private Roads. All setback requirements of this chapter shall also be applicable to private roads and easement access rights-of-way.
(1997 Code, § 300.11) (Am. Ord. 08-003, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 154.083 HEIGHT.
A. Maximum Height
1. Antennas shall not be located on structures in excess of 65 feet in height unless the structures are existing water towers and the antennas are only an accessory use on the water towers.
IV-4
2. No other structure shall exceed 35 feet in height including church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, chimneys, and smokestacks, flag poles, public facilities, except barns, silos, and other farm structures, utility transmission services, and transmission towers of commercial broadcasting stations.
B. Parapet Walls. Parapet walls shall not exceed more than 4 feet above the height permitted of the building.
(1997 Code, § 300.12)
V-1
ARTICLE V. ZONING ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.100 DIRECTOR OF PLANNING.
The City Council shall appoint a Director of Planning. The Director of Planning, or his/her designated agent, shall enforce this chapter and shall perform the following duties:
A. Permits. Issue zoning permits pertaining to the zoning ordinance and make and maintain records thereof;
B. Inspections. Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
C. Records. Coordinate with the City Clerk to maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including but not limited to: all maps, amendments and conditional uses, variances, appeals and applications therefore;
D. Applications. Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses or other matters to the designated official bodies;
E. Interpretation. Interpret the provisions of this chapter and related provisions of the City Code, including determinations of Zoning Use Types and Classifications as specified in §154.012.
F. Enforcement. Institute in the name of the City any appropriate actions or proceedings to enforce this chapter;
G. Work Program. Recommend a program of work pursuant to Section §32.032 of the City Code to the Planning Commission prior to the beginning of each calendar year and at such other times as the Planning Commission may request.
H. Reporting. Submit a yearly report to the Planning Commission in January of each year summarizing the activities of the Planning Department during the previous year, including information related to housing, public infrastructure, City facilities, industrial and commercial development, enforcement actions, and other such information as the Director of Planning deems relevant. This report should also include any recommended changes to the Comprehensive Plan or various land use ordinances.
I. Planning Commission. Serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.101 APPLICATIONS REVIEW PROCESS.
A. Application Form and Fee. The following general provisions apply to all applications required under this chapter.
1. Application Form. All applications for any site plan, conditional use permit, zoning verification, variance, or for any other City approval required by this chapter, or to amend this chapter, shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city, to the Director of Planning.
V-2
a. Information Required. Every application shall contain the legal description of the property and a statement of the specific permit or action being sought. In addition, every application shall include the submission requirements listed in §154.101.B.1. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the city from requesting additional information from the applicant upon which to base a decision.
2. Fee. The application shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by resolution of the City Council. If a dispute arises over a specific fee imposed by the City, the amount of the fee must be deposited and held in escrow, and the person aggrieved by the fee may appeal to the district court, as provided by M.S. 462.361 (judicial review), as it may be amended from time to time. The application shall proceed as if the fee had been paid, pending a decision of the court.
B. Application Requirements
1. Submission Materials. Submission materials for applications required under this chapter shall include the following specific information:
a. Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and building dimensions.
b. Location of all buildings and their size, including square footage.
c. Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks.
d. Landscape plans meeting the requirements of Section 154.258 of Article 6 of this Zoning Ordinance.
e. If grading or storm water management is proposed, grading and storm water, erosion, and sediment control plans meeting the requirements of §150.270 through §150.284, §151.017, and §151.027 of the City Code.
f. Type or types of business or activity and proposed number of employees.
g. Proposed floor plan of any building with use indicated.
h. Building elevation drawings of any new construction or building renovation proposed.
i. Sanitary sewer and water plans with estimated flow rates.
j. Soil type and soil limitations for intended use. If severe soil limitations for the intended use are noted, a plan or statement indicating the soil conservation practice or practices to be used to overcome the limitation shall be made part of the application; and
k. For applications that require a public hearing, a certified list of property owners located within 350 feet of the subject property obtained from and certified by a licensed abstractor.
l. The Director of Planning may require that the applicant supply proof of ownership of the property for which a permit is requested.
V-3
m. The Director of Planning may require traffic generation information to determine the adequacy of existing transportation infrastructure.
n. Such other information as may be required by the Director of Planning, Planning Commission, or City Council.
2. Waiver of Submission Materials. The Director of Planning may waive certain submission requirements for projects that will have a minimal impact on surrounding properties or in instances when said submission requirements are impractical given the nature of the proposed development.
C. Amended Applications. An amendment to any permit issued under this Chapter shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
D. State Established Time Limit for Final Action. The City shall comply with the time limits as established by Minnesota Statute 15.99 (time deadline for agency action), as it may be amended from time to time, with regards to taking action on any applications subject to said Statute.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.102 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENTS.
This section contains requirements for public hearings held by the Planning Commission, Board of Adjustment or City Council under this Ordinance.
A. Notification of the General Public. The Director of Planning shall set the date for a public hearing and shall have notices of such hearing published in the legal newspaper at least once, and not less than ten days prior to the hearing.
B. Notification of Surrounding Property Owners. For any application for which a public hearing is required, the Director of Planning shall notify all property owners within the affected zone and within three hundred and fifty feet (350’) of the outer boundaries of the property in question.
1. Failure of any property owner to receive such notification shall not invalidate the proceedings.
2. The City Council may waive the mailed notice requirements for a city-wide amendment to the zoning ordinance initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council.
C. Hearing Procedures
1. Public Hearings conducted by the Planning Commission, City Council, and Board of Adjustment.
a. The Director of Planning or his/her representative shall summarize the application and any associated information.
b. The applicant shall be allowed to summarize the request and call any witnesses to support his/her request.
V-4
c. The public shall be allowed to make statements concerning the request subject to reasonable limits that may be set by the body conducting the hearing.
d. The Planning Commission, City Council and Board of Adjustment may establish other procedures as needed to ensure due process for those parties involved with the hearing.
2. Appeal Hearings. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing and make a decision on any appeal submitted in accordance with §154.108 of this Article. The Board of Adjustment shall establish rules for due process during appeal hearings and any part to the appeal may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney. At a minimum, the following hearing procedure will be followed:
a. Appellant shall present a case and may call any witnesses necessary in support thereof;
b. Respondent may ask questions of appellant’s witnesses;
c. Respondent may call witnesses;
d. Appellant may ask questions of respondent’s witnesses;
e. Respondent may summarize his or her position;
f. Appellant may summarize his or her position;
g. Generally, the Minnesota District Court Rules of Civil Procedure shall apply for the conduct of the hearing.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.103 PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES.
A. Building Permits
1. Compliance. A building permit is required for the construction or structural alteration of a building or any part thereof. Other construction activity may require a permit in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. Demolition, wrecking or removal of any structure shall require a demolition or moving permit. No building permit shall be issued for any construction, enlargement, alteration or repair, demolition or moving of any building or structure on any lot or parcel until all requirements of the Minnesota State Building Code as adopted by the City of Lake Elmo pursuant to Chapter 151, Title XV of the City Code have been fully met.
2. Concurrent Applications. If the proposed development requires a zoning amendment, variance or conditional use permit, or other permit required under this Article, the applicant shall secure all required permits prior to the issuance of a building permit for said development.
3. Administrative Review of Permits for Existing Platted Lots. If the proposed development does not involve a zoning amendment, variance or conditional use permit, and proposes a use, structure or expansion of an existing structure on an
V-5
existing platted lot, the Director of Planning may review the application and authorize the Building Official to approve or to deny the permit.
4. Expiration. Any building permit issued by the city shall expire and by limitation be null and void if a certificate of occupancy and final completion has not been issued within the following applicable period of time after the date of permit issuance:
a. Single-family residential dwellings, including new construction, remodeling or additions: 12 months;
b. Multi-family and nonresidential construction: 12 months unless a longer time is specified by the City Council at the time the original permit is issued;
c. Extension. The Building Official may grant an extension prior to the expiration of any building permits in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code. An expired building permit may be reissued once, by the Building Official, for one-half the original permit fee. Thereafter, if the permitted work is not completed within the applicable time period, a new permit may be issued only upon such conditions as the City Council by resolution may prescribe, including financial guarantees to guarantee completion by a specified date.
d. Time Limitations for Exterior Work. All exterior work shall be completed as follows:
i. All disturbed and exposed ground shall be covered with landscaping in accordance with §150.070 through §150.078 of the City Code.
ii. All exterior construction, including siding, roofing, doors, windows and finish shall be completed and present a finished appearance within six (6) months of the start of construction. Tar paper, unfinished plywood, fiberboard insulation, foam insulation, brown coat or scratch coat of stucco, plastic sheeting and other similar materials not designed to be an exterior finish shall not be considered an acceptable exterior finish. Extensions for weather sensitive work may be granted by the Building Official.
iii. Failure to complete exterior work as required herein shall result in suspension of the existing permit until a reinstatement fee equal to 100% of the original building permit has been made. Reinstatement of a building permit does not extend the original term of the permit. The reinstatement fee shall also be paid prior to re-issuance of any subsequent permit for exterior work that was not completed under a prior permit that expired.
B. Certificate of Zoning Compliance. A certificate of zoning compliance is a zoning permit that is intended as a means of administratively reviewing a new use, change in use, or structural change that does not require a building permit.
V-6
1. When Required. A certificate of zoning compliance is required for the following activities:
a. A new use classification within an existing building or structure;
b. A change of use classification within an existing building or structure;
c. Addition, removal or change in parking or other on-site improvements;
d. Small accessory structures that do not require a building permit;
e. Swimming Pools;
f. Antennas, including amateur radio antennas and wireless communications facilities that meet the criteria for administrative review in §150.111(C);
g. Fences six feet and less in height;
h. Driveways that are not authorized as part of an approved building permit;
i. Storm water management activities and structures not otherwise permitted as part of a development application;
j. Other situations requiring additional review or interpretation, as specified elsewhere in this ordinance.
2. Expiration of a Certificate of Zoning Compliance. Where a certificate of zoning compliance use has been established and is discontinued for any reason for a period of one (1) year or longer, the certificate of zoning compliance shall become null and void.
C. Certificate of Occupancy. No vacant land shall be occupied or used and no buildings hereafter erected, altered or moved shall be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. Such certificates shall show that the building or premises or part thereof and the use thereof are in conformity with the Minnesota State Building Code and the provisions of this chapter. Such certificate shall be issued only when the building or premises and the use thereof conform to all the requirements of the City Code.
D. Sign Permit. A sign permit shall be authorized for a sign that conforms to the sign regulations in §154.212. An application, on a form provided by the Director of Planning, shall be submitted with the required fee by the owner of the proposed sign. The Director of Planning shall issue a sign permit if all of the regulations in §154.212 are met.
E. Special Event Permit. A special event permit may be issued for certain events for activities or events not otherwise permitted under the Zoning Ordinance in accordance with §110.070 of the City Code.
F. Grading Permit. A permit shall be required for all non-agricultural project(s) or activities that will result in the movement of more than fifty (50) cubic yards of earth or the disturbance of more than one-half acre of land, and for construction of a building or structure on steep slopes, as specified in Article 6, Section 154.800 (C) (7) (e). The Director of Planning may issue a grading permit only if the grading plan meets the requirements of the Lake Elmo Storm Water Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance.
V-7
1. Public Hearing. All grading and excavating applications, for the purpose of creating wetlands, berming, landscape amenities, and other natural features that result in the moving of more than 400 cubic yards of material per acre of site area shall require a public hearing.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.104 PLANNING COMMISSION.
The Planning Commission shall provide assistance to the City Council in the administration of this chapter. The recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be advisory in nature. Specifically, the Planning Commission shall review, hold public hearings, and make recommendations to the City Council on all applications for zoning amendments, variances, and conditional use permits using the criteria of this Article. The Planning Commission shall be formed and operate in conformance with Chapter 32 of the City Code and specifically with Sections 32.025 through 32.042.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.105 ZONING AMENDMENTS.
A. Criteria for Granting Zoning Amendments. The City Council may adopt amendments to the zoning ordinance and zoning map in relation to land uses within a particular district or to the location of a district line. Such amendments shall be used as a means to reflect changes in the goals and policies of the City as reflected in the Comprehensive Plan.
B. Types of Amendments.
1. Rezoning. A change in the boundary of a zoning district or a change from one district to another on the Official Zoning Map, referred to as a rezoning.
2. Text Amendment. A change in the text for specific zoning district regulations or any other provision of this Chapter.
C. Initiation of Proceedings. Proceedings for a text amendment or a rezoning may be initiated by one of the following three methods:
1. By petition of an owner or owners of property that is proposed to be rezoned or for which a text amendment for a change in a district regulation is proposed;
2. By recommendation of the Planning Commission;
3. By action of the City Council.
D. Application Requirements for Zoning Amendments Initiated by Petition. A petition for a Zoning Amendment shall be submitted to the Director of Planning on such form as required by §154.101 of this Article and accompanied by the following information:
1. Conceptual site plan drawn to scale showing all affected parcels and a general concept for any proposed development of said parcels.
2. General location of all buildings and their approximate dimensions and square footage.
V-8
3. Approximate location of all curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking areas, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks.
4. Conceptual landscape plan indicating general planting areas for trees, shrubs, and lawns.
5. Conceptual grading, erosion control, and storm water management plan.
6. Conceptual sewer and water utility plan for the development.
7. Narrative indicating the types of uses or businesses that are contemplated for the development, number of employees, parking and traffic impacts, and other pertinent information about the proposed development.
8. The Director of Planning may require the applicant to supply proof of ownership of the property for which the amendment is requested that illustrates legal or equitable interest in the property.
E. Hearing Requirements. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for a Zoning Amendment as provided in §154.102 of this Article. After the close of such hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider findings and shall submit the same together with its recommendation to the City Council.
F. Effect of Denial of Application. No application of a property owner for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the zoning map shall be considered by the Planning Commission within the one year period following a denial of such request, except the Planning Commission may permit a new application, if in the opinion of the Planning Commission, new evidence or a change of circumstances warrant it.
G. Relationship to Comprehensive Plan. Any rezoning shall be consistent with the current City of Lake Elmo Comprehensive Land Use Plan. If the rezoning is not consistent with the current Comprehensive Plan, an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan must be requested and approved prior to or concurrent with the rezoning request.
H. Coordination with Adjoining Communities. Any zoning district change on land adjacent to or across a public right-of-way from an adjoining community shall be referred to the Planning Commission and the adjacent community or county for review and comment prior to action by the City Council granting or denying the zoning district classification change. A period of at least ten (10) days shall be provided for receipt of comments. Such comments shall be considered as advisory only.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.106 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.
A. Required Findings. Conditional use means a land use or development as defined by ordinance that would not be appropriate generally but may be allowed with appropriate restrictions as provided by official controls only upon a finding that all of the following provisions are met:
1. The proposed use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare of the neighborhood or the city.
V-9
2. The use or development conforms to the City of Lake Elmo Comprehensive Plan.
3. The use or development is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
4. The proposed use meets all specific development standards for such use listed in Article 9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 08-152)
5. If the proposed use is in a flood plain management or shoreland area, the proposed use meets all the specific standards for such use listed in Chapter 150, §154.800 (Shoreland Regulations) and Chapter 152 (Flood Plain Management).
6. The proposed use will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of that area.
7. The proposed use will not be hazardous or create a nuisance as defined under this Chapter to existing or future neighboring structures.
8. The proposed use will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including streets, police and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer systems and schools or will be served adequately by such facilities and services provided by the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use.
9. The proposed use will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community.
10. The proposed use will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property or the general welfare because of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
11. Vehicular approaches to the property, where present, will not create traffic congestion or interfere with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares.
12. The proposed use will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural or scenic feature of major importance.
B. Application Requirements. Conditional Use Permit applications shall be submitted to the Director of Planning on such form and accompanied by such information as required by §154.101.A of this Article and with the submission materials listed in §154.101.B of this Article.
C. Public Hearing Required. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for a conditional use permit as provided in §154.102 of this Article. After the close of the hearing on a proposed conditional use permit, the City Planning Commission shall consider findings and shall submit the same together with its recommendation to the City Council.
D. Final Decision by City Council. The City Council shall make the final decision on a conditional use permit after a public hearing by the Planning Commission. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
V-10
E. Conditions. In reviewing applications for conditional use permits, the Planning Commission and Council may attach whatever reasonable conditions they deem necessary to mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with these uses, to protect the value of property within the district and to achieve the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. In determining such conditions, special consideration shall be given to protecting immediately adjacent properties from objectionable views, noise, traffic and other negative characteristics associated with such uses.
1. The conditions shall include all specific development standards for such use listed in Article 9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 08-152)
2. If the proposed use is in a flood plain management or shoreland area, the conditions shall include specific standards for such use listed in Chapter 151 (Floodplain Management) and Chapter 154 (Shoreland Management).
3. In addition, conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Controlling the number, area, bulk, height and location of such uses;
b. Regulating ingress and egress to the property and the proposed structures thereon with particular references to vehicle and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow, and control and access in case of fire or other catastrophe;
c. Regulating off-street parking and loading areas where required;
d. Controlling the location, availability and compatibility of utilities;
e. Requiring berming, fencing, screening, landscaping or other means to protect nearby property; and
f. Requiring other conditions to create compatibility of appearance with surrounding uses.
F. Findings for Denial. If the Planning Commission recommends denial of a conditional use permit or the Council orders such denial, it shall include in its recommendation or determination findings as to the specific ways in which the proposed use does not comply with one or more specific findings required by this chapter.
G. Permittee. A conditional use permit shall be issued for a particular use and not for a particular person, except in the case of a permit granted for the uses of land reclamation, mining or soil or mineral processing. In such cases, a permit shall be issued to the particular person making application for such permit and such permit shall not be transferred or assigned for use by another without the written consent of the City. However, such consent by the City shall not be unreasonably withheld.
H. Periodic Review. A periodic review of the use may be attached as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit.
I. Term of Permit. Unless otherwise stipulated, the term shall be the life of the use.
J. Revocation. Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a conditional use permit, or any other violation of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and shall also constitute
V-11
sufficient cause for the termination of the conditional use permit by the City Council following a public hearing conducted in accordance with §154.102 of this Article.
K. Expiration. If substantial construction has not taken place within 12 months of the date on which the conditional use permit was granted, the permit is void except that, on application, the Council, after receiving recommendation from the Planning Commission, may extend the permit for such additional period as it deems appropriate. If the conditional use is discontinued for six months, the conditional use permit shall become void. This provision shall apply to conditional use permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter, but the six-month period shall not be deemed to commence until the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.107 INTERIM USE PERMITS.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses are:
1. To allow a use for a limited period of time that reasonably utilizes the property where such use is not consistent with the future land map in the Comprehensive Plan; and
2. To allow a use that is presently acceptable, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment or other significant change, will not be acceptable in the future or will be replaced by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the respective district.
B. Required Findings. An interim use permit may be granted only if the City Council finds as follows:
1. The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning district and conforms to standard zoning regulations.
2. The use will not adversely impact nearby properties through nuisance, noise, traffic, dust, or unsightliness and will not otherwise adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
3. The use will not adversely impact implementation of the Comprehensive Plan.
4. The user agrees to all conditions that the City Council deems appropriate to establish the interim use. This may include the requirement of appropriate financial surety such as a letter of credit or other security acceptable to the City to cover the cost of removing the interim use and any interim structures not currently existing on the site, upon the expiration of the interim use permit.
5. There are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or city utility fees due upon the subject parcel.
6. The date or event terminating the interim use shall be set by the City Council at the time of approval.
C. Application Requirements. Interim Use Permit applications shall be submitted to the Director of Planning on such form and accompanied by such information as required by
V-12
§154.101.A of this Article and with the submission materials listed in §154.101.B of this Article.
1. Additional Application Requirements. An application for an Interim Use Permit shall include the following additional information:
a. A letter from the applicant explaining the proposal and stating the date or event that will terminate the use;
b. A signed consent agreement, subject to review and approval by the City Council documenting:
i. That the applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user has no entitlement to future approval or reapproval of the interim use permit;
ii. That the interim use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to fully or partially take the property in the future; and
iii. That the applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user will abide by conditions of approval that the City Council attaches to the interim use permit.
D. Public Hearing Required. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for an Interim Use Permit as provided in §154.102 of this Article. After the close of the hearing on a proposed Interim Use Permit, the City Planning Commission shall consider findings and shall submit the same together with its recommendation to the City Council.
E. Final Decision by City Council. The City Council shall make the final decision on an Interim Use Permit after a public hearing by the Planning Commission. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
F. Termination. An interim use shall terminate on the happening of any of the following events, whichever occurs first:
1. The date or event stated in the permit;
2. Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued;
3. Upon a change in the City’s zoning regulations which renders the use nonconforming; or
4. The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district.
G. Revocation. Failure to comply with any condition set forth in an Interim Use Permit, or any other violation of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and shall also constitute sufficient cause for the termination of the conditional use permit by the City Council following a public hearing conducted in accordance with §154.102 of this Article.
H. Renewal. The following process may be used to renew an active interim use permit that is set to expire. Terminated or suspended interim use permits cannot be renewed unless the Director of Planning has received an application for and approved a 1-time 30-day extension to continue processing the renewal application.
V-13
1. Application. Application requirements for renewal of an existing Interim Use Permit shall be the same as for a new application.
2. Review. Upon receiving a completed application for an interim use permit renewal, the Director of Planning shall send notice of the requested renewal to all property owners within 350 feet of the parcel(s) containing the interim use. If any objections are raised within 10 days of the mailed notice, the application shall be processed in the manner of a new application. If no objections are raised, the Director of Planning shall prepare a resolution of approval outlining the conditions and stipulations of the renewal for consideration by the City Council. The City Council, as its discretion, may approve or deny the request with findings. Denial of a renewal request does not constitute termination of the existing interim use permit.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.108 APPEALS AND THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
The Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to this chapter and Minnesota law. The Board of Adjustment (which is the City Council in accordance with §31.10 of the City Code) shall have those powers and authority as provided by Minnesota law and as hereinafter provided for. The Board of Adjustment shall be formed and operate in conformance with Chapter 31 of this Code and specifically with §31.10.
A. Powers of the Board of Adjustment.
1. Review of Administrative Decisions. The Board of Adjustment shall act upon all questions as they may arise in the administration of this chapter, including the interpretation of zoning maps, and it shall hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by such an administrative official charged with enforcing this chapter. Such appeal may be made by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by an officer, department, board or bureau of the City.
2. Variances. The Board of Adjustment shall also have the power to grant variances to the provisions of this chapter under certain conditions. The conditions for the issuance of a variance are as indicated in §154.109 of this Article. No use variances (uses different than those allowed in the district) shall be issued by the Board of Adjustment.
B. Procedure for Appeals.
1. Filing of Appeals. All appeals to the Board of Adjustment shall be in writing and filed with the office of the City Clerk within 14 calendar days of the date of mailing of the notice of the order, requirement, decision or determination from which the appeal is made.
2. Hearings. The Board of Adjustment shall conduct a hearing regarding all appeals in accordance with §154.102.C.2 of this Article.
V-14
3. Notice. Written notice of the hearing shall be provided to the parties to the hearing and mailed not less than 14 days prior to the hearing.
4. Orders. The Board shall, within a reasonable time, make its order deciding the matter and shall serve a copy of such order upon the appellant or petitioner by mail. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made. The reasons for the decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be stated in the order. A majority vote of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any decisions of an administrative office of the city or to decide in favor of the applicant.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013)
§ 154.109 VARIANCES.
A. In General. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant variances to the provisions of this chapter under the following procedures and standards.
1. A request for a variance from the literal provisions of this chapter may be granted in instances where their strict enforcement would cause practical difficulties because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration and then only when it is demonstrated that such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter. All requests for variances shall be reviewed in accordance with the required findings listed in §154.109.F.
B. Use Variances Prohibited. A variance shall not be granted for any use that is not a listed permitted or conditional use under this chapter for property in the zone where the property is located.
C. Application Requirements. Variance applications shall be submitted to the Director of Planning on such form and accompanied by such information as required by §154.101.A of this Article and with the submission materials listed in §154.101.B of this Article.
D. Hearing Requirements. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each complete application for a variance as provided in §154.102 of this Article. After the close of the hearing on a proposed variance, the City Planning Commission shall consider findings and shall submit the same together with its recommendation to the Board of Adjustment.
E. Board of Adjustment Action. The Board of Adjustment shall receive the recommendation of the Planning Commission and shall take final action on the variance request. All findings and decisions of the Board of Adjustments concerning variances shall be final.
F. Required Findings. Any action taken by the Board of Adjustment to approve or deny a variance request shall include the following findings:
1. Practical Difficulties. A variance to the provision of this chapter may be granted by the Board of Adjustment upon the application by the owner of the affected property where the strict enforcement of this chapter would cause practical difficulties because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
V-15
consideration and then only when it is demonstrated that such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter.
a. Definition of Practical Difficulties. “Practical difficulties,” as used in connection with the granting of a variance, means that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner not permitted by an official control.
2. Unique Circumstances. The problem for the landowner/applicant which the proposed variance is intended to correct must be due to circumstances that are unique to the property in question and that were not created by the land owner/applicant.
3. Character of Locality. The proposed variance will not alter the essential character of the locality in which the property in question is located.
a. Definition of Locality. For purposes of this subsection, “locality” shall be defined as all that property within 350 feet of the property proposed for the variance; however, in all events, it shall include all parcels abutting the affected parcel, including those immediately across a public street, alley of other public property.
4. Adjacent Properties and Traffic. The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to property adjacent to the property in question or substantially increase the congestion of the public streets or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
G. Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Board of Adjustment may impose such restrictions and conditions upon the property that is the subject of the variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards established by this chapter or to reduce or minimize the effect of such variance upon other properties in the neighborhood and to better carry out the intent of the variance.
H. Effect of Denial. No application by a property owner for a variance shall be submitted to the Board of Adjustment within a six (6) months period following a denial of such a request unless, in the opinion of the Board, new evidence of change in circumstances warrant it.
I. Expiration. A variance shall be deemed to authorize only one particular use and shall expire if work does not commence within twelve (12) months of the date of granting such variance, except when:
1. Initial requests for an extension of one (1) year or less:
a. A written request for an extension of one (1) year or less is received by the City at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the initial variance. In order to make the request, the applicant shall submit an application on a form provided by the City and pay an application fee in the amount set forth in the City’s fee schedule. The request for the extension must include facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made by the applicant to complete or utilize the variance that was granted.
V-16
b. The Planning Director shall review the request and either approve or deny the extension. The Planning Director’s decision may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to §154.108 of this Code.
2. Subsequent requests for extensions and extensions for more than one (1) year:
a. Subsequent requests for extensions and requests for an extension of more than one (1) year must be made to the City at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the variance. In order to make the request, the applicant shall submit an application on a form provided by the City and pay an application fee in the amount set forth in the City’s fee schedule. The request for the extension must include facts demonstrating that a good faith attempt has been made by the applicant to complete or utilize the variance that was granted.
b. The Planning Commission shall review the request and shall make a recommendation to the City Council as to whether the City Council should approve or deny the request.
J. Revocation. The Board of Adjustment may revoke a variance if any conditions established by the Board as part of granting the variance request are violated.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013; Am. Ord. 08-158, passed 11-15-2016)
§ 154.110 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
A. Enforcing Officer. It shall be the duty of the Planning Director to cause the provisions of this chapter to be properly enforced.
B. Violations
1. Violations. Any person who shall violate or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of §10.99 of the City Code.
C. Investigation and Administrative Enforcement
1. Investigation of Violation. The Director of Planning shall investigate alleged violations of this Chapter. Investigation of a violation may require accessing the property where the violation is alleged to have occurred. The Director of Planning shall notify the landowner of the need for investigation and make a reasonable attempt to gain permission from the landowner for access to the property and structures for investigative purposes. If the landowner is unresponsive or access to the property is specifically denied by the landowner, the Director of Planning shall obtain a judicial order prior to entering upon the property. Entering a structure for investigative purposes shall occur only upon permission of the landowner or issuance of a judicial order.
2. Administrative Enforcement
a. Notice of Violation. Whenever in the judgment of the Director of Planning a determination is made upon investigation that a particular permit holder has
V-17
not complied with this Chapter, the Director of Planning shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the record and require him or her to complete the work.
b. Cease and Desist Order. Upon investigation, if the Director of Planning has probable cause to believe a violation of this Chapter has occurred and that immediate stoppage of work is necessary to minimize harm caused by such violation, the Director of Planning may issue a cease and desist order to halt the progress of any property modification. When any work has been stopped by a cease and desist order, it shall not be resumed until the reason for the work stoppage has been completely satisfied and the cease and desist order lifted.
D. Administrative Fee for Enforcement. The Director of Planning shall charge an administrative fee, as set by resolution of the City Council, to compensate for time spent involving the investigation and prosecution of violations, and including any expenses incurred during the investigation.
E. After the Fact Applications and Fees. Any person making application for a permit after the commencement of work requiring a permit, shall be charged an additional administrative fee. In the event the application for a permit is denied or the action permitted does not include all or part of the work commenced prior to approval of said permit, the Director of Planning shall require correction and/or restoration of the concerned property to its original state, including removal of structures or improvements.
(Ord. 08-085, passed 7-2-2013
VI-1
ARTICLE VI. NON-CONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
§ 154.150 APPLICATION.
A. Application, Generally. Except as provided in this chapter, no building or structure shall be erected, moved, altered, or extended and no land, building, or structure or part of the building, shall be occupied or used unless in conformity with regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located.
B. Application to Existing Structures. This chapter shall not apply to existing buildings and structures, nor to the existing use of any structure, or land to the extent of the use on the effective date of this chapter. This chapter shall apply to any change in use, to any intensification of the non-conforming use, to any movement of a building or structure, or to any expansion of a structure which may result in the generation of additional sewage for on-site disposal.
C. Use Defined. For the purpose of this chapter, the word USE shall mean:
1. Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; or
2. Any activity, occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure, or on a tract of land.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.151 NON-CONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
1. NON-CONFORMING USE. Any lawful use of land or any lawful use of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment to this chapter which use does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located after the effective date of this chapter or the amendment.
2. NON-CONFORMING BUILDING or NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE. Any building or structure lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment to this chapter, which building or structure does not conform with the regulations, including dimensional standards, for the district in which it is located after the effective date of this chapter or the amendment.
B. Preservation of Non-Conforming Uses. Except as provided in this chapter, the lawful use of land or the lawful use of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this chapter or on the effective date of any amendment to this chapter may be continued through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, although the use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this
VI-2
section. The continuation of the non-conforming use does not include expansion, except as otherwise permitted by this section.
C. Preservation of Dimensionally Substandard Buildings or Structures. Except as provided in this chapter, buildings structures lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter or on the effective date of any amendment to this chapter may be maintained although the building or structure does not conform to the dimensional standards of this chapter. However, any such building or structure shall not be altered or improved beyond normal maintenance, except that any lawful dimensional substandard residential building, accessory building, or structure may be altered or improved if the existing substandard dimension relates only to setback requirements and does not exceed the 10% of the minimum setback requirements. Additionally, the alteration or improvement shall conform to all of the provisions of this chapter and shall not increase the existing substandard dimensions.
D. Unlawful Uses, Buildings, and Structures. No unlawful use of property existing on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment to this chapter, nor any building or structure which is unlawfully existing on the effective date shall be deemed a non-conforming use or a nonconforming building or structure.
E. Permit Holders and Permit Applicants. Any non-conforming structure that is ready for or under construction on the effective date of this chapter or any amendment to this chapter may be completed and occupied in accordance with the requirements of any valid building permit issued for the construction prior to the effective date.
F. Change from One Non-Conforming Use to Another. A non-conforming use may be changed only to a use permitted in the district in which it is located; except that if no structural alterations are made, a non-conforming use of a building may be changed to another non-conforming use of the same or a more restrictive classification, and provided the change is approved by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals as provided in this chapter. Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a non-conforming use.
G. Change of Use with Approval of the Board of Adjustment. A non-conforming use all or partially conducted in a building or buildings, may be changed to another non-conforming use only upon determination by the Board of Adjustment, after a public hearing, that the proposed new use will be no more detrimental to its neighborhood and surroundings than is the use it is to replace. In determining relative detriment, the Board of Adjustment shall take into consideration, among other things: traffic generated; nuisance characteristics, such as emission of noise, dust, and smoke; fire hazards; and hours and manner of operation.
H. Restoration of Non-Conforming Building or Structure. A non-conforming use, building or structure which is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged may be restored and the occupancy or use of the building, structure, or part of the structures which existed at the time of the partial destruction, may be continued or resumed. In this case, the city may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property or
VI-3
water body. When a non-conforming structure in the shoreland district with less than 50 percent of the required setback from the water is destroyed by fire or other peril to greater than 50 percent of its market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the structure setback may be increased if practicable and reasonable conditions are placed upon a building permit to mitigate created impacts on the adjacent property or water body.
I. Abandonment of Use. When any non-conforming use of land or of a building or structure is discontinued for a period in excess of 1 year, the land, building, or structure shall not be allowed to continue as a non-conforming use and any subsequent use or occupancy of the land, building or structure shall be a conforming use or occupancy.
(1997 Code, § 300.05) (Am. Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-157, passed 11-5-2016) Penalty, see § 154.999
VII-1
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 154.200 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations for activities that may occur in many zoning districts or in association with a variety of land uses, including parking, signage, and activities within yards, to promote the orderly development or use of land and minimize conflicts among land uses.
(Ord. 08-078, passed 5-07-2013)
§ 154.201 APPLICABILITY.
The provisions of this Article shall be applied to all zoning districts and shall be in addition to the requirements in any specific zoning district. A permit shall not be issued unless all applicable general regulations are met.
(Ord. 08-078, passed 5-07-2013)
§ 154.202 PERMITS REQUIRED.
Permits are required for all changes in use and all development activities, with the exception of signs, which shall be governed by the specific requirements of Section 154.212 as may be applicable.
(Ord. 08-078, passed 5-07-2013) (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
§ 154.203 ESSENTIAL SERVICES.
Essential services as defined by this Ordinance are permitted in any district, provided that a site plan for any new or expanded service facility is filed with the Planning Department. The City Council may require site plan review of large facilities, upon the recommendation of the Planning Director.
(Ord. 08-078, passed 5-07-2013)
§ 154.205 FENCING REGULATIONS.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide for the regulation of fences in the City of Lake Elmo and to prevent fences from being erected that would be a hazard to the public, an unreasonable interference with the uses and enjoyment of neighboring property or are incompatible with existing uses and other zoning restrictions.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
VII-2
Permanent Fence. Fences that are installed in a fixed or enduring manner that are not intended for a seasonal or temporary purpose.
Temporary Fence. Fences that are installed and removed on a seasonal basis, such as snow fences, garden fences and seasonal recreational fences, such as hockey boards.
C. Permit Required.
1. Permanent Fence. No permanent fence shall be erected without first obtaining a fence permit. Application shall be made to the Planning Director. The fee shall be established by the City’s Fee Schedule. The Planning Director is authorized to issue a fence permit if the application indicates that the fence will be in compliance with this Ordinance. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that the Planning Director was in error. The appeals shall follow the procedure outlined in §31.01.
2. Temporary Fence. Temporary fencing that complies with subsection (F) and all other applicable provisions of this Ordinance shall be exempt from permit requirements.
D. General Requirements. All fences erected in the City of Lake Elmo are subject to the following requirements:
1. Maintenance. All fences shall be property maintained with respect to appearance and safety. Fences that remain in a state of disrepair for an extended period of time shall constitute a nuisance per §96.03.
2. Face of Fence. The finished side of any fence or wall must face abutting property or street rights of way.
3. Fence Materials. Permitted fence materials shall be limited to brick, stone, wood, wrought iron, vinyl, composite material, steel, aluminum, chain-link, and in cases of temporary fencing only, materials that are consistent with temporary fencing as regulated under subsection (F)
4. Traffic Obstruction. No fence or wall shall obstruct a motorist’s or a pedestrian’s safe view from the driveway or street.
5. Location.
a. Fences may be installed on any portion of a lot subject to the height restrictions of §154.205.E and may be installed along or within one foot of property lines provided the adjacent property agrees, in writing, that such fence may be erected on or within one foot of (12 inches) of the boundary lines of the respective properties. Any portion of the fence and all footing material shall not encroach on the neighboring property.
b. All pertinent property pins shall be visible upon inspection for fences installed within one foot (12 inches) of a property boundary.
c. In the case of a dispute, the City may require a survey to establish the boundary line of a property.
6. Easement Encroachment. An easement encroachment agreement must be approved by the Planning Director or his/her designee after review and approval
VII-3
from the City Engineer or his/her designee, along with a fence permit, for any fence that will be installed within a City easement.
7. Swimming Pools. All swimming pools shall be enclosed with required fencing per §151.085.
E. Fence Height and Design
1. Fences within Front and Side (Corner) Yards. Any fence within a front or side (corner) yard setback or any required setback form a public right-of-way may not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height and must be 50% open to air and light.
2. Residential and Mixed-Use Districts. No fence shall exceed six feet (6’) in height, and shall be subject to the design requirements of §154.205.E.3.
3. Commercial and Industrial Districts. No fence or wall shall exceed eight feet (8’) in height. Fences that exceed eight feet (8’) in height require a conditional use permit.
F. Temporary Fences
1. Height and Performance. Temporary fences shall comply with the fence height standards of subsection (E). Temporary fences shall be at least 40% open to air and light. If unable to be at least 40% open to air and light, temporary fences shall not exceed forty-two inches (42”) in height.
2. Duration and Limitation
a. No snow fence or posts shall be installed prior to October 1, and must be removed prior to April 15.
b. Seasonal recreational fencing intended for winter sports, such as hockey or broomball shall not be installed prior to October 1, and must be removed prior to April 15.
3. Location. Snow fences shall be set back at least 50 feet from any south or east property line, or such additional distance as may be required to prevent the accumulation of snow on public streets or adjoining property, as determined by the Public Works Director.
G. Prohibited Fencing. Barbed wire and electric fencing are prohibited in platted areas.
H. Agricultural Exemption. Fences constructed on parcels in excess of 5 acres for the keeping of horses; and fences constructed on parcels in excess of 10 acres are specifically exempted from the provisions of this Section. Any such agricultural fencing shall be at least 75% open to air and light.
(Ord. 08-086, passed 7-16-2013; Am. Ord 08-140, passed 7-5-2016; Am. Ord. 08-154, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.210 OFF-STREET PARKING.
A. Purpose. The intent of this section is to prevent or alleviate congestion and promote the public safety and welfare by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking,
VII-4
and requiring that parking areas are located and constructed in a manner that provides for optimum visibility to vehicles entering and exiting said parking area, accessibility, and safety. It is the responsibility of property owners to provide adequate parking to meet their specific needs.
B. Applicability. Off-street parking in accordance with this section shall be provided for all new uses and all expansions of existing uses in all districts. Parking requirements may be waived in the Village Mixed-Use District (VMX), recognizing the availability of on-street and shared parking facilities.
C. Location. All required off-street parking facilities shall be located outside of any street right-of-way, and as follows:
1. Spaces accessory to one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the principal use served. Spaces within garages are counted toward the required number of spaces.
2. Spaces accessory to multiple-family dwellings and nonresidential uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use served or within four hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to the principal building served.
3. Off-street parking located elsewhere than on the lot where the principal use being served is located shall be under the same ownership and control, either by deed or long-term lease, as the principal use. The owner of the principal use must file a recordable document with the City requiring permanent provision of off-street parking during the existence of the principal use.
4. Off-street surface parking areas containing more than four parking spaces shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the boundary of any adjacent lot zoned or used for residential purposes, with the exception of lots zoned Village Mixed-Use (VMX).
5. Other Parking in Residential Areas. Parking in residential areas (off-street and on-street) shall be limited to the use of the residents of those homes and their guests.
6. Off-street Parking in Commercial Areas. Off-street surface parking areas in commercial districts shall be located in a manner consistent with the setback requirements in §154.552.
7. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be utilized for open storage of goods or for the storage of vehicles which are inoperable or for sale or rent.
D. Parking Area Design and Maintenance
1. Access to Parking Spaces. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly to an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space, as shown in Table 5-1, Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions, except where accessory to residential uses of up to four (4) units.
2. Maneuvering Area. All parking areas except those serving one and two family dwellings on local streets shall be designed so that cars shall not be required to back into the street. If deemed necessary for traffic safety, turn-around areas may be required.
VII-5
3. Surfacing and Drainage. All off-street parking areas shall be surfaced as follows:
a. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall provide a durable surface with suitable drainage.
b. In all residential, commercial and mixed use districts, all areas intended to be utilized for parking space for five (5) or more vehicles and associated driveways shall be paved with a durable surface including, but not limited to, hot asphalt, bituminous or concrete.
c. In industrial districts, all areas intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be surfaced with materials suitable to control dust and drainage. Plans for surfacing and drainage for nonresidential uses shall be submitted for review and the final plan shall be subject to written approval.
d. Storage areas for heavy construction equipment that would damage the pavement may be exempt from the paving and surfacing requirement with an acceptable surface approved by the City Engineer.
e. Farm dwellings and farm operations are exempt from the paving requirement.
f. City parks shall be exempt from the parking requirement if approved by the City Council.
4. Marking of Parking Spaces. All parking areas containing five (5) or more spaces or containing angled parking shall be marked with painted lines at least four (4) inches wide. Such markings shall be maintained in a clearly legible condition.
5. Curbing. All open off-street parking areas designed to have head-in parking along the property line shall provide a bumper curb not less than five (5) feet from the side property line or a barrier of normal bumper height not less than three (3) feet from the side property line.
6. Landscaping and Screening. Parking areas shall be screened and landscaped as provided in Article 8, Section 154.258. (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
7. General Maintenance. Parking areas and driveways shall be kept free of dirt, dust, debris and waste. In winter months, required parking areas shall be cleared of snow and ice within a reasonable time.
8. Accessible Parking. Accessible parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided as required by the International Building Code.
E. Dimensions. The minimum dimensions for required parking spaces are shown in Table 5-1, Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions and Figure 5-1, Minimum Parking Dimensions Diagram.
Table 5-1: Minimum Parking Space and Aisle Dimensions
Angle (A)
Width (B) ª
Curb Length (C)
Stall Depth (D) b
1 Way Aisle Width (E)
2-Way Aisle Width (E)
0 (Parallel)
9’
22’
8’6”
14’
22’
VII-6
44°
9’
12’
18’9”
14’
22’
60°
9’
9’10”
19’10”
18’
22’
90°
9’
8’6”
18’
20’
22’
a. For parking areas containing more than ten (10) parking spaces, compact spaces may account for up to twenty percent (20%) of the total parking area required. They may be reduced in size to a width of eight (8) feet and a stall depth of twelve percent (12%) less than (D) above, and must be grouped and signed appropriately
b. Parking spaces that use an appropriately sized curb overhang over a landscaped island or buffer may be reduced in depth by one and one-half feet (1’ 6”). A concrete curb or other means shall be provided to prevent parked vehicles from damaging plant materials.
VII-7
Figure 5-1: Minimum Parking Dimensions Diagram
F. Parking Requirements. Accessory, off-street parking shall be provided as specified in Table 5-2, Specific Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements, except as otherwise specified in this section.
1. In addition to the requirements in Table 5-2, one (1) parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle or vehicle necessary for the operation of the use that is maintained on the premises.
2. Parking spaces for uses with multiple components, such as hotels with dining and conference facilities, shall be based on the sum of the parking requirements of the separate components. Shared parking standards may be used where applicable.
3. Proof of Parking. The Planning Commission may allow parking requirements for a particular use to be relaxed or lessened in response to an expected demand that is lower than the required standard in this section, provided that one of the following conditions exists:
a. Sufficient open area is set aside on the parcel to meet the required standard, if determined to be necessary at a later date.
b. If parking will be needed less than twenty-five (25%) of the time during typical hours of use, on-street parking accessible by sidewalk within two blocks of the site may be used in lieu of required off-street parking.
4. Where a parking study is required, a qualified transportation engineer or transportation planner shall perform the study. The study shall contain information on the anticipated number of employees, customers, visitors, clients, shifts, events, or deliveries to the use, and may refer to other studies or similar situations elsewhere.
G. Shared Parking. Joint use of required parking spaces is encouraged where two or more uses on the same or adjacent sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. The applicant(s) must submit analysis showing that peak parking times of the uses will occur at different times and the parking area will
VII-8
be adequate for both uses. A legal instrument such as an easement or deed restriction that guarantees access to the parking for both uses shall be submitted.
H. Truck Parking in Residential Areas. No commercially licensed trailer shall be parked or stored in a residential district except when loading, unloading, or rendering a service. Recreation vehicles and pickups are not restricted by the terms of this provision.
Table 5-2. Specific Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
Residential Uses
Household Living
Single-family detached dwelling
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Two-family dwelling
1 space per 1-bedroom unit
2 spaces per 2-bedroom or larger unit
Single-family attached dwellings shall provide an additional 10% of parking spaces for visitor parking
Multifamily dwellings shall also provide 1 visitor space per 4 units
Single-family attached dwelling
Multifamily dwelling
No fee shall be charged for required spaces
Senior (elderly) housing
1 space per dwelling unit
If senior housing may be converted to general housing in the future, proof of additional parking shall be required
Secondary dwelling
1 space per secondary dwelling unit
Live-work unit
2 spaces per dwelling unit
At least one of the required spaces shall be accessible for client parking
Mobile home park
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Group Living
Group home, group residential facility, halfway house, congregate housing
1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 visitor space for every 4 residents based on capacity
VII-9
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
Semi-transient accommodations
1 space per bedroom, plus one space for each fulltime staff equivalent
Parking study required
Public and Civic Uses
Cemetery
As determined by the Planning Director
College or university, other adult learning center
To be determined by the Planning Director based on parking study
Parking study required
Community services
Parking equal to 30 percent of the capacity of persons or as determined by the Planning Director based on parking study
Day care center (see under Accessory Uses for Family day care)
1 space per employee on largest shift plus 1 space per 7 students based on capacity; or 1 space per 10 students if an off-street drop-off and pick-up space is provided
School, public or private
1 space per staff member plus 1 space per 5 students of legal driving age based on design capacity
Existing schools not meeting this standard may be required to develop a parking management plan, but shall not be required to add the minimum number of spaces
Public assembly
1 space per each 4 seats based on design capacity
Religious institution, place of worship
1 space per each 6 seats or 10 feet of pews in the main assembly hall
Existing institutions not meeting this standard may be required to develop a parking management plan, but shall not be required to add the minimum number of spaces
Services
VII-10
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
Business center
Total of parking requirements for individual uses, excepting any that meet the shared parking requirements in Section 154.210.G
Commercial kennel, commercial stable
1 space per employee on the largest shift plus 1 space per 6 animals
Communication services
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 space per company vehicle stored on the site
Educational services
1 space per staff member plus 1 space per 5 students of legal driving age based on design capacity
Financial institution
1 space per 100 square feet of usable floor area
Funeral home
1 space per 100 square feet of floor area in the main assembly room plus one space per staff member
Transient Accommodations, Lodging
1 space per guest room, plus additional space for meeting or restaurant facilities
Meeting and restaurant facilities may require additional parking, based on square footage of each use as defined in this table.
Medical facilities
5 spaces per medical professional, or 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Membership organization (clubs, lodges, etc.)
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Nursing and personal care
1 space for each 4 beds, plus 1 space per employee on the largest work shift
Offices
3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
Personal services
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
VII-11
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
Repair and maintenance shop
1 space per 400 square feet of gross floor area
Self-service storage facility
1 space per 300 square feet of office or sales area
The apron in front of the storage units shall be wide enough for two cars to pass
Trade shop
1 space per 300 square feet of office or sales area, plus 1 space per 3,000 square feet of storage area
Transportation services
1 space per 300 square feet of office or sales area, plus 1 space per vehicle kept on premises
Veterinary service
3 spaces per veterinarian, or 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Food Services
Drinking and Entertainment
1 space per 3 customer seats or each 100 sq. ft. of interior space (the greater), plus 1 space per 200 sq. ft. exterior seating area.
Drive-in Restaurant, Fast Food Restaurant, Standard Restaurant
1 space per 3 customer seats or each 100 sq. ft. of interior space (the greater), plus 1 space per 200 sq. ft. exterior seating area. Drive-throughs shall provide queuing space for at least 3 vehicles in advance of the menu board and 3 vehicles between the menu board and pick-up window
Sales of Merchandise
Garden Center, Building Supplies Sales
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus 1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. of outside sales or display area
Furniture and Appliance Sales
1 space per 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area
VII-12
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
General Retail
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Includes any retail uses not specifically listed in this table
Shopping Center
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Shared parking provisions (Section 154.210.G. of this Article) are encouraged to be used where applicable
Wayside Stand
1 space per 400 sq. ft. sales area
Spaces need not be paved, but shall be adequately separated and screened from the street and adjacent properties, as determined by the Planning Director
Wholesaling
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of indoor sales area plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet of storage area
Automobile/Vehicular Uses
Automobile Maintenance Services, Commercial Vehicle Repair, Gas Station
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area used for sales or customer service plus 2 spaces per service bay
Service bay shall not be counted as a parking space
Automobile Parts/Supply
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of indoor sales area plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet of storage area
Automobile Rental
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus adequate storage space for rental vehicles maintained on site
Car Wash
1.5 spaces per bay, plus 4 stacking spaces per bay, plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift,
Vehicle Sales and Storage Lots
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of indoor sales area plus 1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. of outside sales or display area and 1 space per 2,000 square feet of storage area
VII-13
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
Outdoor Recreation Uses
Campgrounds and Trailering
1 space per site, plus spaces required for other uses
Golf Course
5 spaces per hole plus additional space for meeting or restaurant facilities
Marina
As determined by the Planning Director
Parking study may be required for large or multiple-use facilities
Outdoor Entertainment
As determined by the Planning Director
Outdoor Recreation Facility
1 space per 3 persons based on maximum occupancy load, plus 1 space per employee on the largest shift or as determined by parking study
Parking study may be required for large or multiple-use facilities
Parks and Open Areas
No requirement
Restricted Recreation
As determined by the Planning Director
Parking study may be required
Swimming pool
1 space per 150 square feet of pool area
Indoor Recreation/Entertainment
Adult Establishment
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area
Indoor Athletic Facility
1 space per 250 square feet floor area plus 2 spaces per tennis or racquet games court and 1 space per 150 square feet of pool area
Indoor Recreation
Bowling alleys: 5 spaces per lane
Other facilities: 1 space per 3 persons based on maximum capacity
VII-14
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
Agricultural and Related Uses
Agricultural Production and Services;
No requirement
Agricultural Support
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of indoor sales or office area plus 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of outside sales or display area and 1 space per 2,000 square feet of storage area
Forestry Operations
As determined by the Planning Director
Production, Processing and Storage
Non-production Industrial
Light Industrial
Heavy Industrial
1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area up to 20,000 sq. ft. plus 1 space per 2,000 sq. ft. in excess of 20,000 sq. ft., or per 5 regular employees, whichever is greater.
Additional parking may also be required for office or retail space, as specified in this table
Includes other industrial uses largely carried on in enclosed buildings and not individually listed
Motor freight and warehousing
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of office or sales area, plus 1 space per 3,000 sq. ft. of storage area
Landfill, Resource Extraction, Salvage/Recyclable Center
2 spaces per 3 employees on the largest shift, based on maximum planned employment
Includes other industrial uses largely carried on outdoors
Utilities, Transportation and Communications
Air transportation
As determined by the Planning Director
Broadcasting or Communication Tower
No requirement
Essential Services
As determined by the Planning Director
VII-15
Use
Minimum Parking Requirement
Notes
Local Transit, Railroad Transportation
2 spaces per 3 employees on the largest shift, based on maximum planned employment
Accessory Uses
Animals, Domestic
No requirement
Home Occupation
No requirement unless specified in Conditional Use Permit
Bed and breakfast
1 space per guest room in addition to dwelling unit requirements
Family Day Care, Group Family Day Care
1 space per employee not residing on the premises plus one drop-off space
Kennel, Private; Stable, Private
No requirement
Interim Uses
Interim Use
As determined by the Planning Director
(Ord. 08-078, passed 5-07-2013)
§ 154.211 OFF-STREET LOADING AREAS.
Off-street loading space shall be provided in all districts for any nonresidential use which will involve the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles and has a gross floor area of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more, in accordance with the following standards. Off-street loading area requirements may be waived in the Village Mixed-Use District (VMX).
A. Number. For facilities with less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area, a designated loading zone may be provided on site, rather than constructing a loading berth. For facilities with twenty thousand (20,000) square feet gross floor area or greater, one (1) off-street loading berth shall be provided every thirty thousand (30,000) square feet gross floor area or fraction thereof.
B. Location. All required loading berths shall be off-street. A loading berth shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of two street rights-of-way and at least fifty (50) feet from a residential district unless within a building. Loading berths shall not occupy the required front yard setback.
VII-16
C. Size. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a required loading berth shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width, fifty (50) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle maneuvering space.
D. Access. Each required loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicle access to a street or public alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic. Driveway design is specified in Section 154.209 of this Article.
E. Surfacing. All loading berths and access ways shall be improved with a durable material to control the dust and drainage.
F. Accessory Use. Any space allocated as a loading berth or maneuvering area in accordance with this Section shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles or required off-street parking.
(Ord. 08-078, passed 5-07-2013)
§ 154.212 SIGN REGULATIONS.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide standards to safeguard life, health, and property and to promote the public welfare by regulating the design, area, number, construction, location, and installation of all signs referred to hereunder. The City Council and Planning Commission of the City of Lake Elmo find that the visual environment has an effect on the welfare of the citizens of Lake Elmo and that careful control of signage can protect and enhance the community. To carry out this general purpose, the regulations set forth herein are intended to:
1. Protect the public from hazards that result from signs which are structurally unsafe, obscure the vision of motorists and/or compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals and warning signs.
2. Preserve the land value of private property by assuring the compatibility of signs with nearby land uses.
3. Foster high quality commercial and industrial development and to enhance economic development of existing businesses and industries by promoting reasonable, orderly, attractive and effective sign that meet the need for business identification, advertising and communication.
4. Encourage creative and well-designed signs that contribute in a positive way to the community’s visual environment, express local character and help develop a distinctive image in the city. When appropriate, signage is encouraged to utilize design elements that are consistent with the Lake Elmo Branding and Theming Study.
5. Recognize that signs are a necessary form of communication and provide flexibility within the sign review and approval process to allow for unique circumstances.
6. Provide applicants with clear and consistent rules and regulations.
VII-17
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandoned Sign. Any sign remaining in place which for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or more no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product, service, idea, or commercial activity located on the site or has not been properly maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
Ancillary Sign. A wall sign separate from and subordinate in area to the principal sign, identifying generic services, goods or departments in the building, such as pharmacy, optical, auto repair, or garden center, but not including the identification of brand names.
Attention-Attracting Object. Any streamer, pinwheel, pennant, flag, propeller, inflatable sign, statuary, tethered balloon, bunting, beacon, or other artificial device, figure, shape, color, sound, light or exhibit, whether live, animated, or still, that is intended to attract attention to the use or business being conducted on the site. Attention-attracting object does not include the flag of any governmental country.
Awning. A roof-like cover consisting of fabric, plastic or structural protective cover that projects from the wall of a building which generally serves the purpose of shielding a doorway, entrance, window, or outdoor service area from the elements or to provide decorative distinction.
Banner. A suspended sign made of a flexible material such as canvas, sailcloth, plastic, paper, or fabric of any kind, and intended to be displayed on a temporary basis. A decorative banner is a banner containing no message or logo that is displayed for the purpose of adding color or interest to the surroundings or to the building to which it is attached. A flag or canopy shall not be considered a banner.
Beacon. A stationary or revolving light that flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner that is intended to attract or divert attention.
Business Opening Sign. A temporary sign displayed prior or in addition to permitted permanent signs to promote the opening of a new business, a change of name, or a change of ownership.
Canopy. A detachable, roof-like cover, supported from the ground or deck, floor or walls of a structure, for protection from the sun or weather.
Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged manually without altering the face or the surface of the sign and on which the message changes less than eight times a day and less than once per hour. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall not be considered a changeable copy sign.
Commercial Message. A message that directs attention to or acts as advertising for a business, commodity, product, service, or form of entertainment or tends to encourage the occurrence of a commercial transaction related thereto.
Comprehensive Sign Plan. A complete signage plan for a building or lot that has been approved by the City.
VII-18
Construction Sign. A sign identifying individuals or companies involved in design, construction, wrecking, financing, or development of a building or lot upon which the sign sits and/or identifying the future use of buildings or lot upon which the sign sits. Copy. Words, letters, numbers, figures, designs, or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign.
Directional Sign, On-Premise. A sign without commercial message erected for the purpose of indicating the required or preferred direction of vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian traffic on private property including, but not limited to “no parking,” “entrance,” “exit only,” “loading only,” and other similar signage.
Directional Sign, Off-Premise. Any sign without commercial message that is displayed for the purpose of informing people of or guiding people to a particular place for a specified event, including, but not limited to, an open house, garage sale, estate sale or other similar event.
Directly Illuminated Sign. Any sign designed to give any artificial light directly through any transparent or translucent material from a source of light originating within or on such sign.
Directory Sign. A sign which serves as a common or collective identification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same lot. Such a sign commonly lists the tenants, occupants, floor plan, addresses or suite numbers of an office complex, shopping center, or residential building complex.
Election Campaign Period. A period prior to a general election starting on August 1 until 10 days following the general election, or a period prior to a special election starting 13 weeks prior to the special election until 10 days following the special election.
Electronic Variable Message Sign. A changeable copy sign or portion thereof which can be electronically changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign, not including signage or portions thereof displaying time and temperature.
Façade. Any separate face or surface of a building, including parapet walls, and roof surfaces or any part of a building which encloses or covers unusable space. Where separate facades are oriented in the same direction, or where the inside angle at the intersection of two surfaces is greater than one-hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees, they are to be considered as part of a single façade.
Flag. A device generally made of flexible material, such as cloth, paper, or plastic, and displayed from a pole, cable or rope. It may or may not include copy.
Frontage. The boundary of a lot that abuts a public street.
Garage Sale Sign. A sign advertising the sale of personal property including estate sales, yard sales or rummage sales used to dispose of personal household possessions.
Government Sign. Any sign erected by the City of Lake Elmo or any other governmental entity in the exercise of official government business and authority.
Ground Sign. Any free-standing sign that is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building. A single sign structure having two identical or nearly identical faces back to back shall constitute a single sign. For the purposes of this definition, a ground sign is intended to refer to a primary,
VII-19
permanent, ground-mounted sign, not a temporary sign or sign that is ancillary to the primary sign, such as a directional sign or portable sign.
Hanging Sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a surface and is supported by such surface.
Indirectly Illuminated Sign. A sign that is illuminated from a source outside of the actual sign.
Inflatable Sign. A freestanding or moored sign expanded or inflated with air or another gas, like a balloon, and which may rise and float above the ground.
Legal Non-Conforming Sign. Any sign which was lawfully erected and displayed on [City Clerk to insert effective date], but which does not conform to the requirements and limitations herein, or any sign which was lawfully erected and displayed on the effective date of any amendment to this Section, but which does not conform to such amendment.
Logo. A symbol or trademark commonly used to identify a business or organization.
Memorial Sign. A sign or tablet memorializing a person, event, place or structure.
Menu Sign. A permanent changeable copy sign associated with restaurants with drive-through windows, car washes, or other businesses with drive-up services which gives a detailed list of food or services available.
Monument Sign. A ground sign having a monolithic base or support structure of any material measuring no less than one-third (1/3) of the greatest width of the sign at any point.
Noncommercial message. A message intended to direct attention to a political, social, community or public service issue or an idea, aim viewpoint, aspiration or purpose and not intended to produce any commercial benefit or tend to encourage a commercial transaction.
Off-Premise Sign. A sign which displays any message directing attention to a business, product, service, profession, commodity, activity, event, person, institution or any other commercial message, which is generally conducted, sold, manufactured, produced, offered, or occurs elsewhere than on the lot where such sign is located.
On-Premise Sign. A sign which displays any message directing attention to a business, product, service, profession, commodity, activity, event, person, institution or any other commercial message, which is generally conducted, sold, manufactured, produced, offered, or occurs on the same lot as the sign.
Pennant. A tapered or dove-tailed banner or flag.
Permanent. When used in reference to a sign, means that the sign is constructed of durable materials and intended to exist for an indefinite period of time or the duration of the time that the use or occupant is located on the premises and is generally, but not necessarily, affixed to the ground or structure. Unless the context clearly dictates otherwise, the term “permanent” in this Ordinance is not intended to mean literal permanence, but rather it is meant to distinguish such signs from more transient or temporary signage.
VII-20
Pole Sign. A ground sign mounted upon a pole or pylon, or multiple poles or pylons, not meeting the definition of a monument sign.
Portable Sign. A type of temporary sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or a building or not designed to be permanently attached to the ground or a building, including but not limited to, trailers or other vehicles that are used principally as a sign, posters, “sandwich boards” or other freestanding signboards, regardless of whether such signs are attached to the ground or to a building or structure.
Projecting Sign. A sign that is attached to the wall of a building and projects more than fifteen (15) inches beyond such wall.
Real Estate Sign. A sign advertising only the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.
Sign. Any display of lettering, logos, colors, lights, or illuminated neon tubes visible to the public from outside of a building or from a traveled way, that either conveys a message to the public, or intends to advertise, direct, invite, announce or draw attention to any event, goods, products, services, facilities, persons, property interest or business.
Street Frontage. The distance for which a lot boundary adjoins a single public street.
Temporary Sign. Any sign that is not a permanent sign.
Wall Sign. A sign that is attached to a wall of a building and is affixed parallel to the wall at a distance of not more than fifteen (15) inches from the surface of the wall.
Window Sign. Any sign located completely within an enclosed building and visible from a public way or placed upon a window. Merchandise within the premises and visible from the exterior shall not be considered a window sign under this definition.
C. Applicability. The Sign Ordinance shall apply to any sign placed, erected, altered, maintained, or relocated within the city that is plainly visible, although not necessarily legible, from any public right-of-way or any lot in ownership separate from the lot upon which the sign is located.
D. Sign Permits and Fees
1. Permit Required. Except as provided in this Section, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, alter or relocate within the city, any sign without first obtaining a permit from the Planning Department and making payment of all fees as required by the City’s Fee Schedule. This subsection shall not be interpreted to require a permit for a change of copy on a changeable copy sign, changing occupant sign panels on a directory sign, repainting, cleaning, or other normal maintenance and repair of any existing sign or its structure as long as the sign copy does not change.
2. Application for Sign Permit. All applications for sign permits shall be filed on a form supplied by the City. Such application shall be submitted with all required information provided and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
a. Date of Application
VII-21
b. Name, address, telephone number, and, if available, fax and email address, of the Applicant as well as of the person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the sign.
c. The written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected, or the sworn statement of the applicant that the applicant is authorized by the owner, lessee or other authorized occupant of the premises to erect the proposed sign.
d. A scale drawing showing the existing and proposed location and dimensions of all buildings, structures, and signs on the subject property. For a ground sign, the drawing shall also indicate the following:
i. Distance of the sign from either the face of curb or sidewalk as well as its location relative to other ground signs, driveways, fire hydrants, and any other features of a site that could be obscured by the sign.
ii. A landscaping plan around the base of all ground signs.
e. The configuration of the proposed sign listing the height, width, total square footage, proposed copy, method of construction and attachment, method of illumination and description of all electrical equipment, sign materials and colors, and at least one image showing the location of the proposed sign and its relationship to either the building to which it is to be mounted or the surrounding lot if it is a ground sign.
f. The total area and number of all signs by type on the subject property both before and after the installation of the proposed sign.
g. For temporary signs, applications must be accompanied by a signed, written statement acknowledging the ordinance requirements governing the duration of time during which the sign may be displayed.
h. Such other information as the City may require to ensure compliance with this Sign Ordinance and any other applicable laws.
3. Application Process and Review Procedure. It shall be the duty of the Planning Director, upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, to examine the application for compliance with the requirements of this Section and, if deemed necessary by the Planning Director, to inspect the premises upon which the proposed sign is to be erected. If the application is complete and the proposed sign is in compliance with all the requirements of this Ordinance, and any other applicable laws, the following actions shall be taken:
a. If the application is for a permanent sign that conforms to an approved Comprehensive Sign Plan that applies to the property upon which it is to be located, or for a permanent or temporary sign that adheres to the requirements of this Code, the Planning Director may issue a permit.
b. If an application for approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan pursuant to §154.212.I is submitted with a development application subject to Planning Commission review and City Council Approval, the Planning Director shall
VII-22
review the application and make a recommendation to the Planning Commission prior to issuing a permit.
c. Except for applications for approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan, applications shall be approved or denied within thirty (30) days of the filing of a complete application or be deemed approved unless an extension of time for review is granted, in writing by the applicant. Any decision of the Planning Director may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
d. In the event that a permit is issued but the sign authorized by the permit is not placed, erected, altered or relocated within six (6) months after the issuance of the permit, the permit shall expire and be null and void.
e. Fees. A fee shall be charged for the permit in the amount set forth in the City’s Fee Schedule.
E. Design Review Criteria. Signs shall meet the following criteria:
1. Any signage affixed to a building shall be dimensioned and located in such a manner that is fits the buildings architectural features and proportions.
2. All signs shall be designed to fit the zoning and character of the surrounding area. Special consideration should be made where proposed signage is located on or adjacent to locally identified historic structures or publicly owned recreation and conservancy areas. Signage in Planned Unit Development, or in developments seeking Comprehensive Sign Plans, shall conform to the planned or existing dominant architectural theme of the area. Signage in or abutting residential properties should be designed and located so as not to create a nuisance.
3. Signs illuminated by lights shall be positioned in such a manner that none of the light spills over onto an adjourning property or glares or shines into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians. All signs must conform to the Sign Illumination standards in §154.212.F.7 and §150.035 (Lighting, Glare Control and Exterior Lighting Standards).
4. Landscape features shall be incorporated around the base of all permanent ground signs. Landscape plantings or other landscape materials shall not be considered as part of the allowable signage.
F. General Sign Regulations. This section pertains to all signs erected in the City of Lake Elmo. Additional regulations may apply based on sign type and zoning district in which the sign is to be displayed. Whenever regulations conflict anywhere within this Section or with any other applicable rule or regulation, unless expressly stated otherwise, the more restrictive provision shall control.
1. Surface Area Calculation. The sign surface area shall be calculated based on the area within the smallest single continuous rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines encompassing all elements of the actual sign face including any writing, representation, emblems or any figure or similar character together with any material forming an integral part of the display or forming the backing surface or background on which the message or symbols are displayed, but excluding any support structure. For a sign painted on or applied to a building, the
VII-23
area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording and accompanying design or symbols, together with any background of a different color than the natural color, or finish material of the building. Area of signs displaying copy on two parallel, back-to-back faces not separated by more than twelve (12) inches shall be calculated with reference to a single face only.
2. Sign Location, Placement and Setback Requirements. Except as provided elsewhere in this Section, all signs shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. Limitations Based on Building Setbacks
i. Except as provided in subparagraph (b), no part of any permanent or temporary sign shall extend over a property line.
ii. Where buildings are lawfully permitted to exist on the property line, a permanent sign attached to a building may project not more than six (6) feet over the abutting public sidewalk or right of way provided that the bottom of the sign components are located no less than eight (8) feet above the ground immediately beneath such sign. No sign may project over adjacent private property. Any ground sign shall be located on the premises unless it is an authorized temporary sign for which a valid permit is in effect.
b. Signs on Public Property. No sign shall be located within or across any public right-of-way, or on any public property, easement, or utility pole, except for:
i. A sign erected by, or required by, a government agency or temporarily erected to protect the health and safety of the general public; or
ii. A sign erected in conformity with subparagraph (a.ii) of this subsection.
iii. Subdivision identification signs, provided an encroachment and license agreement is obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction.
iv. Directional signs to places of worship, schools, parks and public buildings within the City not to exceed four square feet subject to the approval of the road authority. Not more than three directional signs are allowed for each building location.
c. Safety of Motorists and Non-Motorists
i. No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape, or color it may obstruct, impair, obscure the vision of road users, or otherwise obstruct, interfere with the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.
ii. No ground sign, with the exception of government signs, may be placed within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, within 15 feet of a crosswalk, or within 15 feet of the intersection of any circulation lane, driveway or alley.
VII-24
iii. No sign exceeding a height of thirty (30) inches may be placed within the vision triangle as defined in §11.01.
iv. No sign or structural components shall obstruct passage on a sidewalk or walkway.
d. Additional Regulations Pertaining to Placement of All Signs. Except for a sign erected by, or required by, a government agency or temporarily erected to protect the health and safety of the general public:
i. No sign shall be attached to a fence, tree, shrubbery, utility pole or like items on either public or private property, and no sign shall obstruct or obscure primary signs on adjacent premises.
ii. No sign shall extend beyond the perimeter of a permanent structure or obstruct any window, door, fire escape, ventilation shaft or other area that is required to remain unobstructed by an applicable building code.
iii. No sign shall be mounted upon any roof of any building or structure.
e. Americans with Disabilities Compliance. Sign placement shall meet all Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
3. Construction and Structural Requirements. Every sign and its framework, braces, anchors and other supports shall be constructed of such material and with such workmanship as to be safe. Every sign shall be designed and constructed in conformity with the applicable provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code and shall be free of any exposed extra bracing, angle iron, guy-wire or cables. The base or support of all permanent ground signs shall be securely anchored to an appropriately designed concrete base or footing per the State Building Code.
4. Load Requirements. All signs and other advertising structures shall be designed and constructed to meet all load requirements according to all applicable regulations in the Minnesota State Building Code.
5. Installation. All signs shall be property secured, supported and braced. No sign or any part thereof, or anchor, brace, or guy-wire shall be attached, fastened or anchored to any fire escape, fire ladder or standpipe, and no sign or any part thereof, or anchor, brace or guy-wire shall be erected or maintained which may cover or obstruct any door, doorway, or window of any building or which may hinder or prevent ingress or egress through such door, doorway or window, or which may hinder or prevent the raising or placing of ladders against such building in the event of fire. All signs or attention-attracting devices shall be free of projections that could cause injury to a pedestrian and shall be installed in such a manner to avoid obstruction of a public sidewalk or street or portion thereof.
6. Maintenance. All signs, including nonconforming signs, and sign structures shall be maintained to preserve the appearance and structural integrity substantially identical to the new condition of the sign.
VII-25
7. Sign Illumination. All illuminated signs shall comply with Section 150.035 (Lighting, Glare Control and Exterior Lighting Standards) and the following requirements:
a. Electrical Permit. All signs in which electrical wiring and connections to be used shall comply with all applicable provisions of the State Electrical Code.
b. Voltage Displayed. The voltage of any electrical apparatus used in conjunction with a sign shall be conspicuously noted on that apparatus. In addition, all electrical signs shall bear the label of approval of a recognized testing laboratory and be equipped with a watertight safety switch that is located where the electrical supply enters the sign.
c. External Illumination. All external lighting fixtures shall be steady, stationary, fully-shielded and directed solely onto the sign, and shall use lighting designed to minimize light spill and glare. Lighting sources shall not be directly visible or cause glare to adjacent public rights-of-way or adjacent private property.
d. Internal Illumination. Internally illuminated signs shall permit light to shine fully through only the lettering and graphic elements of the sign. The background for such lettering and graphics shall be opaque or translucent and shall transmit light at a level substantially less than that transmitted through the lettering and graphics. If the contrast between the lettering or graphic elements and background does not permit adequate legibility, a translucent white boarder of up to one (1) inch in width may be placed around said lettering or graphic elements.
e. Brightness Limitation. Except for daytime displays on electronic variable message signs, in no instance shall the lighting intensity of any illuminated sign exceed:
i. Three (3) foot candles at the front lot line and one (1) foot candle at all other lot lines, measured three (3) feet above the surface of the ground.
ii. Fifty (50) foot candles measured perpendicular to the face of the sign from a distance equal to the narrowest dimension of the sign.
f. Glare. All artificial illumination shall be so designed, located, shielded and directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light up adjacent public right-of-way or surrounding property.
g. Gooseneck and similar reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground and wall signs provided, however, the reflectors and lights shall concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. It shall be unlawful to maintain any sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by floodlights or spotlights, unless such lights are completely concealed from view from the public right-of-way.
8. Motion as a Component of a Sign. No sign shall have any flashing, scintillating, moving or blinking lights or rotating beacons, whether operated by electronic or mechanical means or wind driven, nor shall any floodlight, spotlight, or beacon
VII-26
utilize such actions to illuminate a sign. In addition, no beam of light shall be projected through a mechanism which periodically changes the color of the light reaching the sign.
9. Attention-Attracting Objects. The use of any attention-attracting object, as defined in this code, shall be allowed only as a temporary sign in conjunction with a special event permit, not to exceed ten (10) days per issuance. No permit shall be granted for any premises more than four (4) times in any calendar year; or more than once in any three month period.
10. Lots having Multiple Street Frontages. Business occupying corner lots, or multiple frontages adjacent to more than one public right-of-way, may display up to one additional ground or building-mounted sign for each additional frontage provided that such additional sign may not exceed 50% of the area allowed by the primary frontage and is oriented toward the additional frontage. For purposes of this code, the primary frontage shall be presumed to be the frontage upon which the main entrance to the building is located. The applicant, however, may identify a different frontage as the primary frontage to maximize the effectiveness of the signage.
11. Resemblance to Traffic Signs. No sign shall contain or resemble any sign resembling in size, shape, message, or color any traffic control devices compliant with the Minnesota State Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
G. Limitations According to the Type of Land Use. Unless exempt under §154.212.K or as expressly provided elsewhere, no permanent or temporary signs shall be displayed except in conformity with the following regulations as they correspond to the type of land use and districts in which the sign is to be displayed.
1. Residential Uses in Residential Districts
a. In connection with legal home occupations, a single sign which is limited in content to the name, address and legal home occupation of the owner or occupant of the premises, and which does not exceed two (2) square feet in area. Signs under this paragraph shall be wall signs only.
b. A residential condominium or multi-family apartment complex may display signs identifying the name of the condominium or apartment complex if the total acreage of the lot is one (1) acre or more and the condominium or apartment includes eight (8) or more units. One (1) wall sign and one (1) ground sign per street frontage may be displayed, with a maximum of two (2) wall signs and two (2) ground signs per lot. No identification sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, and the maximum height is one (1) story or twelve (12) feet above curb level, whichever is lower. For purposes of this paragraph, the term “lot,” when used in reference to a condominium means all property within a common interest community.
c. Subdivision Identification Signs
i. Number. Each residential subdivision is allowed up to one subdivision identification sign per entrance. For the purposes of
VII-27
this section, residential subdivision shall include all phases of approved staged developments.
ii. Location. Subdivision identification signs shall be located near entrances to the subdivision, except that one sign may be located along an abutting arterial or major collector roadway.
iii. Size. The maximum size for a subdivision identification sign is 32 square feet at a subdivision’s main entrance and twenty four (24) square feet for all other locations.
iv. Setback. Subdivision identification signs and support structure shall maintain a setback of at least ten feet from any street right-of-way. Signs as well as support structures within a center island shall maintain a setback of at least five feet from the curb and are subject to regulations set forth by 154.212 (F) (2) (b) of this Chapter.
v. Changeable copy signs, including electronic variable message signs, are not a permitted sign type for subdivision identification signage.
(Ord. 08-124, passed 08-18-15)
2. Institutional Uses in Residential Districts. Non-residential uses located in residential districts, such as churches and schools, located in residential districts may erect signs as follows;
a. Wall and Ground Signs
i. Area and Number. One (1) wall sign and one (1) ground sign per street frontage may be displayed, identifying the entity, with a maximum of two (2) wall signs and two (2) ground signs per lot. Additional wall or ground signs for wayfinding purposes may be permitted when the size of the lot, number of vehicular or pedestrian entrances, and layout of the buildings require additional signs in order to promote traffic and pedestrian safety. Signs under this paragraph, whether displayed on a wall or on the ground, shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area, except such signs may be increased in area by one (1) square foot for each additional foot that the sign is set back more than twelve (12) feet from a lot line. No sign under this section shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
ii. Height. No identification sign shall project higher than one story, or twelve (12) feet above curb level, whichever is lower.
b. Temporary Signs
3. Commercial, Mixed-Use and Industrial Districts
a. Ground Signs
b. Directory Signs
c. Awning and Canopy Signs
VII-28
d. Wall Signs
e. Projecting Signs
f. Hanging Signs
g. Window Signs
h. Directional and Informational Signs
i. Corporate Flags and Decorative Banners
j. Temporary Signs
4. Planned Development Districts. No permanent sign shall be displayed except a sign authorized by the City and included in the Comprehensive Sign Plan pertaining to the site. Temporary signs are permitted for commercial, institutional or industrial uses unless prohibited by the Comprehensive Sign Plan.
5. Conservancies and Parks. No sign shall be permitted except those installed by direction of the Public Works Director.
6. Agricultural Sales Businesses. Signage related to agricultural sales business may be erected as follows:
a. On-Premises Signs, Agricultural Sales Businesses. One (1) or more on-premises signs may be erected on a property in conjunction with an operating agricultural sales business subject to the following requirements and restrictions:
i. Agricultural sales businesses utilizing less than 10 acres of land specifically for the growing of agricultural crops for the businesses are allowed 1 on-premises sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) gross square feet of advertising surface.
ii. Agricultural sales businesses utilizing more than 10 acres of land but less than 40 acres of land specifically for the growing of agricultural crops for the businesses are allowed up to two (2) on-premises sign not to exceed forty-eight (48) gross square feet of total advertising surface, with no individual sign surface exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in size.
iii. Agricultural sales businesses utilizing more than 40 acres of land specifically for the growing of agricultural crops for the business are allowed up to three (3) on-premises signs not to exceed sixty-four (64) gross square feet of total advertising surface, with no individual sign surface exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in size.
iv. Any illuminated sign shall be consistent with §154.212.F.7 and illuminated only during those hours when business is open to the public for conducting business.
b. Temporary Off-Premises Signs, Agricultural Sales Businesses. Independent of the total allowable sign area for an individual property anywhere within the City, a temporary off-premises sign may be erected on a property in
VII-29
conjunction with an operating agricultural sales business subject to the following requirements and restrictions:
i. Maximum Number. Every agricultural sales business shall have no more than three (3) off-premises signs at any given time to direct the public to the location of the business.
ii. Time Frame of Use. Temporary off-premises signs may be erected for 45-day time periods no more than 4 times in any given calendar year. The required temporary sign permit shall stipulate the range of dates for each of the 4 allowable time periods in any given calendar year.
iii. Size and Height. An off-site agricultural sales advertising sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not be taller than 10 feet in height.
iv. Setbacks. Off-premises signs shall be a minimum of 25 feet from all side property lines, and a minimum of 50 feet from other off-premises advertising signs.
v. Permission Required. Applicants for off-premises signs shall acquire permission from the property owner upon whose land the sign is to be erected.
H. Regulations Pertaining to Specific Sign Type. Except as expressly provided elsewhere, signs shall meet the following regulations according to sign type:
1. Wall Signs
a. Number. No building occupant shall display more than one (1) wall sign per street frontage except as provided below:
i. One additional wall sign may be displayed on a building with no front setback provided that such sign is a flat sign that is either painted upon the building or does not extend outward more than six (6) inches.
ii. Up to three (3) ancillary wall signs may be displayed on buildings measuring at least 100 feet in length along the front lot line. Any ancillary sign displayed under this paragraph shall not exceed 50% of the net area or 50% of the height of the largest permitted wall sigh displayed on that façade, nor shall the aggregate area of the ancillary signs exceed 50% of the net area of such wall sign.
b. Surface Area. The total permitted sign surface area of all wall signs on a façade shall not exceed one (1) square foot of signage for each lineal foot of building frontage that is coterminous with the occupancy to which the sign refers, unless a different amount allocated to the building occupant is identified in an approved Comprehensive Sign Plan pursuant to §154.212.I. In addition, no individual wall sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area.
c. Location. Wall signs shall be mounted parallel to building walls and only on a portion of an exterior wall that is coterminous with the occupancy to which the sign refers, unless a different location is identified in an approved
VII-30
Comprehensive Sign Plan pursuant to §154.212.I. No wall sign shall extend above or beyond the wall to which it is attached.
d. Installation Requirements. No wall sign shall cover or interrupt significant architectural elements such as columns, column caps, friezes, door or window heads, embellishments, adornments, fenestration, or ornamental detailing on any building. All mounting brackets and other hardware used to affix a sign to a wall as well as all electrical service hardware and equipment shall be concealed by architectural elements of the building or the sign itself.
2. Ground Signs
a. Number. There shall be no more than one (1) ground sign for each street on which the lot has frontage, except one additional ground sign per lot frontage may be allowed for any lot frontage over one thousand (1,000) linear feet. On lots occupied by two (2) or more occupants, or where a second ground sign is permitted, three (3) or more occupants, a directory sign shall be used in lieu of multiple ground signs. No single business or building occupant shall be allowed signage on both an individual ground sign and a ground directory sign on the same street frontage. On premises having no principal building, there shall be no more than one (1) ground sign for the premises.
b. Surface Area. No ground sign shall exceed the size listed in Table 5-3.
c. Type of Sign. Any permanent ground sign shall be erected as a monument sign. Pole signs are prohibited unless the pole portion of the sign is enclosed in a shroud that causes the sign to appear to have a monolithic base or support structure of any material measuring no less than one-third (1/3) of the greatest width of the sign at any point or unless the height is no greater than three (3) feet. This provision does not apply to signs erected on properties located south of 5th Street and north of I-94. The base of the monument sign shall not exceed the width of the widest portion of the sign face by more than twenty-five percent (25%).
d. Location. Ground signs shall be placed with consideration for visibility, access, maintenance, and safety, consistent with the provisions of Section 154.212.F.2. Ground signs shall be located beyond required setbacks a distance equal to or greater than the height of the sign. If this is not possible, ground signs shall be located as far from required setback lines as possible. In no case shall a ground sign, as defined in this Ordinance, extend beyond a lot line of a property. A ground sign larger than 6 sq. ft. shall be located no closer than 100 feet of another ground sign or the furthest distance possible from another ground sign, whichever distance is shorter.
e. Height
i. The height of a ground sign shall be measured from the approved grade at the base of the sign or the elevation of the street upon which the sign faces, whichever is lower, to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
VII-31
ii. A ground sign shall be mounted on a base not to exceed four (4) feet in height.
iii. Allowable height of a ground sign shall be as set forth in Table 5-3.
iv. No ground sign shall be taller than the principal building on the premises to which it pertains.
f. Landscaping. Perennial plantings, grass or other landscaping features shall be incorporated around the base of all ground signs.
g. Exempt or Special Purpose Ground Signs. The location of and maximum height and surface area of any other exempt or special-purpose ground sign expressly authorized by another section of this ordinance, shall be as set forth in such other section.
Table 5-3 Ground Signs
Table 5-3 describes the zoning districts in which ground signs may be displayed, and the maximum height and area of the signs, as determined by street classification (as designated in the Lake Elmo Comprehensive Plan) of the closest street to which each free standing sign is located. For ground signs on zoning lots with more than one street frontage, use the higher street classification to determine the maximum height and area allowed. Businesses that are located on a road designed to provide safe access to minor arterials and principal arterials shall be permitted to erect a freestanding sign up to the determined maximum height and size allowable for a freestanding sign on said minor arterial or principal arterial road to which it is adjacent.
Table 5-3 Ground Signs
Zoning District
Aa, LDR, OP, RE, RS, RRa, RTa
MDR, HDR
BP, C, CC, GB, LC, VMX
Max Height/ Area (Sq. Ft.)
Max Height/ Area (Sq. Ft.)
Max Height/ Area (Sq. Ft.)
Local Street
-
6’/32
10’/40
Collector Street
-
6’/32
10’/50
Minor Arterial
-
6’/32
10’/64
Principal Arterialb
-
6’/32b
12’/80b
Notes to Table 5-3:
a. Ground signs are only permitted in the A, RR, and RT districts in conjunction with agricultural sales business.
b. In lieu of a ground sign meeting underlying zoning requirements, properties located south of 5th Street and north of I-94 may have one ground sign up to 30 feet in height and up to 250 square feet in size when within 50 feet of the
VII-32
property line nearest I-94. The base of the sign shall be constructed of materials similar to those used on the building for which the sign is installed.
3. Window Signs
a. Location. All window signs must be located inside an exterior window unless the sign is weatherproof and does not pose a danger from falling or being blown by the wind. Lettering or graphic elements that are directly mounted on a window shall not encroach upon the frame, mullions, or other supporting features of the glass.
b. Permanent Signs. When a sign is painted on or otherwise attached or applied to the window area in a permanent manner, then such a sign shall be included in the total allowable wall sign area for the building and shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total ground-floor window area of the building, excluding the door windows. All permanent window signs which have their lettering or graphic elements directly on the glazing shall be painted, metal leafed, vinyl transferred, or in some other manner permanently applied to the interior side of the glass of an exterior building window or door. No application using a temporary adhesive shall be permitted unless the Planning Director determines the application to be reasonably safe.
c. Temporary Signs. Signs advertising sales and specials shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total ground-floor window area of any building, excluding the door windows. Such signs must be displayed in conformance with the temporary sign regulations listed in §154.212.J.
d. Under no circumstances shall any combination of permanent or temporary window signage cover more than fifty percent (50%) of the total ground window area of any building.
4. Changeable Copy Signs
a. Changeable copy signs are not an additional permitted sign type, but any permitted sign type maybe be a changeable copy sign, provided that the total surface area of the entire sign does not exceed the maximum allowed for the type and location of sign upon which the changeable copy is displayed.
b. Electronic Variable Message Signs. Any sign type may be an electronic variable message sign subject to the following regulations:
i. Surface Area. The areas of electronic variable message signs capable of displaying copy shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and shall be included within the maximum aggregate sign surface area allowed for the type and location of sign upon which the changeable copy is displayed.
ii. Length of Cycle. The electronic changeable copy or images shall not alternate, change, fade in, fade out, or otherwise change more frequently than once every ten (10) seconds. Electronic variable message sign signs may not display scrolling, racing, pixelating or moving characters or images, or similar actions that convey motion.
VII-33
iii. Color. All copy, characters or other changeable images shall be of one (1) color only, with light copy on a dark background.
iv. Brightness Adjustment. An electronic variable message sign shall be equipped with photosensitive equipment which automatically adjusts the brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor illumination such that the light level does not exceed three (3) foot candles at the front lot line and one (1) foot candle at all other lot lines, measured three (3) feet above the surface of the ground.
v. Maintenance. Any electronic variable message sign shall be maintained so as to be able to display messages in a complete and legible manner.
5. Canopy and Awning Signs. The use of canopy and awning signs reduces the maximum area of any allowed wall sign by half. Canopy and awning signs are subject to the following provisions:
a. Surface Area. The sign surface area of a canopy or awning sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the area of the vertical section of the canopies and awnings. The area of the vertical section of the canopies and awnings is calculated as the difference between the highest and lowest point on the canopy or awning multiplied by the length of the canopy or awning measured parallel to the façade upon which it is attached.
b. Location
i. Canopies and awnings shall be constructed and erected so that the lowest portion of the projecting frame thereof shall be not less than nine (9) feet, and the lowest portion of the descending shirt shall be not less than eight (8) feet above the level of the sidewalk or public thoroughfare.
ii. No portion of the canopy or awning sign shall extend above or beyond the canopy or awning upon which it is attached. However, a sign may be hung beneath a canopy parallel to the building frontage so long as it and its structural components are no less than eight (8) feet above the ground immediately beneath the sign.
iii. Awnings shall not project more than seventy-two (72) inches out from the building upon which they are attached, nor extend out from the building beyond the extension of the awnings on adjoining buildings.
c. Installation Requirements. To preserve the architectural integrity of a building, no canopy or awning, and no canopy or awning sign, shall cover or interrupt significant architectural elements such as columns, column caps, friezes, door or window heads, embellishments, adornments, fenestrations or ornamental detailing.
d. Illumination. Awnings and canopies may be illuminated where the following conditions are maintained:
VII-34
i. Both interior type strip lighting and exterior type goose neck lighting is permitted, not exceeding a maximum light level of 18 foot candles measured three (3) feet from the perpendicular to the light source.
ii. The bottom of any illuminated awning or canopy shall be enclosed.
iii. The provisions of §154.212.F.7 are satisfied.
e. Materials. Canopy and awning signs shall be made of either the material with which the canopy or awning is covered or other water proof materials affixed flush to the face of the canopy or awning, or be painted directly on the awning or canopy material with weather-resistant paint.
f. Snow Load. It is found that snow and ice that accumulates on awnings can pose a danger to pedestrians. To ensure the safety of pedestrians, snow and ice shall be removed from awnings within a reasonable time period after an event of snow and ice accumulation.
6. Hanging Signs. One sign up to six (6) square feet in area may be suspended above a walkway near a primary building entrance so long as it and its structural components are no less than eight (8) feet above the ground immediately beneath the sign.
7. Projecting Signs. A projecting sign may be displayed in lieu of a wall sign and subject to the following restrictions:
a. Maximum Projection. The maximum distance a projecting sign may project is not more than twenty-four inches (24”) into the right-of-way. Subject to zoning setback limitations, a projecting sign may project no more than six feet (6’) from the building face.
b. Location. A building may have one (1) projecting sign facing a street or on a corner of the building.
c. Surface Area. The permitted area of a projecting sign shall not exceed the square footage for the amount that would otherwise be allowed for a wall sign on the building.
d. Height. A projecting sign must vertically clear any pedestrian area by at least eight (8) feet and vehicular ways by at least fourteen (14) feet. A projecting sign may extend to the juncture of the roof with the building wall or to the top of any parapet, but no projecting sign may extend above a second story.
8. Directional Signs. On-premise directional signs may be placed on private property near driveway entrances, at building entrances, and in parking lots and loading areas where reasonably necessary. Each such sign shall be located on premise and shall adhere to the regulations pertaining to vision triangles and other setbacks as defined in §154.212.F.2. Such signage shall be considered exempt from the total signage calculation for the premises as long as all the following standards are met:
a. Such signage does not serve an additional advertising purpose.
VII-35
b. There are no more than three (3) directional signs per lot, not including a maximum of one (1) directional sign allowed per driveway entrance/exit.
c. Surface area per sign does not exceed four (4) square feet.
d. Logos do not exceed two (2) square feet in area per sign.
e. Sign height does not exceed five (5) feet above ground elevation at base of sign.
9. Flags and Decorative Banners. The following regulations apply to all flags and decorative banners:
a. A minimum clearance of eight feet (8’) over pedestrian ways and fourteen (14’) feet over vehicular areas.
b. Maximum number of flagpoles for any lot is three (3).
c. Maximum height of any flagpole is fifty (50) feet.
d. Maximum number of flags per lot is four (4).
e. Maximum area of any flag shall be forty (40) square feet.
f. Flags representing a private entity, including corporate or business flags, shall be included within the maximum sign area total for the site, as applied to the allowance for a ground sign, and shall require a sign permit.
I. Comprehensive Sign Plans
1. Purpose. Multi-tenant developments such as shopping malls, due to the varying occupant’s need for signage and the potential for unique architecture and placement of different occupancies as they relate to street frontages, can create challenges to the applicability of sign regulations and the fair distribution of permitted square footage for occupants. This section is intended to define how signage permitted under this code will be distributed among the different occupancies available in the development. The Comprehensive Sign Plan shall create visual harmony between the signs, building(s), and building site through unique and exceptional use of materials, design, color, and lighting, and other design elements; and shall result in signs of appropriate scale and character to the uses and building(s) on the lot as well as adjacent buildings, structures and uses.
2. Applicability. A Comprehensive Sign Plan shall be required of an applicant for all planned developments and commercial or industrial multi-tenant developments where different occupancies will compete for permitted square footage on a single lot.
3. Submission Requirements. An application for Comprehensive Sign Plan approval shall be submitted to the Planning Director and shall include:
a. A site plan, dimensioned, showing the location of the building(s), structure(s), parking area(s), driveway(s), and landscaped areas on the lot upon which the proposed sign is to be attached or erected.
b. A table or tables containing:
VII-36
i. Computation of the maximum total sign area.
ii. Maximum area for individual signs.
iii. Height and number of ground signs.
iv. Statement of the maximum total sign area and maximum number of signs permitted on the site by this Ordinance.
c. An accurate indication on the site plan of the location and orientation of each sign for which a permit is currently being requested, the anticipated location of future signs requiring a permit, and the location of all reasonably anticipated temporary signs.
d. A description and illustration of the following may be required:
i. Colors and materials to be used in sign construction.
ii. Style of lettering for all signs.
iii. Appearance/location of logos or icons.
iv. Location of each sign on the building(s), with building elevations if necessary.
v. All sign proportions.
vi. Types of illumination.
4. Amendment. A Comprehensive Sign Plan may be amended by filing a new Comprehensive Sign Plan, in conformance with the requirements of the Sign Ordinance in effect at the time, and obtaining approval of the Planning Director.
5. Binding Effect.
a. After approval of a Comprehensive Sign Plan, no permanent sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained by the property owner or any buyer, tenant, subtenant, assignee, employee, agent or other party in use of the subject property except in conformance with such plan without obtaining a sign permit and in conformance with the Comprehensive Sign Plan.
b. If the City Council has approved a Comprehensive Sign Plan with flexible criteria, the Planning Director is authorized to approve, through the standard sign permit approval process, sign applications in conformance with the comprehensive sign plan, but only to the extent that the application is in conformance with the Comprehensive Sign Plan.
c. The terms and conditions of an approved Comprehensive Sign Plan shall have the same force and effect and be enforced in the same manner as any other provision of this Section.
J. Temporary Signs
1. General Requirements. Temporary signs shall conform to the following standards:
a. Permit Required. No temporary sign may be displayed without a valid temporary sign permit or portable sign permit.
VII-37
b. Sign Type. Temporary signs may include any sign type permitted by this Section.
c. Number. No more than two (2) temporary signs may be displayed on a lot at any time.
d. Surface Area. The maximum area of all temporary signs displayed shall be a combined total of eight (8) square-feet if displayed for ten (10) days or longer.
e. Location. Temporary signs shall be located only upon the premises to which the special, unique, or limited activity, service product, sale, or event is to occur. No temporary sign may be placed off-premise except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Section.
f. Duration. No temporary sign permit shall be issued to erect or maintain any temporary signage for a period exceeding twenty-one (21) days, or to be displayed three (3) days after termination of the activity, service, project, sale, or event to which the sign pertains, whichever comes first. A permit for temporary sign or signs shall be granted no more than four (4) times in any calendar year and only once every three (3) months.
g. Installation Requirements. All temporary signs shall be constructed, anchored and supported in a manner which reasonably prevents the possibility of such signs becoming hazards to the public health and safety as determined by the Planning Director.
2. Business Opening Signs.
a. Permit Required. A permit shall be issued before a business opening sign may be erected. The permit may not be renewed.
b. Type of Sign and Location. A business opening sign may be a wall sign, projecting sign, or ground sign. A business opening sign may be displayed in addition to, in lieu of, or affixed to a permanent sign. A banner may be used as a business opening sign.
c. Size. The size of a business opening sign shall be determined by the type of sign chosen, and shall be limited to the maximum size allowed for a permanent sign of that type at the location.
d. Illumination. A business opening sign may be illuminated subject to §154.212.F.7.
e. Duration. A business opening sign may be displayed for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date the business opened, changed names, or changed ownership.
3. Portable Signs. In addition to the general requirements pertaining to temporary signs, the following standards pertain to portable signs:
a. Permit Required. A sign permit shall be issued on an annual basis before a stationary portable sign may be erected. Such permit shall only be valid during the calendar year during which it is issued.
VII-38
b. Construction. A sign shall be manufactured to a professional standard of construction, finish and graphics. A portable sign shall be free-standing, self-supported and constructed of substantial materials such as wood, metal or plastic such that the sign will reasonably withstand the elements.
c. Size and Design Regulations:
i. A portable sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in surface area per side, with a maximum of two (2) sign able sides or faces.
ii. The sign shall not exceed three (3) feet measured at the widest point of the sign face.
iii. Any portion of the sign’s face used for a chalk or dry-erase board shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign face surface area.
d. Number. One portable sign may be displayed per business or occupant in any commercial or industrial area or Planned Unit Development.
e. Location. A portable sign is restricted to the lot of the business establishment to which a permit has been issued, except such a sign may be located in the public right-of-way in front of the premises only where no front setback is required.
f. Placement. A portable sign shall:
i. Be placed only along sidewalks where a minimum five (5) foot wide clear sidewalk is maintained. In no event shall a portable sign be placed on any bicycle path. The placement, of a portable sign shall not obstruct access to any crosswalk, mailbox, curb cut, fire hydrant, fire escape, fire door, building entrance, public parking space or any other public property, nor shall a sign obstruct the ability of persons to exit/enter vehicles parked along the curb;
ii. Not be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to public property including street trees, utility poles or sign posts.
iii. Not obstruct the clear view of any traffic signal, regulatory sign or street sign;
iv. Not be located closer than 10 feet to any other portable sign;
v. Not be located directly adjacent to a bus stop or transit vehicle, shall not obstruct sight lines of road users, nor be placed less than twenty-five (25) feet from a street intersection or fifteen (15) feet from a crosswalk;
vi. Not be placed in such a way as to interfere with snowplowing of the streets;
vii. Be maintained free of snow, be placed on solid ground at all times and shall not be placed on top of snow banks.
g. Illumination. A portable sign shall not be illuminated
VII-39
h. Time Limitations and Removal. A portable sign may be displayed only during business hours. Such sign must be removed and safely stored out of view during times when the business is not open to the public. Trailers or other vehicles that are not used principally as a sign may be parked on the lot when the business is not open to the public.
i. Enforcement. Portable signs located within the public right-of-way are a privilege and not a right. The City in permitting placement of such signs in the public right-of-way reserves the right to require their removal at any time because of anticipated or unanticipated problems or conflicts. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior notice of any time period during which, or location at which, the placement of portable signs is prohibited. Furthermore, the sign permit may be revoked by the Planning Director following notice to the permittee. The permit may be revoked if one or more conditions outlined in this section have been violated, or if the sign is determined to constitute a public nuisance not specifically outlined in this section. Following the revocation of the sign permit, no application for the same site shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of revocation. The permittee has a right to appeal the decision of the Planning Director within thirty (30) days of issuance of a revocation notice pursuant to §154.212.N.2.
j. Indemnification. Where a temporary, portable sign is permitted in the public right-of-way, the owner, lessee or lessor of the business to which a permit has been issued and the property owner shall agree in writing to fully indemnify and hold the City harmless for any personal injury or property damage resulting from the existence or operation of said sign, and shall furnish evidence of general liability insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with the City as additional named insured or provide other security to the satisfaction of the City Administrator.
k. Permit Renewal. The permit for a portable sign must be renewed annually prior to January 1 of each year.
K. Signs Exempt from Permit. Consistent with the purpose and scope of this ordinance, the City recognizes that certain temporary, necessary, or limited-purpose signs should be lawfully displayed without the need to obtain a permit and should not count as part of the specific sign area allowed to be displayed on a particular property. All signs exempt from permit requirements must, nonetheless, adhere to all other applicable sections of this ordinance and all other applicable State and Federal regulations. The City finds that the following signs may be displayed without a permit because they serve an immediate or temporary traffic safety or way finding function:
1. Address and Nameplates. Address and name plates not exceeding three (3) square feet in area.
2. Athletic Field Signage. Signs, banners, and scoreboards designed solely for view from spectator areas and displayed on interior walls, fences, or other structures located inside an enclosed athletic field at a school, park, or other public or
VII-40
private athletic complex. Approval of the Park Commission shall be required to display a sign, banner, or scoreboard under this paragraph at a City Park.
3. Awning Signage. Signs displayed on awnings located on commercial or industrial buildings provided that the signs are displayed on the lowest twelve inches (12”) of the principal face or side panels of awnings and provided that they do not exceed six inches (6”) in height.
4. City Signs on City Property. City signs on City property not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
5. Construction Signs. Such signs may only be placed on the property where work is in progress, shall not be erected prior to the beginning of work for which a valid building permit has been issued, and shall be removed within ten (10) days of completion of work or the expiration of the building permit, whichever is sooner. Construction signs on parcels in residential or park uses shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per street frontage. Construction sign area for commercial, industrial, multi-family, or planned development uses on parcels less than 100,000 square feet shall not exceed sixty four (64) square feet per street frontage; and on parcels greater than 100,000 square feet shall not exceed ninety six (96) square feet per street frontage. Square footage must be divided.
6. Flags. Flags that comply with the provisions of §154.212.H.9.
7. Garage Sale and Estate Sale Signs. Signs advertising a garage sale shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area, shall not be displayed for a period of time more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours and may be displayed no more than twice in any one calendar year. Up to three (3) residential garage sale signs may be displayed per event, two (2) of which may be displayed off-premises, but not in the public right-of-way. Any such sign placed on private property must have the consent of the property owner on whose property such sign is displayed.
8. Government Signs, Including Traffic or Official Public Hearing Notice Signs. Such signs are placed, authorized, or required by the City or other authorized governmental agency. The requirements for maximum area, height, setback, or other size, materials or physical specifications shall be as required by law or the authorizing agency.
9. Holiday and Temporary Decorations. Holiday or temporary decorations when located on private property, or with the approval of the City if on public property. In addition, any sign in the nature of a decoration, identification or direction, incidentally and customarily associated with any national or religious holiday or any civic festival, fair or similar gathering, held during a period of ten (10) days or less in any year, provided such sign shall not differ substantially from the requirements set forth in this Section. Such decorations may not contain any commercial message or logo or depict any commercial symbol or character.
10. Home Occupation Signs. Signs identifying only the name and occupation of the resident. Home occupation signs shall be non-illuminated, flush-mounted to a wall of the residence, and shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
VII-41
11. Memorial Signs. Any non-commercial sign in the nature of a cornerstone, commemorative, or historical tablet or landmark designation plaque.
12. Menu Signs. Menu signs up to fifty-five (55) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height, provided they are located within fifteen (15) feet of the commercial building with which they are associated or advertise and in a manner such that the copy is not readily viewable from the public right-of-way or a residential occupancy on an adjacent lot.
13. Non-Commercial Messages. One sign per parcel per street frontage carrying any lawful non-commercial message not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. Any other permitted commercial sign may be substituted for a noncommercial message but will count toward the total signage type and area for the parcel upon which it is located. Hand-held signs carrying noncommercial messages are not subject to any size limitation so long as they are held by and under the physical control of a person during all times they are on display.
14. Parking Lot Regulation Signs. Parking signs not exceeding nine (9) square feet and having a minimum setback of ten (10) feet.
15. Parking Lot Directional Signs. Signs must comply with the provisions of §154.212.H.8.
16. Parking Lot Traffic Signs, as required by law.
17. Political and Election Campaign Signs. Signs containing a political message and displayed during an election campaign period are allowed in addition to the noncommercial message sign under subsection (13) during the election campaign period, however, after ten (10) days has passed from the election date such sign may continue to be displayed, but will count as the allowed noncommercial message sign under subsection (13). Political and election campaign signs may also substitute for any commercial message sign in the same manner. Unless substituted for another permitted sign, such signs shall not have any electrical component. Such signs shall not have a mechanical or audio auxiliary component, and shall not be attached to or placed on utility poles, trees, traffic devices, or within the public rights-of-way.
18. Real Estate Signs Advertising Residential Properties. Signs located on premise may not be placed above the top of the lowest level of the building. All signs authorized under this subsection shall be removed within ten (10) days of the sale or rental of the residential units being advertised.
a. For lots containing less than four (4) dwelling units within one residential structure, one non-illuminated real estate sign up to six (6) square feet per unit may be displayed to advertise the sale or rental of the premises or any part thereof.
b. For lots where at least four (4) but less than sixteen (16) dwelling units are contained within one residential structure, one non-illuminated real estate sign up to twelve (12) square feet may be displayed to advertise the sale or rental of the premises or any part thereof.
VII-42
c. For lots where sixteen (16) or more dwelling units are contained within one residential structure, one non-illuminated real estate sign up to thirty-two (32) square feet may be displayed to advertise the sale or rental of the premises or any part thereof.
d. Up to two (2) signs directing traffic to “open houses,” each sign no more than six (6) square feet in area, may be installed off property after obtaining the consent of the property owner on whose property such sign is to be displayed. These signs may not be located in the public right-of-way. These off property directional signs may be displayed only during the hours that the advertised activity is to take place, and they must be a self-supporting type sign.
19. Real Estate Signs Advertising Single Occupant Commercial Property. For lots less than five (5) acres, one non-illuminated real estate sign up to twelve (12) square feet in area may be displayed. For larger lots, one non-illuminated real estate sign up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area may be displayed. All signs authorized under this subsection shall be removed within ten (10) days of the sale or rental of the commercial unit being advertised.
20. Real Estate Signs Advertising Non-Residential Grouped Development or Multi-Tenant Buildings. For each group development or multi-tenant building containing nonresidential land uses, a maximum of two (2) signs, one per each nonresidential street frontage, may be displayed up to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
21. Real Estate Subdivision Signs. For each real estate subdivision that has been approved in accordance with the City of Lake Elmo subdivision regulations, a maximum of two (2) temporary development project identification signs may be located on some portion of the subject subdivision. Each such sign shall be not more than thirty-two (32) square feet in area. One additional similar sign shall be permitted for each one hundred (100) lots in the subdivision in excess of one hundred (100) lots. These signs may be displayed until a time at which building permits have been issued for eighty percent (80%) of the lots in the subdivision. Signs advertising sale or lease after such time shall conform to the requirements of subsection (18) of this section.
22. Temporary Notices. Leaflet-type notices flat-mounted to kiosks or public information boards.
23. Utility Company Signs. Signs that serve as an aid to public safety or that show the location of facilities such as public telephones and underground cables only to the extent necessary to accomplish those goals.
24. Window Signs, Temporary. Signs and displays that are of a temporary nature such as for advertising sales and specials and that do not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the total ground-floor window area of any building, excluding the door windows. Merchandise and pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window display are not considered signs. Any sign placed on the outside of a window requires a sign permit unless the sign is weatherproof and does not pose a danger from falling or being blown by the wind.
VII-43
25. Window or Wall Signs Not Readable Off-Premises. Window or wall signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area with lettering not exceeding three (3) inches high designed to provide information to persons on the premises such as hours of operation, or sample restaurant menu. Where no front yard setback exists, such signs as would generally be unreadable off premises where minimum setback regulations apply shall qualify for this exemption notwithstanding that such signs are readable from the public right-of-way. Such signs shall not be counted toward total permitted signage.
L. Prohibited Signs. The following signs are expressly prohibited in the City of Lake Elmo:
1. Abandoned Signs
2. Off-Premise Signs, except as expressly allowed under this section.
3. Inflatable Signs
a. Rationale. Inflatable signs shall be prohibited because they are generally more distracting and hazardous to pedestrian traffic safety, tend to have an anchoring device that is less reliable under wind pressure, and out of scale and less compatible with surrounding structures and signs.
b. The following inflatable devices shall not be considered a sign:
i. Registered hot air balloons in use and momentarily moored but not being used primarily as a sign.
ii. Novelty type balloons less than two (2) feet in diameter and less than three (3) feet in any dimension tethered or moored no more than ten (10) feet above the ground.
iii. Inflatable holiday or other decorations displayed temporarily on private property, that do not contain any commercial message or logo or depict any commercial symbol or character, and that does not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
4. Signs attached to any public utility pole or structure, street tree, fence, fire hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench, or other location on public property except as otherwise expressly permitted under this section.
5. Beacons, unless authorized for use by the City of Lake Elmo or any other governmental entity in the exercise of official government business and authority.
M. Legal Non-Conforming Signs. Any legal non-conforming sign may continue to be displayed or replaced consistent with §154.150 through §154.151, Non-Conforming Uses and Structures.
N. Variances and Appeals
1. Variances. It is recognized that circumstances may exist from time to time where strict application of the size, location and type of sign standards hereinafter specified for the various zoning districts may be unreasonable or where literal enforcement of the regulations may work an unnecessary hardship on the applicant. Variations from the standards are, therefore, permitted by issuance of a variance by the City Council upon recommendation of the Planning Commission
VII-44
that such extenuating circumstances exist. Variances shall be considered according to the provisions of §154.109.
2. Appeals. An applicant may appeal any decision of the Planning Director to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals according to the provisions of §33.10.
O. Violations.
1. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this ordinance for any person to maintain any prohibited sign, to perform or order the performance of any act prohibited by this ordinance, or to fail to perform any act which is required by the provisions of this Section. In the case of any such violation, each twenty-four (24) hour period in which such violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
2. Any and all signs, erected, altered, or maintained in violation of this Section, or any of the clauses and provisions of the same, or in violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the City and/or the State of Minnesota, are, and each of them is declared to be a public nuisance and subject to enforcement. Any such signs are erected, altered or maintained contrary to law shall be abated as a common nuisance by the Planning Director.
P. Penalty. Any person who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a penalty as prescribed by §10.99 of this Code.
Q. Enforcement
1. If the Planning Director or Building Official finds that any sign has been erected, altered, or is being maintained in violation of this section, or is in an unsafe condition as to be a menace to the safety, health, or welfare of the public, he or she shall give written notice to the owner thereof of the person entitled to possession of the sign and the owner of the real estate upon which the sign is located. No notice shall be required for permitted temporary signs displayed in violation of time limitations prior to taking enforcement action.
2. Said letter shall notify the owner, or person entitled to possession of the sign, of the specific violation or violations and direct that alterations, repairs or removal, whichever may be applicable, be made to bring said violations in conformance with the terms and conditions of this Section.
3. In the event the person so notified fails or neglects to comply with or conform to the requirements of such notice, the Planning Director or Building Official may file an appropriate citation or complaint in an appropriate court of law or take whatever other legal action may be necessary to cause such sign to be altered or removed. If a sign is considered abandoned, the City, after notice, may remove such sign at the cost of the owner of the property upon which the sign sits. An invoice for such costs shall be sent to the property owner and, if not paid, shall be placed on the tax roll as a special charge pursuant to M.S. §429.061.
R. Severability and Conflict
1. Severability. The provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
VII-45
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
2. Conflict. If any part of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance or with any other part of this ordinance, the most restrictive or highest standard shall prevail. If any part of this ordinance is explicitly prohibited by federal or state statute, that part shall not be enforced.
(Ord 08-082, passed 6-18-2013)
§154.213 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, GENERALLY.
A. Purpose. Within the city of Lake Elmo, the following provisions shall apply to accessory building and structures in all zoning districts.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, and all sections pertaining to accessory buildings or structures, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Agricultural Building. An accessory building means a structure that is on agricultural land as determined by the governing assessor of the City under section 273.13, subdivision 23 and meets all other requirements of State Statute 362B.103. A Minnesota Pollution Control Agency permit may be required.
Detached Domesticated Farm Animal Building. A 1-story accessory building used or intended for the shelter of domestic farm animals and/or related feed or other farm animal supportive materials. The building may require a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency feedlot permit in addition to site and building plan approval.
Detached Residential Accessory Building. A 1-story accessory building primarily used or intended for the storage of automobiles and other miscellaneous equipment. No door or other access opening shall exceed 14 feet in height.
Fish House. A water-oriented structure meant to provide periodic shelter during the winter months while atop a frozen lake for use in fishing. A structure will be considered a fish house only if it is constructed with sleds, wheels or similar means to allow transport on to a frozen lake; is not used on land for human habitation; and is not used for boat storage.
Storage or Tool Shed. A 1-story accessory building of less than 200 square feet gross area with a maximum roof height of 12 feet.
C. Permit Required. All accessory building and structures require either a certificate of zoning compliance or a building permit as determined by the Minnesota State Building Code.
D. Principal Structure Necessary. No accessory buildings of structures shall be constructed nor accessory use located on a lot until a building permit has been issued for the principal structure to which it is accessory. Exemption: Fish houses as defined in this code and located in the RS Rural Single Family District are exempt from this requirement provided the following are met: must be located on a lot half acre in size or more with direct access
VII-46
to a water body; is 120 square feet or less; and complies with Shoreland regulations and RS Rural Single Family setback requirements. One fish house per lot may exist without a principal structure. The structure must maintain a current fish house license with the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources regardless if it is left on a water body overnight. If a current Minnesota Department of Natural Resources fish house license is not obtained for the structure, the structure must be removed from the property within 60 days.
E. Proximity to Principal Structure. Accessory buildings shall maintain a six (6) foot setback from the principal structure. An accessory building or structure will be considered as an integral part of the principal building if it is located six (6) feet or less from the principal structure.
F. Exempt Structures. The following residential improvements shall be exempt from the maximum allowed structure size and number requirements in residential districts:
1. Unenclosed playhouses
2. Gazebos up to a total of 120 square feet in size and a maximum of twelve (12) feet in overall height
3. Detached decks over thirty (30) inches in height up to a total of 120 square feet in size
4. Outdoor swimming pools
5. Patios
6. Tennis and sport courts
7. Structures, sheds or coops up to a total of two hundred (200) square feet in size used to house permitted animals, such as chickens, horses, or other livestock. These structures must not exceed twelve (12) feet in height and must meet all required setbacks per MPCA guidelines and the City’s animal ordinances.
8. Water oriented accessory structures as permitted in accordance with the City’s Shoreland Ordinance.
9. Storage or Tool Sheds as defined in this section.
10. Ground-mount solar energy systems
(Am. Ord. 08-138, passed 6-21-2016; Am. Ord. 08-210, passed 5-15-2018)
§154.214 POLE CONSTRUCTION BUILDINGS.
A. Pole Construction Buildings, A and RR Districts
1. Pole construction buildings are permitted in the A and RR zoning districts subject to the setbacks and other performance standards required under the Zoning Code.
2. Pole construction buildings are prohibited on properties zoned A and RR where a conditional use permit has been issued for an open space preservation (OP) development.
VII-47
B. Pole Construction Buildings, RS District. Pole construction buildings are permitted in the RS zoning district only on parcels that are abutted by land zoned Rural Residential (RR) or Agricultural (A) Zoned along 75% or more of the perimeter of the subject parcel.
(Ord. 08-104, passed 3-18-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
VIII-1
ARTICLE VIII. ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 154.250 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this section is to provide regulations of general applicability for property throughout the City that are intended to protect or enhance natural resources and processes, and minimize conflicts among land uses.
(Ord. 08-077, passed 5-07-2013)
§ 154.257 TREE PRESERVATION.
A. Purpose. Within the City of Lake Elmo, trees and woodlands are considered a valuable asset to the community. The City places a priority on protecting this asset and finds that it is in the best interest to regulate the development and alteration of wooded areas within the community. All builders, developers and subdividers shall comply with all the provisions in the Zoning Code which address the preservation of existing significant trees. All builders, developers and subdividers are encouraged to preserve all healthy trees of significant value even if the trees do not meet the size requirements to be considered significant trees.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Common Tree. Includes Ash, Aspen, Basswood, Catalpa, Elm, Hackberry, Locust, Poplar, Silver Maple, Willow and any other tree not defined as a hardwood deciduous tree or a coniferous/evergreen tree.
Coniferous/Evergreen Tree. A wood plant, which, at maturity, having foliage on the outermost portion of the branches year-round. Tamaracks are included as a coniferous tree species.
Critical Root Zone (CRZ). An imaginary circle surrounding the tree trunk with a radius distance of one (1) foot per one (1) inch of tree diameter. E.g. a twenty-inch diameter has a critical root zone with a radius of twenty (20) feet.
Deciduous Hardwood Tree. Includes Birch, Cherry, Hickory, Ironwood, Hard Maples, Oak and Walnut.
Diameter Breast Height (DBH). The diameter of trees at breast height, measured 4 ½ feet (54 inches) above the ground.
Drip Line. The farthest distance away from the trunk of a tree that rain or dew will fall directly to the ground from the leaves or the branches of the tree.
Nuisance Tree. (1) Any living or standing tree or part thereof infected to any degree with a shade tree disease (See Shade Tree Disease Below) or shade tree pest; (2) Any logs, stumps, branches, firewood or other part of dead or dying tree(s) infected with a shade tree disease or shade tree pest unless properly treated; and (3) Any standing dead trees or
VIII-2
limbs which may threaten human health or property. Also included, are noxious or invasive trees such as buckthorn, boxelder, and cottonwood.
Ornamental Tree. A small tree, usually less than thirty (30) feet at maturity, often planted for ornamental characteristics such as flowers or attractive bark.
Shade Tree Disease. Dutch elm disease (Ophiostoma ulmi or Ophiostoma novo-ulmi), oak wilt (Ceratocystis fagacearum) or any other tree disease of epidemic nature.
Significant Tree. A healthy tree measuring a minimum of six (6) inches in diameter for hardwood deciduous trees, 19 ft. in height or eight (8) inches in diameter for coniferous/evergreen trees, or twelve (12) inches in diameter for common trees, as defined herein.
Specimen Tree. A healthy, deciduous hardwood tree measuring equal to or greater than thirty (30) inches in diameter breast height or a healthy coniferous/evergreen tree measuring equal to or greater than twenty-five (25) feet in height.
Tree Preservation Plan. A plan prepared by a certified landscape architect or forester indicating all of the significant trees in the proposed development or parcel. The Tree Preservation Plan includes a tree inventory which includes the size, species, and location of all significant trees proposed to be saved and removed on the area of development, and the measures proposed to protect the significant trees to be saved.
Woodland Evaluation Report. A report prepared by a certified landscape architect, forester, or land surveyor indicating the general location, condition, and species of significant trees on a parcel planned for future development or grading activity. The report must demonstrate that there will be no impact to existing significant trees as part of the development or grading activity. Finally, the report must include the measures proposed to protect significant trees on the site.
C. Tree Preservation Standards for Developing Properties
1. Applicability.
a. A Tree Preservation Plan, or suitable alternatives as determined by the City, shall be submitted and approved for the following activities:
i. New Development in Any Zoning District. A Tree Preservation Plan shall be required as part of any development or subdivision application.
ii. Any grading or excavation project that result in the movement of greater than 400 cubic yards of material per acre of site per §151.017.
iii. If the applicant is able to demonstrate that the proposed development or major grading activity includes no impact to the significant trees on the site, then the applicant may be exempt from the requirement to submit a Tree Preservation Plan. It is the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate that there are no impacts to significant trees through a Woodland Evaluation Report or some other form of tree survey or study.
b. A Tree Preservation Plan is not required for the following activities:
VIII-3
i. This section does not apply to the issuance of a development approval for a single-family residence on an existing platted lot of record.
ii. This section does not apply to the harvesting of trees. For purposes of this section, “harvesting” means cutting or clearing trees for purposes relating to forestry operations, as defined in §154.012. “Harvesting” does not include the clearing of land for purposes of development, even where the trees are sold for purposes of creating lumber for related purposes.
2. Tree Preservation Plan. All applicants shall submit a tree preservation plan prepared by a certified forester or landscape architect in accordance with the provisions of this section. During the review of an application for a building permit, grading permit or Preliminary Plat, the tree preservation plan will be reviewed according to the best layout to preserve significant trees and the efforts of the subdivider to mitigate damage to significant trees.
3. Tree Preservation Plan Requirements. The Tree Preservation Plan shall be a separate plan sheet(s) that includes the following information:
a. The name(s), certification(s), telephone number(s) and address(es) of the person(s) responsible for tree preservation during the course of the development project.
b. Tree Inventory. The Tree Preservation Plan must include a Tree Inventory through one of the following methods:
i. Tree Inventory Individual. An individual inventory including an identification system linked to metal field tags located four and one-half (4.5) feet from grade on all significant trees must be identified on a plan sheet in both graphic and tabular form.
ii. Tree Inventory Sampling. In cases of sites with large tracts of significant trees, the City may approve the use of a sampling inventory for all or portions of a site as an alternative to an individual inventory. The sampling inventory must include the methodology for sampling, identification ribbon around the perimeter of the sampling areas, and metal field tags located four and one-half (4.5) feet from grade on all significant trees in the sampling area. Within the sampling area, the quantity, size, species, health and location of all significant trees must be identified on a plan sheet in both graphic and tabular form. Based on sampling, total estimates and locations of healthy significant trees shall be provided.
iii. Tree Inventory Combination. With the approval of the City, sites that include both large tracts of significant trees and areas of individual significant trees may utilize a combination of the individual and sampling inventory methods.
c. Trees that were planted as part of a commercial business such as a tree farm or nursery do not need to be inventoried on an individual tree basis. A general description of the trees and an outer boundary of the planted area must be
VIII-4
provided. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to provide evidence to support the finding that the trees were planted as part of a commercial business.
d. A listing of healthy significant trees inventoried in subsection (b) above. Dead, diseased or dying trees do not need to be included in the totals.
e. A listing of the healthy significant trees removed, identified by the metal field tag or some other form of identification used in the tree inventory in subsection (b) above.
f. A listing of the healthy significant trees to remain, identified by the metal field tag or some other form of identification used in the tree inventory in subsection (b) above.
g. Outer boundary of all contiguous wooded areas, with a general description of trees not meeting the significant tree size threshold.
h. Locations of the proposed buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces.
i. Delineation of all areas to be graded and limits of land disturbance.
j. Identification of all significant trees proposed to be removed within the construction area. These significant trees should be identified in both graphic and tabular form.
k. Measures to protect significant trees and City standard tree protection detail.
l. Size, species, number and location of all replacement trees proposed to be planted on the property in accordance with the Mitigation Plan, if necessary.
m. Signature of the person(s) preparing the plan.
4. Implementation. All sites shall be staked, as depicted in the approved Tree Preservation Plan, and the required tree protection fencing shall be installed around the critical root zone before land disturbance is to commence. The City has the right to inspect the site at any time for compliance with the plan. No encroachment, land disturbance, trenching, filling, compaction, or change in soil chemistry shall occur within the fenced areas protecting the critical root zone of the trees to be saved.
5. Allowable Tree Removal. Up to thirty (30) percent of the diameter inches of significant trees on any parcel of land being developed may be removed without replacement requirements. Replacement according to the Tree Replacement Schedule is required when removal exceeds more than thirty (30) percent of the total significant tree diameter inches. The following types of trees do not need to be included as part of the tally of tree removals:
a. Dead, diseased, or dying trees;
b. Trees that are transplanted from the site to another appropriate area within the city;
c. Trees that were planted as part of a commercial business, such as a tree farm or nursery; or
VIII-5
d. Trees that were planted by the current property owner. In making such a determination, the City shall consider consistency of the age of the trees, any patterns in the location of trees, historical aerial photography and evidence of intentional planting such as invoices, formal planting plans or cost sharing agreements.
6. Mitigation Plan.
a. In any development or grading project where the allowable tree removal is exceeded, the applicant shall mitigate the tree loss by planting replacement trees in appropriate areas within the development in accordance with the Tree Replacement Schedule.
b. The form of mitigation to be provided by the applicant shall be determined by the City.
c. The planting of trees for mitigation on residential projects shall be in addition to any other landscape requirements of the City.
d. All trees, with the exception of ornamental trees, planted as landscaping on commercial or mixed-use projects may be counted towards tree replacement requirements.
7. Tree Replacement Calculations. Thirty (30) percent of the total diameter inches of significant trees on the site may be removed without replacement. Any percentage over 30 shall be replaced. The following calculation procedure must be used to determine tree replacement requirements:
a. Tally the total number of diameter inches of all significant trees on the site.
b. A calculation must be provided which breaks out the number of inches removed for hardwood, evergreen/deciduous, and common trees. The 30% removal figure applies to each category individually and trees are replaced according to the Tree Replacement Schedule in subsection 8.
8. Tree Replacement Schedule. Tree removals over the allowable tree removal limit on the parcel shall be replaced according to the following schedule:
a. Common tree species shall be replaced with new trees at a rate of one-fourth (1/4) the diameter inches removed.
b. Coniferous/evergreen tree species shall be replaced with new coniferous or evergreen trees at a rate of one-half (1/2) the diameter inches removed. Since coniferous species are often sold by height rather than diameter inch, the following conversion formula can be used:
Height of Replacement Coniferous Tree/2 = Diameter Inches of Credit
c. Hardwood deciduous tree species shall be replaced with new hardwood deciduous trees at a rate of (1/2) the diameter inches removed.
d. Replacement Tree Size. Replacement trees must be a minimum of one (1) inch in diameter.
VIII-6
9. Species Requirement. The City must approve all species used for tree replacement. Ornamental trees are not acceptable for use as replacement trees. Where ten or more replacement trees are required, not more than thirty (30) percent of the replacement trees shall be of the same species of tree. Native species are encouraged, and hardiness and salt tolerance should be considered where applicable.
10. Warranty Requirement. Any replacement tree which is not alive or healthy, as determined by the City, or which subsequently dies due to construction activity within two (2) years after the date of project closure shall be removed by the applicant and replaced with a new healthy tree meeting the same minimum size requirement within eight (8) months of removal.
11. Protective Measures. The Tree Preservation Plan shall identify and require the following measures to be utilized to protect significant trees planned for preservation:
a. Installation of snow fencing or polyethylene laminate safety netting placed at the drip line or at the perimeter of the critical root zone, whichever is greater, of significant trees, specimen trees and significant woodlands to be preserved. No grade change, construction activity, or storage of materials shall occur within this fenced in area.
b. Identification of any oak trees requiring pruning between April 15 and July 1. Any oak trees so pruned shall be required to have any cut areas sealed with an appropriate nontoxic tree wound sealant.
c. Prevention of change in soil chemistry due to concrete washout and leakage or spillage of toxic materials, such as fuels or paints.
d. Removal of any nuisance trees located in areas to be preserved.
12. Compliance with the Tree Preservation Plan. The applicant shall implement the Tree Preservation Plan prior to and during any construction. The tree protection measures shall remain in place until all land disturbance and construction activity is terminated or until a request to remove the tree protection measures is made to, and approved by, the City.
a. No significant trees shall be removed until a tree preservation plan is approved and except in accordance with the approved Tree Preservation Plan.
b. The City shall have the right to inspect the development and/or building site in order to determine compliance with the approved Tree Preservation Plan. The City shall determine whether the Tree Preservation Plan has been met.
c. Instances where (a) significant tree(s) is (are) removed due to development or disturbed, which was not noted on the landscaping or tree removal plan will result in a one to one replacement penalty regardless if it is over the 30% allowance.
D. Financial Security. In cases where mitigation or tree replacement is required, the City may require that a financial security, in a form acceptable to the City, be provided as part of a development agreement or applicable permit to ensure compliance and performance
VIII-7
of the Mitigation Plan. The financial security will be released to the applicant upon verification by the City that the Mitigation Plan was followed, and that all replacement trees are planted and in a reasonable state of health. The financial security may be used to replace any replacement trees that have become damaged or diseased after planting.
E. Exceptions
1. Exception Standards. Notwithstanding the City’s desire to accomplish tree preservation and protection goals, there may be instances where these goals are in conflict with other City objectives. These conflicts will most likely occur on small, heavily-wooded parcels. Developers may ask for exceptions through the variance process as indicated in 154.109. Exceptions may be granted if all of the following conditions exist:
a. It is not feasible to combine the subject parcel with adjacent parcels that could use the parcel as required green space;
b. Strict adherence to the Tree Preservation Ordinance would prevent reasonable development that is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and desirable to the City on the parcel; and
c. The exception requested is the minimum needed to accomplish the desired development.
2. Reduced Mitigation for Exceptions. If an exception is granted, relief from the requirements of the ordinance may take the form of reduced mitigation requirements, greater allowable tree removal, higher thresholds for determining significant trees, or any combination of the above. The City Council will determine which form of relief best balances the objectives of the City and tree preservation. The Council may require payment of park dedication fees; woodland management practices; or planting of replacement trees on City property under direction of the Public Works Director as a condition of variance approval.
(Ord. 08-077, passed 5-07-2013)
§ 154.258 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.
All development sites shall be landscaped as provided in this section in order to control erosion and runoff, moderate extremes of temperature and provide shade, aid in energy conservation, preserve habitat, provide visual softening of, especially, urban development, and generally enhance the quality of the physical environment within the city.
A. Landscape Plan Required. A landscaping plan is required for all new commercial, industrial, institutional, and multi-family development, all planned unit developments, and all subdivisions, with the exception of minor subdivisions, as defined in Chapter 154. The landscape plan shall be prepared by a certified landscape architect and include the following:
VIII-8
1. The location, size, quantity, and species of all existing and proposed plant materials.
2. Methods for protecting existing trees and other landscape material, consistent with §154.257.
3. Structural and ground cover materials.
4. Provisions for irrigation and other water supplies.
5. Details and cross sections of all required screening.
6. Special planting instructions.
7. City standard plan notes and drawings.
8. Utilities and driveways shall also be clearly shown on the plans.
B. Design Considerations. The following design concepts and requirements shall be considered when developing a landscape plan.
1. To the maximum extent possible, the landscape plan shall incorporate existing trees and other vegetation on the site.
2. Landscaped areas should be of adequate size to allow proper plant growth, protect plantings from vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and provide adequate areas for plant maintenance.
3. A variety of trees and shrubs should be used to provide visual interest year round. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the required number of trees and shrubs may consist of any one species. A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the required number of trees shall be deciduous shade trees, and a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) shall be coniferous trees. Ornamental trees may be used when applied towards landscaping requirements. However, the number of trees shall not exceed 15% of the required amount.
4. Final slopes greater than 3:1 will not be permitted without special treatment such as terracing, retaining walls, or special ground covers.
5. All plant materials, except trees planted per the Tree Replacement Schedule, shall meet the following minimum size standards in Table 6-1. Trees planted per the Tree Replacement Schedule shall meet the minimum requirements outlined in Section 154.257 (C) (8) (d.).
Table 6-1. Minimum Size Standards for Landscape Materials
Plant Type
Minimum size at planting
Trees:
Evergreen
6 feet in height
Deciduous – shade
2.5 inches caliper, measured 6 inches from base
Deciduous - ornamental
2 inches caliper, measured 6 inches from base
Shrubs:
Evergreen
# 5 container*
Deciduous
# 5 container*
VIII-9
Shrubs used for screening (evergreen or deciduous)
# 5 container*
* Approximately 5 gallons. See American Standards for Nursery Stock, ANSI 260.1-2004 for exact specifications.
* This table and its requirements do not apply to the tree replacement schedule.
6. As an alternative to the minimum standards for landscape materials, a landscape plan prepared by a qualified professional certifying that said plan will meet the intent of this Section may be submitted.
7. As a general rule, trees should be planted ten feet away from all utilities including water and sewer stubs unless approved by the City’s Landscape Architect.
C. Landscaping of Setback Areas. All required setbacks not occupied by buildings, parking, paths or plazas shall be landscaped with turf grass, native grass, trees, shrubs, vines, perennial flowering plants, and surrounding pervious ground cover.
1. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted for every fifty (50) feet of street frontage, lake shore or stream frontage, or fraction thereof.
a. Trees adjacent to streets shall be planted within the front yard and may be arranged in a cluster or placed at regular intervals to best complement existing landscape design patterns in the area.
b. Salt tolerance and root structure should be considered when selecting tree species adjacent to streets, sidewalks and parking areas.
c. Where property abuts a lake or stream, trees shall be planted at intervals of no more than fifty (50) feet along the shoreline, except where natural vegetation is sufficient to meet this requirement.
2. In addition to the requirements of C.1 above, a minimum of five (5) trees shall be planted for every one (1) acre of land that is disturbed by development activity. Such trees may be used for parking lot landscaping or screening as specified in subsections D and E below.
D. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. The purpose of interior parking lot landscaping is to minimize the expansive appearance of parking lots and provide shaded parking areas. Landscaping shall consist of planting islands, medians and borders, comprising the required planting area specified under item (1) below.
1. At least five (5) percent of the interior area of parking lots with more than thirty (30) spaces shall be devoted to landscape planting areas. Areas may consist of islands or corner planting beds.
2. Shade trees shall be provided within the interior of parking lots (in islands or corner planting beds) in accordance with the following table:
Table 6-2. Minimum Required Tree Planting for Parking Lots
Number of Parking Spaces
Minimum Required Tree Planting
0 – 30
None required
31 - 100
1 tree per 10 spaces or fraction thereof
101+
1 tree per 15 spaces or fraction thereof
VIII-10
E. Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping. Parking areas shall be screened from public streets and sidewalks, public open space, and adjacent residential properties. The perimeter of parking areas shall be screened as follows:
1. With the exception of the VMX district, a landscaped frontage strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided between parking areas and public streets, sidewalks, or paths. If a parking area contains over one hundred (100) spaces, the frontage strip shall be increased to eight (8) feet in width.
a. Within the frontage strip, screening shall consist of either a masonry wall, fence, berm, or hedge or combination that forms a screen a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) and a maximum of four (4) feet in height, and not less than fifty percent (50%) opaque on a year-round basis.
b. Trees shall be planted at a minimum of one deciduous tree per fifty (50) linear feet within the frontage strip.
2. Alongside and rear property lines abutting residential properties or districts, screening shall be provided, consisting of either a masonry wall, fence or berm in combination with landscape material that forms a screen a minimum of four (4) feet in height, a maximum of six (6) feet in height, and not less than ninety percent (90%) opaque on a year-round basis. Landscape material shall include trees, planted at a minimum of one deciduous or coniferous tree per forty (40) linear feet along the property line.
F. Screening. Screening shall be used to provide visual and noise separation of intensive uses from less intensive uses. Where screening is required in the City Code between uses or districts, it shall consist of either a masonry wall or fence in combination with landscape material that forms a screen at least six (6) feet in height, and not less than ninety percent (90%) opaque on a year-round basis. Landscape material shall include trees, planted at a minimum of one deciduous or coniferous tree per forty (40) linear feet along the property line. Additional landscape material such as shade trees or trellises may be required to partially screen views from above.
G. Maintenance and Installation of Materials. Installation and maintenance of all landscape materials shall comply with the following standards:
1. All landscape materials shall be installed to current industry standards.
2. Irrigation or other water supply adequate to support the specified plant materials shall be provided.
3. All required landscaping and screening features shall be kept free of refuse and debris.
4. All landscape materials shall be guaranteed for two (2) years. Any landscape material that dies or becomes diseased before the end of the second (2nd) year after installation shall be replaced by the developer.
5. Continuing maintenance and replacement of landscape materials shall be the responsibility of the property owner beyond two years of initial installation.
VIII-11
H. Financial Security. The City will require that a financial security, in a form acceptable to the City, be provided as part of a development agreement or applicable permit to ensure compliance and performance of the Landscape Plan. The financial security will be released to the applicant upon verification by the City that the Landscape Plan was followed, and that all landscape materials are planted and in a reasonable state of health. The financial security may be used to replace any landscape materials that have become damaged or diseased after planting. Adequate security must be retained to ensure performance for at least two years after the installations have been completed.
(Ord. 08-087, passed 8-20-2013)
IX-1
ARTICLE IX. SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 154.300 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
Specific development standards are established as supplemental regulations that address the unique characteristics of certain land uses. The standards and conditions listed below apply to both permitted and conditional uses, in addition to all other applicable regulations of this ordinance. Standards shall apply in all zoning districts where the use in question is allowed. Standards for uses that apply only within specific districts are listed within the Articles pertaining to those districts.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 154.301 STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL AND RELATED USES.
A. Group Home. A group home is a specific use type located within a single-family dwelling, and therefore shall meet all zoning standards applicable to single-family dwellings, including setbacks, lot area, lot coverage, and off-street parking. License capacity shall not exceed six (6) persons per facility, plus support staff.
B. Group Residential Facility, Halfway House
1. In residential districts, the facility shall occupy a residential building type permitted within the district where it is located, and shall meet all zoning standards applicable to that building type.
2. On-site services shall be for residents of the facility only.
C. Congregate Housing (Assisted Living)
1. To the extent practical, all new construction or additions to existing buildings shall be compatible with the scale and character of existing building and surrounding neighborhood.
2. The site shall contain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of green space per resident, consisting of outdoor seating areas, gardens and/or recreational facilities. In cases of unique circumstances, the City may consider public parks or plazas within three hundred (300) feet of the site to meet this requirement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate why the green space cannot be located on-site.
3. An appropriate transition area between the use and adjacent property may be required, to include landscaping, screening and other site improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
D. Semi-Transient Accommodations (Boarding, Rooming Houses, etc.)
1. The operator shall submit a management plan for the facility and a floor plan showing sleeping areas, emergency exits and bathrooms.
2. All new construction or additions to existing buildings shall be compatible with the scale and character of the existing building and surrounding neighborhood.
IX-2
3. An appropriate transition area between the use and adjacent property may be required, to include landscaping, screening and other site improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
E. Temporary Health Care Dwellings
1. Pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, subdivision 9, the City opts-out of the requirements of Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.3593, which defines and regulates temporary family health care dwellings. By exercising this authority, the City is prohibiting the use of temporary family health care dwellings within the City.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013; Am. Ord. 08-151, passed 8-16-2016)
§ 154.303 STANDARDS FOR SERVICES.
A. Educational Services. Except in the industrial districts, all typical activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
B. Medical Facilities. The facility shall have access to an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic that the use will generate. A minimum of two (2) access points shall be provided.
1. Any new hospital or expansion of an existing hospital shall submit a master plan that shall describe proposed physical development for at least a ten (10) year period, and shall include a description of proposed development phases and plans, estimated dates of construction and anticipated interim uses of property.
2. Landing pads for helicopters involved in emergency rescue operations, and helicopter flight paths shall meet all applicable federal and state requirements.
C. Nursing and Personal Care
1. To the extent practical, all new construction or additions to existing buildings shall be compatible with the scale and character of the existing building and surrounding neighborhood.
2. The site shall maintain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet of green space per resident, consisting of outdoor seating areas, gardens and/or recreational facilities. In cases of unique circumstances, the City may consider public parks or plazas within three hundred (300) feet of the site to meet this requirement. It is the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate why the green space cannot be located on-site.
3. An appropriate transition area between the use and adjacent property may be required, to include landscaping, screening and other site improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
D. Self-Service Storage Facility
1. No commercial transactions shall be permitted other than the rental or sale of storage units.
2. No more than one (1) unit shall be accessed directly from the public street.
IX-3
3. Site design shall accommodate a logical and safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation pattern.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 154.304 STANDARDS FOR FOOD SERVICES.
A. Restaurant with Drive-Through
1. Drive-through elements shall not be located between the front façade of the principal building and the street. No service shall be rendered, deliveries made or sales conducted within the required front yard, although tables may be provided for customer use.
2. Site design shall accommodate a logical and safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation pattern. Adequate queuing lane space shall be provided, without interfering with on-site parking/circulation.
3. Drive-through canopies and other structures, where present, shall be constructed from the same materials as the primary building, and with a similar level of architectural quality and detailing.
4. Sound from any speakers used on the premises shall not be audible above a level of normal conversation at the boundary of any surrounding residential district or on any residential property.
5. Each food or beverage drive-through business shall place refuse receptacles at all exits.
B. Drinking and Entertainment. Music or amplified sounds shall not be audible above a level of normal conversation at the boundary of any surrounding residential district or on any residential property.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 154.305 STANDARDS FOR AUTOMOTIVE/VEHICULAR USES.
A. Car Wash
1. The car wash shall be capable of being enclosed when not in operation.
2. Any access drive shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from any public street intersection, measured from the interior curb line commencing at the intersection of the street.
3. Any car wash line exit shall be at least thirty (30) feet distant from any street line.
4. Sound from any speakers used on the premises shall not be audible above a level of normal conversation at the boundary of any surrounding residential district or on any residential property.
5. Water from the car wash shall not drain across any sidewalk or into a public right-of-way.
IX-4
B. Gasoline Station
1. Lot Size and Access. A gasoline station site shall be a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size and shall have access to a collector or higher classification street.
2. Performance Standards. A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be installed. The entire site, with the exception of the area taken up by the structure, landscaping and pump islands, should be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other material approved by the City.
3. All vehicle repairs shall be conducted in a building capable of being enclosed when not in use.
4. Vehicles. No vehicles other than those utilized by employees or awaiting service shall be parked on the premises overnight. No vehicle shall be parked or awaiting service longer than fifteen (15) days.
5. Canopies. Canopies shall be located no closer than twenty (20) feet from any property line. Any lighting on the underneath side of the canopy shall be recessed mounted with flush lenses and downward directed. Signage on canopies shall comply with §154.212. Canopy columns and fascia should reflect the design and/or materials of the principal building.
6. Screening of Storage Areas. The storage or display of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles not awaiting service as in subsection (B4) or other equipment, and all trash storage or disposal facilities, shall meet all setback requirements of a structure, and shall be screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties. Screening shall meet the requirements of Article 8, Section 154.258. (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
7. Outdoor Display. Exterior display of items offered for sale shall meet all building setback requirements and shall be located in containers, racks or other structures designed to display merchandise.
8. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses shall require a separate conditional use permit:
a. Automatic car and truck wash.
b. Rental of vehicles, equipment or trailers.
c. General retail exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in floor area.
C. Sales and Storage Lots
1. Size and Location. The site shall be a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size and shall have access to a collector or higher classification street. Vehicular access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection of any two streets.
2. All vehicle repairs shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building.
IX-5
3. A site plan shall be submitted showing the layout of vehicles for sale or rent, employee parking and customer parking.
4. Sound from any speakers used on the premises shall not be audible above a level of normal conversation at the boundary of any surrounding residential district or on any residential property.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 154.306 STANDARDS FOR OUTDOOR RECREATION USES.
A. Golf Course
1. Location. The facility shall have access to a collector or higher classification street. A minimum of two (2) entry points to such facilities shall be provided.
2. Site Plans. Site plans for such facilities shall indicate all proposed recreation areas, building uses and locations, sanitary facilities, storage areas, parking, circulation and other information needed to assess the impacts of the proposed operation on surrounding properties and the road network.
3. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in conjunction with a golf course: A driving range, putting greens, pro shop, club house and locker facilities, maintenance buildings, course shelters, and cart storage facilities. Other accessory uses may require a separate conditional use permit.
4. Resource Protection. Golf courses shall be designed with consideration of environmental resources, including:
a. Water recycling and conservation through on-site storage and use facilities;
b. Use of landscaped buffers and other Best Management Practices (BMP’s) to minimize fertilizer runoff and other chemicals from entering surface water bodies; and
c. Use of landscaping and site layout to preserve and enhance wildlife habitat.
5. Buffering. A planted buffer may be required to screen adjacent residential and other uses.
6. Other Conditions. Other conditions may be imposed to mitigate the potential impacts of the use.
B. Outdoor Entertainment, Restricted Recreation
1. Location. The facility shall have access to a collector or higher classification street. A minimum of two entry points to such facilities shall be provided.
2. Site Plans. Site plans for such facilities shall indicate all proposed recreation and entertainment areas, sanitary facilities, storage areas, parking, circulation, estimated noise levels, and other information needed to assess the impacts of the proposed operation on surrounding properties and the road network. Conditions may be imposed to mitigate the potential impacts of the use.
IX-6
C. Outdoor Recreation Facility. Facilities that would generate substantial traffic, such as playing fields or aquatic centers, shall be located with access to a street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic that the use will generate. A minimum of two (2) entry points to such facilities shall be provided.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 154.307 STANDARDS FOR INDOOR RECREATION/AMUSEMENT.
A. Indoor Athletic Facility, Indoor Recreation. Facilities that would generate substantial traffic shall be located with access to a street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic that the use will generate. A minimum of two (2) entry points to such facilities shall be provided.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013)
§ 154.308 STANDARDS FOR ALTERNATIVE ENERGY
A. Solar Farms
1. Conditional or Interim Use Permit. A conditional or interim use permit subject to the zoning district in which the proposed solar farm is to be located.
2. Minimum Lot Size, Setbacks, and Screening Requirements. Solar farms are limited to properties at least ten acres in size. Solar farms must maintain a setback of at least 50 feet from adjacent properties and be screened and fenced as determined by the City from adjacent residential properties.
3. Stormwater and NPDES. Solar farms are subject to the City’s and watershed district’s stormwater management and erosion and sediment control provisions and NPDES permit requirements.
4. Foundations. A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation and design of the solar panels, racking and support is within accepted professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
B. Wind Generator Systems. Wind generator systems are allowed as an accessory or principal use with a conditional use permit in the rural and commercial districts. The system must comply with all standards described herein Applicants should check for compliance with local utility, State, and Federal laws before construction.
1. Application. An application for a wind generator shall follow the application and review procedures for a conditional use permit as specified in Section 154.106. In addition to the submission requirements of Section 154.106, an application for a wind generator shall include the following:
a) A report from a professional engineer describing the proposed wind generator and certifying the safety of the device
b) Appropriate certifications as required by a nationally Recognized Testing Laboratory. Self-certification is not allowed.
IX-7
c) A statement indicating that the proposed wind generator is in compliance with all applicable regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration where appropriate.
d) All necessary information relating to site (site plan) and system design.
2. Specific Standards for Ground Mounted Systems.
a) Maximum Height. 125 feet, including the system as a whole, from the base to the highest point.
b) Setbacks. At least 1.25 times the height of the wind generator from any lot line, shoreland overlay district boundary, and any utility lines and public or private road way. A setback of at least 200 feet is required from any principal structure on adjacent properties within the Rural Districts.
c) Rotors. Rotors or moving parts are required to be at least 30 feet above the ground and 30 feet above any obstruction equal to its height from the base. Rotor diameter shall not exceed 52 feet or a blade length of 26 feet.
d) Minimum Lot Size. There is no minimum lot size on which a wind generator may be constructed unless there is more than one wind generator per parcel, provided required setbacks are met.
e) Number. For parcels on which there are more than one wind generator, the number of wind generators allowed is limited to one system per 5 acres, and all systems must meet minimum setback requirements.
3. Specific Standards for Roof/Structure Mounted Systems.
a) Height. Subject to the maximum building height specified for the district in which it is constructed.
b) Setbacks. Must be set back a distance equal to its height away from utility lines, and the location must support the structure.
c) Rotors. Moving parts may not be located below the roof line on which the system is mounted.
d) Number. The number of roof/structure mounted systems allowed is limited to one system per building within rural districts and is limited to the manufacturer’s setback recommendations within commercial districts.
4. General Standards.
a) Design. All turbines shall be commercially available and not prototype turbines. Each wind generator shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping the operation in high winds. No components unnecessary to the operation of the wind generator shall be allowed.
b) Maintenance. Wind generators shall be inspected and maintained under agreement or contract by the manufacturer or other qualified entity. The
IX-8
owner of the wind generator must have the tower inspected by a licensed qualified professional and submit to the City a report on the status and condition of the wind generator. The times of inspection shall be specified by the manufacture or at a minimum of every two (2) years. Routine maintenance, including but not limited to, painting, part replacement, etc. shall be done as necessary but does not require a report to be submitted. Penalty, see § 10.99
c) Climbing. To prevent unauthorized climbing, such apparatus shall not be located within 12 feet of the ground, and a locked anti-climb device shall be installed on the tower.
d) Signage. Properties with wind generators shall have at least one (1) sign posted at the entrance of the property or structure on which the wind generator is mounted, containing the following information: voltage information, manufacturer's name, emergency telephone number, and emergency shutdown procedures. There shall also be signs located on transformers and substations which are directly connected to the system. Systems shall not be used for displaying any advertising, nor for other uses including but not limited to cell phone antennas, flags, ham radio antennas, etc.
e) Lightning. All wind generators shall be protected against lightning strikes.
f) Aviation. No Wind Generator shall be located in a way that will create an obstruction to navigable airspace of public and private airports in Minnesota. Wind Generators are prohibited in the Lake Elmo Airport Safety Zone.
g) Feeder lines. The electrical collection system (Wind Generator) shall be placed underground within the interior of each parcel. They may run through Public water ways subject to DNR, FWS, and or USACOE permits.
h) For all guyed towers. Visible and reflective objects, such as plastic sleeves, reflectors or tape, shall be placed on the guy wire anchor points and along the outer and innermost guy wires up to a height of 8 feet above the ground.
i) Screening. Wind Generator are exempt from the screening requirements.
j) Aesthetics. The appearance of the Wind Generator, tower and any other related components shall be maintained throughout the life of the wind generator per the manufactures/industry standards. Ground mounted wind generators shall be installed on tubular and monopole design towers.
k) Color.Wind Generators shall be uniform in color, white or off white, grey, or another non-obtrusive color. Finishes shall be matt or non-reflective.
IX-9
l) Vibration. No wind generator shall produce vibrations through the ground that are perceptible beyond the property on which it is located.
m) Noise. Wind Generator shall comply with language outlined in Chapter 130: General Offences; Noise Control Section 130.45.
n) Lighting. Systems shall not be illuminated unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), state, or federal regulations.
o) Electrical Certification. Batteries or other energy storage device shall be designed consistent with the Minnesota Electrical code and Minnesota Fire Code. Wind Generators must also meet the standards established by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC)
p) Intent to install. Prior to installation of a wind generator the applicant must show proof that the utility provider has given consent to connect to the grid. Off-grid systems are exempt from this requirement.
5. Decommissioning
a) Decommissioning. A wind energy systems shall be maintained at all times according to the manufacture’s specifications. If a wind generator has become unstable, leans significantly out-of-plumb, or poses a danger of collapse, it shall be removed or brought into repair within 60 days following notice by the Building Official to the owner of the lot upon which the system is located. The Building Official may order immediate repairs if, in the opinion of the Building Official, the generator will imminently collapse or if a safety risk is being posed. If the owner of a wind generator plans to abandon or discontinue, or is required to discontinue, the operation of the system, the owner shall notify the Building Official by certified U. S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation. Such notice shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation. In the event that an owner fails to give such notice, the wind energy system shall be considered abandoned if the wind energy system is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months. At such point the owner has the option to either fully abandon and remove the system or submit a new application for operation of the system.
b) Removal. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the property owner shall physically remove the wind energy system as soon as practical, considering the weather conditions within six (6) months from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” includes, without limitation, the actual, complete removal of the tower, turbine, and all other components of the wind energy system from the site of the original installation.
IX-10
c) Site Restoration. The owner shall, upon “decommissioning/abandonment,” as soon as practical, considering the weather, restore the area affected by any wind generator to the condition that existed immediately before construction began, to the extent possible. The time period may be no longer than six (6) months after decommissioning of the turbine, unless otherwise negotiated with the Building Official. Restoration shall be compatible with the safe operation, maintenance, and inspection of the City. All costs associated with the restoration of the site will be the responsibility of the property owner.
d) Transfer of ownership. Permits are not transferrable. If the portion of property containing the wind generator is sold, the new owner must apply for a new wind generator permit or remove the system per the decommissioning plan.
§ 154.310 STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY USES.
A. Bed and Breakfast.
1. The use of a bed and breakfast is not permitted unless the city issues a permit for that specific property. The permit will be valid for two years. A permit for a bed and breakfast will only be issued if :
a. The facility is located in a single-family detached dwelling.
b. The number of lodging rooms in any building does not exceed five (5). If the proposed number of lodging rooms in any building exceeds five (5), a conditional use permit shall be required.
c. The facility meets parking requirements as set forth by Table 5-2 of Section 154.210.
2. The applicant shall meet all applicable government regulations.
3. The operator shall carry liability insurance, and shall provide proof of such insurance to the City upon request.
4. Permits are non-transferable and do not run with the land.
5. A permit constitutes a limited license granted to the property owner by the city and in no way creates a vested zoning right.
6. By signing the permit, the applicant of the bed and breakfast permit acknowledges that he or she shall defend and indemnify the city against any and all claims arising out of operating a bed and breakfast.
7. Bed and breakfast permit fees shall be as established by the city council.
B. Drive-through Facility
1. Drive-through elements shall not be located between the front façade of the principal building and the street.
2. Plans for on-site circulation and driveway locations shall be reviewed as part of the conditional use review process. Site design shall accommodate a logical and
IX-11
safe vehicle and pedestrian circulation pattern. Adequate queuing lane space shall be provided, without interfering with on-site parking/circulation.
3. Alley access to drive-through lanes is prohibited on any block containing a residential district, except for commercials deliveries when approved by the city engineer.
4. Drive-through canopies and other structures, where present, shall be constructed from the same materials as the primary building, and with a similar level of architectural quality and detailing.
5. Sound from any speakers used on the premises shall not be audible above a level of normal conversation at the boundary of any surrounding residential district or on any residential property.
6. An emergency exit lane shall be provided for uses queuing through the drive-through lane(s), without interfering with on-site parking/circulation.
C. Solar Energy Systems. Solar energy systems are permitted accessory uses in all districts, provided the system or equipment is in compliance with standards set forth below.
1. Permits. A building permit shall be obtained before the installation of solar arrays or panels on any property. All solar energy systems shall be installed and components labeled in accordance with the Minnesota State Electric Code Section 690.
2. Rooftop or Building Integrated Solar Energy Systems.
a. These systems are permitted accessory uses in all districts in which buildings are permitted.
b. Visibility, Commercial Installations. Commercial rooftop systems shall be placed on the roof to limit visibility from the public right-of-way or to blend into the roof design, provided that minimizing visibility still allows the property owner to reasonably capture solar energy.
3. Ground-Mount Solar Energy Systems.
a. Ground-mount energy systems are permitted accessory uses in all districts where buildings are permitted.
b. Ground-mount energy systems must comply with all accessory setback, height and lot coverage restrictions unless otherwise stated herein or a variance is granted and shall not encroach on any City easement unless an easement encroachment agreement approved by the Planning Director or his/her designee after review and approval from the City Engineer or his/her designee has been executed. A certificate of zoning compliance is required for all solar energy systems unless a conditional use permit is required as stated herein.
i. The collector surface of a ground-mount system and any foundation, compacted soil, or other component of the solar installation that rests on the ground is considered impervious surface. Vegetated ground under the collector surface can be used to mitigate stormwater runoff.
c. Exemptions. Solar energy systems of a size of six square feet or less may be exempt from zoning district setback requirements.
IX-12
4. Interconnection Agreement. All electric solar energy systems that are connected to the electric distribution or transmission system through the existing service of the primary use on the site shall obtain an interconnection agreement with the electric utility in whose service territory the system is located. Solar energy systems connected directly to the distribution or transmission system must obtain an interconnection agreement with the interconnecting electric utility. Systems that are not directly connected to the grid or not connected to the electric system of a building that is connected to the gird are exempt from this requirement.
5. Glare. Glare produced from any solar energy system shall be minimized from affecting adjacent or nearby properties. Measures to minimize glare include selective placement of the system, screening of the solar array, modifying the orientation of the system, reducing use of the reflector system, or other remedies that limit glare.
a. Mirror Reflecting Designed Solar Energy Systems. Mirror reflecting designed solar energy systems are permitted only on properties with ten (10) acres or larger. A conditional use permit is required and more restrictive setback standards may be required upon review of the conditional use permit.
6. Code Requirements. Electric solar energy system componements that are connected to a building electric system must have an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing. All solar installations must comply with the Minnesota and National Electric Code. All rooftop or building integrated solar energy systems require a building permit and shall comply with the Minnesota Building Code. Solar thermal hot water systems shall comply with applicable Minnesota State Plumbing Code requirements.
7. Decommissioning. A decommissioning plan shall be required to ensure that facilities are properly removed after their useful life. Decommissioning of solar panels must occur in the event they are not in use for 12 consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for removal of all structures and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation and a plan ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission the site. The City may require the posting of a bond, letter of credit or the establishement of an escrow to ensure proper decommissioning.
8. Easements Allowed. Solar easements may be filed, consistent with Minnesota Stat. Chapter 500 Section 30. Any building owner can purchase an easement across neighboring properties to protect access to sunlight. The easement is purchased or granted by owners of neighborhing properties and can apply to buildings, trees, or other structures that would diminish solar access.
9. Restrictions on Solar Energy Systems Limited. No homeowners’ agreement, covenant, common interest community, or other contract between multiple property owners within a subdivision shall forbid installation of solar energy systems or create design standards that effectively preclude solar energy installations.
D. Commercial Wedding Ceremony Venue. A commercial wedding venue is allowed as an accessory use with an interim use permit in the A – Agriculture, RT – Rural Transitional, and RR-Rural Residential zoning districts on parcels greater than 10 acres in size. The establishment of a Commercial Wedding Venue on RR parcels is limited to those sites
IX-13
meeting the following criteria: 1) the site has historically been used as a farmstead for the surrounding agricultural land; and 2) the use will incorporate a barn or other historical agricultural building over 75 years of age for the wedding ceremonies.
The suitability of a parcel for a wedding venue shall be determined by the characteristics of the site and by the unique capacity of the parcel to accommodate the use while preserving the essential rural character of the neighborhood and the site on which the use is located, by the ability of the parcel to accommodate the use without negative impact on the general health, safety, and welfare of the community, and by other factors the City may deem appropriate for consideration. The use must adhere to the following standards:
1. Ownership. The property will be the primary residence of the venue operator(s). The operator must be on the premises for the duration of each event.
2. Maximum Number of Guests. The maximum number of guests is limited to 200 for each event.
3. Food and Beverages. The serving of food and beverages is permitted only as part of the ceremony.
4. Seasonal Operation. Ceremonies are limited to no more than twice per week and are permitted only during the months of May through October.
5. Hours of Operation. Events shall only be allowed between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. All guests and staff must vacate the premises by 10:00 p.m. All lights associated with the event must be turned off by 10:00 p.m. Any one ceremony is limited to a maximum duration of three (3) hours.
6. Overnight Accommodations. No overnight accommodations are allowed.
7. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be required in the ratio of one (1) parking space for each three attendees based on the maximum number of attendees planned for the site. The off-street parking area and the number of parking spaces shall be documented on the required site plan. Off street parking shall be exempted from the paving and curbing requirements in section 154.210.
8. Setbacks. The minimum setbacks from neighboring houses and property lines for the various activities associated with the wedding venue shall be as follows:
i. Parking: 100 feet from residential property lines; 200 feet from neighboring houses.
ii. Outdoor Activity Spaces: 300 feet from residential property lines; 400 feet from neighboring houses.
iii. Indoor Activity Spaces: 300 feet from residential property lines; 400 feet from neighboring houses.
9. Landscaping/Screening. Landscaping may be required to buffer the use from adjacent land uses and to provide screening when such screening does not presently exist on the site. A landscape plan shall be submitted at the time of application for an Interim Use Permit.
IX-14
10. Grading. Any proposed grading shall observe all requirements of Section 151.017 of the City Code. If a grading plan is required, it shall be submitted in conjunction with an application for an Interim Use Permit.
11. Traffic. A transportation management plan shall be submitted as part of an application for an Interim Use Permit. The plan shall address traffic control, including traffic movement to the public street system and impact on the surrounding roadways.
12. Structures. All existing or proposed structures to be used for the wedding ceremony venue shall be inspected by the City’s Building Official and must meet applicable Building Code requirements.
iv. Temporary Structures. Temporary Structures, including tents and canopies, may be allowed. Tents and canopies may be erected no more than (1) day prior to an event and must be removed no more than 72 hours following the event.
13. Application. An application for a commercial wedding venue shall follow the application and review procedures for an Interim Use Permit as specified in Section 154.107. In addition to the submission requirements of Section 154.107, an application for a commercial wedding venue shall include the following information:
v. The expected number of attendees per ceremony;
vi. The number of ceremonies per year;
vii. The number of employees;
viii. The hours of operation;
ix. Sanitary facilities;
x. Lighting;
xi. Sound amplification to be used and a plan to minimize any amplified sounds;
xii. Temporary structures or tents to be used in association with the planned events;
xiii. Signage;
xiv. Security to be provided;
xv. Location of all trash receptacles;
xvi. Traffic management plan;
xvii. Other documentation as specified herein;
14. Sanitary Facilities. Sanitary facilities adequate for the number of attendees shall be provided. Portable toilets may be approved for temporary use, and must be screened from view from roads and neighboring properties by landscaping or a wooden enclosure. No portable toilets shall be located closer than 400 feet from a neighboring residential structure.
IX-15
15. Lighting. Lighting associated with the wedding venue shall be limited to downcast and shielded fixtures so that the source of the light is not visible from adjacent roads or neighboring properties. Lighting shall comply with Section 150.035 of the City Code.
16. Noise. All wedding venues shall comply with City’s noise standards found in Section 130.45 through 130.48 of the City Code.
17. Sound Amplification. Amplification of music and participants and is allowed only in conjunction with a wedding ceremony. There shall be no other amplification of music or sound outside of the ceremony.
18. Waste. All solid waste must be stored in a manner that prevents the propagation, harborage, or attraction of flies, rodents, or other nuisance conditions and must be removed at least once every seven days by a licensed solid waste hauler.
19. Liability. The applicant shall secure adequate liability coverage, which shall be in place at least one week prior to any event.
20. Other Activities. Other than the commercial wedding ceremonies authorized under this section, no other commercial ceremonial activities may be conducted on the site.
E. Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be considered a permitted accessory use. The purpose of home occupation standards are to ensure that the activities are clearly secondary to the intended use of the dwelling and to ensure that the business is compatible with surrounding residential uses. All home occupations must comply with the criteria set forth below.
1. Home Occupations.
a) A home occupation may include but is not limited to
i. Home office.
ii. Hair salons not serving more than two customers at a time.
iii. Teaching, though limited to no more than three students at any time
iv. Uses which do not alter the character of the locality, do not create a nuisance as outlined in Chapter 96 of the City Code, and are legally allowed by local, state, and federal law.
b) Home occupations shall not be interpreted to include
i. Tourist homes.
ii. Restaurants.
iii. Disorderly house as defined by M.S. 609.33, subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time, or similar uses.
iv. Sale or use of hazardous materials.
v. Adult establishments as defined in Chapter 113.
IX-16
vi. Any overnight activities shall not be permitted.
2. Operation Requirements
a) The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential use of the premises, and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding area.
b) Activities associated with the permitted home occupation may only be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
c) No over the counter retail sales may be made unless ancillary to the permitted business
d) There shall not be more than one employee who does not customarily reside on the property affiliated with the Home Occupation.
e) The use shall not create a nuisance as defined by chapter 96.
3. Site Requirements
a) Exterior alterations or modifications that change the residential character or appearance of the dwelling unit or accessory structure to that of a commercial nature shall be prohibited.
b) Interior alterations or modifications shall not eliminate all of the bathrooms, sleeping areas, or kitchen(s).
c) Signage. Home Occupations are allowed signage in accordance with Sections §154.212 (G) (1) (a) and (K) (10).
d) The operation shall not create a demand for more than 3 parking spaces at any given time, and no parking for the business shall be on-street. Off-street parking shall be on a durable parking surface such as asphalt, concrete, etc. The off-street parking area required for the principal residential use shall be retained exclusively for the principal use.
e) Exterior Storage. No outside storage or display of products or merchandise is permitted.
f) No stock in trade over 1,000 cubic feet shall be stored on the premises.
(Ord. 08-080, passed 5-21-2013; Am. Ord. 08-107, passed 5-6-2014; Am. Ord. 08-128, passed 2-16-2016; Am. Ord. 08-198, passed 2-7-2018; Am. Ord. 08-199, passed 2-7-2018; Am. Ord. 08-197, passed 2-7-2018)
X-1
ARTICLE X. ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
§ 154.350 DIVISION INTO DISTRICTS.
A. All Areas Zoned. The incorporated areas of Lake Elmo are hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Table 8-1: Zoning Districts
Zoning District
Reference
R-2
One and Two Family Residential
154.033
GB
General Business
154.034
A
Agriculture
Article XI
RR
Rural Residential
Article XI
RT
Rural Development Transitional
Article XI
RS
Rural Single Family
Article XI
RE
Residential Estate
Article XI
GCC
Golf Course Community
Article XII
LDR
Urban Low Density Residential
Article XII
MDR
Urban Medium Density Residential
Article XII
HDR
Urban High Density Residential
Article XII
VMX
Village Center - Mixed Use
Article XIII
C
Commercial
Article XIV
CC
Convenience Commercial
Article XIV
LC
Neighborhood Office/Limited Commercial
Article XIV
BP
Business Park/Light Manufacturing
Article XIV
PF
Public Facilities
Article XV
B. Annexed Areas. Any land that is annexed into the city shall be included in the A Agriculture District until such time as the City Council amends the Comprehensive Plan to include the new area, and rezones it to another district.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012) (Ord. 2008-152, passed 10-04-2016)
§ 154.351 ZONING MAP.
X-2
A. The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are set forth on the Official Zoning Map, which is hereby incorporated as part of this chapter, and which is on display in the Planning Department.
B. District boundary lines recorded on the zoning map are intended to follow lot lines, the centerline of streets or alleys, the centerlines of streets or alleys projected, railroad rights-of-way lines, the center of watercourses or the corporate limit lines as they exist at the time of the enactment of this chapter.
C. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated, the zoning district adjoining that of such vacated street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacated area and all area included therein shall be then and henceforth subject to all regulations of the extended district.
D. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Director to maintain and amend the zoning map. The Director of Planning shall make any corrections or amendments to the map after all of the procedures outlined in § 154.020 of this chapter for the making of such revisions or amendments shall have followed by the Planning Commission and the City Council.
E. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be recorded on the map within 30 days after adoption by the Council. The copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be displayed in the office of the Planning Department and shall be open to public inspection at all times during which the office is customarily open.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.352 CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
The zoning districts in this chapter and the delineation of zoning district boundaries on the zoning map are consistent with the goals and policies of the Lake City Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
XI-1
ARTICLE XI. RURAL DISTRICTS
§ 154.400 PURPOSE.
The rural districts are established to provide guidance for existing rural development that is served primarily by on-site wastewater treatment facilities in Lake Elmo. The objectives of these districts are to preserve and enhance the quality of living in the existing rural areas, as well as regulate structures and uses which may affect the character or desirability of these areas. The rural districts and their purposes are as follows:
A. RT Rural Development Transitional District. The RT District is an interim holding zone that will regulate land uses within those portions of the City planned and staged for development that will connect to regional sewer service in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. The future zoning classification for areas zoned RT and the timing for any zoning map amendments to rezone property in this district will be determined by the City Council upon the extension of public sanitary sewer and water services into these areas. In the meantime, agricultural and existing residential uses will be allowed to continue in addition to other uses that are consistent with the A and RR zoning districts.
B. A Agricultural District. The A District will apply to agricultural or undeveloped areas in Lake Elmo, including any newly annexed areas. The purpose of the district is to allow for agricultural and other activities typically associated with agriculture, including non-farm dwellings at a density of 1 unit per 40 acres. Future residential development may occur at the aforementioned density or through the Open-Space Preservation Development process. These parcels are expected to be served by on-site wastewater treatment facilities. In addition, some limited agriculture-related businesses, such as wayside stands and outdoor recreation, are appropriate short-term or interim uses for this district.
C. RR Rural Residential District. The RR District is established for lands that have existing small-scale agricultural activity, as well as single-family residential dwellings. Future residential development may occur at a density of 1 dwelling unit per 10 acres, or through the Open-Space Preservation Development process. These sites are expected to be served by on-site wastewater treatment facilities. Some limited agriculture-related businesses, such as wayside stands, are appropriate as interim uses for this district.
D. RS Rural Single Family District. The RS District is established for lands that have already been platted as conventional residential subdivisions prior to the 2005 adoption of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. This district provides an environment of predominantly single-family detached dwellings on moderately sized lots in areas that have typically not been provided with public sanitary sewer services.
E. RE Residential Estate District. The purpose of the RE District is to allow for single-family detached dwellings on large lots. The large lots and setbacks provide for an open-space environment that is consistent with the rural character of Lake Elmo. Planned residential subdivisions are allowed on a minimum of 20 acres (nominal) with an average subdivision density of 3.33 acres per residential unit. Lot sizes should be adequate to provide for on-site wastewater treatment.
XI-2
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 154.401 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND INTERIM USES.
Table 9-1 lists all permitted, conditional, and interim uses allowed in the rural districts. “P” indicates a permitted use, “C” a conditional use, and “I” an interim use. Uses not so indicated shall be considered prohibited. Cross-references listed in the table under “Standards” indicate the location within this Ordinance of specific development standards that apply to the listed use.
A. Combinations of Uses. Principal and accessory uses may be combined on a single parcel.
Table 9-1: Permitted, Conditional, and Interim Uses, Rural Districts
RT
A
RR
RS
RE
Standard
Residential Uses
Household Living
Single-Family Detached Dwelling
P
P
P
P
P
154.404 (A)
Secondary Dwelling
-
P
-
-
-
154.404 (D)
Services
Self Service Storage Facility
Ia
Ia
-
-
-
154.404 (G)
Outdoor Recreation
Outdoor Recreation Facility
-
C
-
-
-
154.306 (C)
Parks and Open Areas
P
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (7)
Restricted Recreation
-
C
-
-
-
154.306 (B)
Agricultural and Related Uses
Agricultural Entertainment Business
I
I
I
-
-
154.914
Agricultural Production
P
P
P
-
-
154.012 (B) (9)
Agricultural Sales Business
I
I
I
-
-
154.913
Agricultural Services
C
C
-
-
-
154.404 (J)
Forestry Operations
-
P
-
-
-
154.012 (B) (9)
Greenhouses, Non Retail
C
C
C
-
-
154.012 (B) (9)
Wayside Stand
P
P
P
-
-
154.012 (B) (9)
Industrial and Extractive Uses
Motor Freight and Warehousing
Ia
-
-
-
-
154.404 (G)
Alternative Energy
Solar Farm
I
C
C
-
-
154.308 (A)
Wind Generator – Ground Mounted
C
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Wind Generator – Roof/Structure Mounted
C
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Accessory Uses
Bed and Breakfast
P
P
P
P
P
154.310 (A)
Domestic Pets
P
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (12)
Family Day Care
P
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (12)
Home Occupation
P
P
P
P
P
154.310 (E)
Kennel, Private
C
C
C
-
-
154.012 (B) (12)
XI-3
Table 9-1: Permitted, Conditional, and Interim Uses, Rural Districts
RT
A
RR
RS
RE
Standard
Solar Energy Systems
P
P
P
P
P
154.310 (C)
Stable, Private
C
C
C
-
-
154.012 (B) (12)
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, Etc.
P
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (12)
Temporary Sales
P
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (12)
Water-Oriented Accessory Structures
P
P
P
P
P
154.800
Wind Generator – Ground Mounted
C
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Wind Generator – Roof/Structure Mounted
C
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Other Structures Typically Incidental and Clearly Subordinate to Permitted Uses
P
P
P
P
P
Commercial Wedding Ceremony Venue
I
I
I
154.310 (D)
Open Space Preservation Development
OP Development
-
C
C
-
-
Article 16
Notes to Rural Districts Table 9-1
a. Non-Agricultural Low Impact Use (see 154.404 (G))
Note: Standards listed in Table 9-1 are listed by Article, Section and Subsection.
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013) (Ord. 08-136, passed 6-14-16)
(Ord. 08-107, passed 5-6-2014) (Am. Ord. 08-198, passed 2-7-2018) (Am. Ord. 08-199, passed 2-7-2018) (Am. Ord. 08-197, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 154.402 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS.
Lot area and setback requirements shall be as specified in Table 9-2, Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements.
Table 9-2: Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Rural Districts
RT
A
RR
RS
RE
Minimum Lot Area (acres)
Single Family Detached Dwelling
20
40a,b
10c
1.5d
2.5e,f
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
Single Family Detached Dwelling
300
300
300
125
NAf
Maximum Principal Structure Height (feet)i
35
35
35
35
35
Table 9-2: Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Rural Districts
RT
A
RR
RS
RE
Maximum Impervious Coverage
-
-
-
25%
15%
XI-4
Minimum Principal Building Setbacks (feet) h,i
Front Yard
30
200
30
30
100
Interior Side Yard
10
200
10
10
50
Corner Side Yard g
25
200
25
25
80
Rear Yard
40
200
40
40
100
Minimum Accessory Building Setbacks (feet)h,i
Front Yard
30
200
30
30
100
Interior Side Yard
10
200
10
10
15
Corner Side Yard
25
200
25
25
30
Rear Yard
40
200
40
10
15
Minimum Agricultural Related Setbacks (Animal buildings, feedlots or manure storage sites)
Any Property Line
200
200
200
-
-
Any Existing Well or Residential Structure
50
50
50
-
-
Any Body of Seasonal or Year-round Surface Water
200
200
200
-
-
Notes to Rural Districts Table 9-2
a. 1 dwelling unit per 40 acres applies to all non-farm dwellings. In additional to non-farm dwellings (1 per 40 acres), each farm is allowed one farm dwelling per farm.
b. Nominal 40 acres: a 40-acre parcel not reduced by more than 10% due to road rights-of-way and survey variations.
c. Nominal 10 acres: a 10-acre parcel not reduced by more than 10% and/or a 10-acre parcel located on a corner or abutting a street on 2 sides not reduced by more than 15% due to road rights-of-way and survey variations.
d. The minimum lot size for lots served by public sanitary sewer shall be 24,000 square feet per residential unit.
e. A minimum of 1.25 acres of land above the flood plain or free of any drainage easements is required.
f. Lots must be configured to contain a circle with a diameter of 250 feet minimum; the ratio of lot length to width shall be a maximum of 3:1 – Flag lots are prohibited.
g. Corner properties: The side façade of a corner building adjoining a public street shall maintain the front setback of the adjacent property fronting upon the same public street, or the required front yard setback, whichever is less. If no structure exists on the adjacent property, the setback shall be as shown in the table.
h. Setback standards do not apply to solar farms. 154.915 should be referenced for these specific standards.
XI-5
i. Ground-mounted wind generators may exceed the allowable height restriction designated in all rural districts and are subject to different setback requirements as identified in section 154.308.
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. No. 08-198, passed 2-7-2018; Am. Ord. 08-199, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 154.403 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE.
A. Lot Configuration, RR District. All lots must be rectangular in shape and any 2 adjacent sites must have an aspect ratio not exceeding 4:1.
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 154.404 SITE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development of land within the rural districts shall follow established standards for traffic circulation, landscape design, parking, signs and other considerations as specified in Articles 7,8 and 9. (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016) The following standards apply to specific uses, and are organized by district.
A. Single-Family Detached Dwelling, All Rural Districts. All single-family dwellings shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width, at least nine hundred sixty (960) square feet in area, and be placed on a permanent foundation.
B. Septic Drainfield Regulation, A, RR, and RS Districts. All lots must have at least 20,000 square feet of land suitable for septic drainfields and area sufficient for 2 separate and distinct drainfield sites. Placement of the second required drainfield between the trenches of the first drainfield is prohibited.
C. Septic Drainfield Regulation, RE District. All new subdivided lots shall have a minimum of 20,000 square feet of land to be dedicated for septic system use and suitable for that use. This land may compromise up to 2 separate areas, each of which is contiguous to the 1.25-acre building site or contained within it, and each of which contains at least 10,000 contiguous square feet. Placement of the second required drainfield between the trenches of the first drainfield is prohibited.
D. Secondary Dwelling, A District. One non-farm dwelling per each 40 acres, or part of a dwelling on a prorated basis, not already containing a farm or non-farm dwelling, is permitted provided:
1. The dwelling unit is located on a separate parcel of record in the office of the County Recorder and/or County Auditor, which shall be at least 1-1/2 acres in size;
2. The parcel on which the dwelling unit is located must have at least 125 feet of frontage along a public street, be rectangular in shape and no dimension to be greater than 3 times the other; and
XI-6
3. The dwelling is separated by at least 300 feet from the nearest farm building.
E. Parking Standards, A, RR and RS Districts. 3 space of off-street parking required per dwelling unit.
F. Parking Standards, RE District
1. 2 enclosed spaces minimum (200 square feet minimum per space).
2. 2 exterior spaces within minimum setback of 50 feet from any property line.
G. Non-Agricultural Low Impact Use, A, RT Districts. The City recognizes that allowing non-agricultural low impact uses, strictly controlled and regulated by Interim Use Permit, might allow a farmer or large property owner an economical use of his or her property that is zoned Agricultural. The following standards may apply to these types of uses.
1. All of the property owner’s real estate that is contiguous to the non-agricultural low impact use must be zoned Agricultural and remain so zoned while the conditional use permit is in effect.
2. The area where the non-agricultural low impact use is located shall be legally defined and approved by the city and is hereafter known as the “Non-Ag Area.” The Non-Ag Area shall not exceed 4% of the property owner’s contiguous agricultural zone gross lot area. The building footprints and asphalt and concrete surfaces within the Non-Ag Area shall not exceed 1.5% of the property owner’s contiguous agricultural zone gross lot area. Landscaping, berms, ponds, gravel driveways, and other improvements that would otherwise be permitted in the Agricultural zone may be located outside of the Non-Ag Area.
3. Non-agricultural low impact uses shall only be allowed on a parcel of a nominal 40 acres or larger.
4. Non-agricultural low impact uses shall not generate more than 3 trips per day per acre of contiguous agriculturally zoned area, with the exception of land with sole access to Hudson Boulevard that shall not generate more than 6 trips per day per acre.
5. Any uses under this section involving the outside storage of vehicles, equipment, or goods shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from any public roadway or adjacent landowner’s boundary, except that the setback from the I-94 frontage road shall be not less than 50 feet. In addition, any such outside storage shall be screened from view from adjacent property and the public roadway by berms and landscaping. A plan for such screening shall be submitted with the application for the Interim Use Permit which shall clearly demonstrate by view cross-sections that said screening will be effective immediately, and in all seasons. Degradation of such screening by loss of landscape materials, outdoor storage of items that exceed the screened height or for any other reason shall be grounds for rescinding the outdoor storage portion of the Interim Use Permit.
6. Non-agricultural low impact uses may not generate more than 3.0 SAC units per 3.5 acres or 235 gallons per day per net acre of land based upon design capacity of facilities, whichever is more restrictive.
XI-7
7. The property owner shall maintain the remaining land or farm outside of the IUP Area in accordance with the permitted uses of the Agricultural zoning district and the required practices of the Soil and Water Conservation District.
8. Rate and volume of stormwater runoff must meet the requirements of the City’s Stormwater Ordinance.
9. In the event that the property owner, or future property owner, initiates a Comprehensive Plan amendment and rezoning of any or all of the contiguous real estate from Agriculture to a more intensive use, the Interim Use Permit shall terminate and all non-conforming structures shall be removed from the site within 1 year from the date of the City Council’s adoption of the Comprehensive Plan amendment and rezoning, unless the City agrees otherwise. This section shall not apply if the City initiates rezoning or if property owner is forced to transfer title to any part of the contiguous real estate due to eminent domain.
10. All conditional use permits granted to a non-agricultural low impact shall be reviewed on an annual basis, and may be rescinded, after a 2-week notice and a public hearing, if the Council finds that the public health, safety, or welfare is jeopardized.
11. The standards for buildings or structures, as listed in the minimum district requirements of the Agricultural Zone, shall not apply to structures built prior to the effective date of this chapter.
H. Unserviced Lots, RT, A, RR Districts. All lots that are subdivided without city sewer and public water service shall meet the following standards:
1. Lots, houses and other structures, driveways and any new streets shall be located in compliance with the comprehensive plan and any more detailed area plans for future roads, public water services, and drainage.
2. The Planning Commission may require a sketch plan showing how the entire tract could be divided when city services become available. Lots and buildings shall be sited and streets shall be laid out to facilitate future subdivision.
I. Commercial Kennel, Commercial Stable, or Accessory Kennel or Stable, RT, A, RR Districts. The facility shall occupy a site at least ten (10) acres in size. Outdoor exercise areas shall be located at least 100 feet from adjacent properties; landscaping or other screening may be required.
J. Agricultural Services and Support, RT, A Districts
1. A facility established after the effective date of this ordinance shall have direct access to a collector or higher classification street.
2. An appropriate transition area between the use and adjacent property may be required, to include landscaping, screening and other site improvements consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
3. All processing of animal or dairy products shall take place within an enclosed building.
XI-8
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 154.405 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
Accessory uses are listed in the Rural District Use Table as permitted or conditional accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures in the rural districts shall comply with the following standards and all other applicable regulations of this ordinance:
A. Phasing. No accessory use or structure shall be constructed or established on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal use to which it is accessory.
B. Incidental to Principal Use. The accessory use or structure shall be incidental to and customarily associated with the principal use or structure served.
C. Subordinate to Principal Use. The accessory use or structure shall be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use or structure served.
D. Function. The accessory use or structure shall contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants of the principal use or structure served.
E. Location. The accessory use or structure shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use or structure.
F. Exemption. Fish houses as defined in this code and located in the RS Rural Single Family District are exempt from this requirement provided the following criteria are met: must be located on a lot half acre in size or more with direct access to a water body; is 120 square feet or less; and complies with Shoreland regulations and RS Rural Single Family setback requirements. One fish house per lot may exist without a principal structure. The structure must maintain a current fish house license with the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources regardless if it is left on a water body overnight. If a current Minnesota Department of Natural Resources Fishouse License is not obtained for the structure, the structure must be removed from the property within 60 days.
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. 08-138, passed 6-21-2016)
§ 154.406 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, RURAL DISTRICTS.
A. Size and Number. The maximum number and size of accessory buildings permitted in rural zoning districts are outlined in Table 9-3:
Table 9-3: Accessory Buildings, Rural Zoning Districts
Lot Size
Maximum Structure Sizea (square feet)
No. of Permitted Bldgs
under 1 acre
1,200
1
1 – 1.99 acres
1,500
1
2 – 4.99 acres
1,750
1
5 – 9.99 acres
2,000
2
XI-9
10 – 14.99 acres
2,500
2b
15 – 19.99 acres
3,000
2b
20 – 39.99 acres
4,000
2b
40+ acres
Unregulated c
Unregulated c
Notes to Table 9-3
a. Maximum structure size accounts for the total maximum area allowed for all permitted accessory structures combined.
b. One agricultural building, as defined in §154.213, is allowed in addition to the permitted number and size of accessory structures.
c. Agricultural buildings, as defined in §154.213, are allowed in addition to up to two permitted accessory structures which total 4,000 square feet.
B. Structure Height, Rural Districts. No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal structure, with the exception of agricultural buildings, as defined in §154.213. Building projections or features on accessory structures that are not agricultural buildings as defined in §154.213, such as chimneys, cupolas, and similar decorations are permitted in rural districts.
C. Structure Location, Rural Districts. No detached garages or other accessory buildings shall be located nearer the front lot line than the principal building on that lot.
D. Exterior Design and Color. The exterior building materials, design and color of all accessory building or structures shall be similar to or compatible with the principal building, with the exception of the following accessory building or structures:
1. Detached domesticated farm animal buildings
2. Agricultural buildings
3. Pole buildings, as defined and regulated in §154.214.
4. Gazebos
5. Swimming pools
6. Other structures in which the required design is integral to the intended use, such as a greenhouse.
E. Attached Garages, Size. Attached garages must not exceed the footprint size of the principal building.
(Ord. 08-104, passed 3-18-2014; Am. Ord. 08-138, passed 6-21-2016; Am. Ord. 08-210, passed 5-15-2018) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.407 ACCESSORY USES.
XI-10
A. Exterior Storage in Residential Districts. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:
1. Laundry drying
2. Construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises. Materials kept on the premises for a period exceeding six (6) months shall be screened or stored out of view of the primary street on which the house fronts.
3. Agricultural equipment and materials, if they are used or intended for use on the premises.
4. Off-street parking and storage of vehicles and accessory equipment, as regulated in Article 5, Section 154.102.
5. Storage of firewood shall be kept at least ten (10) feet from any habitable structure and screened from view from adjacent properties.
6. Outdoor parking
B. Temporary Sales. Temporary sales, also known as yard or garage sales, are permitted in all residential districts, limited to two (2) per calendar year per residence, not to exceed four (4) days in length.
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013)
§ 154.408 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES NOT LISTED.
Standards for accessory uses and structures that are permitted in all districts, or in all residential buildings in any district, are listed in Article 9, Specific Development Standards. These include uses such as family and group family day care, bed and breakfast facilities, and home occupations, and structures such as swimming pools and solar equipment.
(Ord. 2012-073, passed 3-19-2013) (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
XII-1
ARTICLE XII. URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 154.450 PURPOSE AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS.
The urban residential districts are established to provide areas for residential development that are served by public sewer and water services in accordance with the city’s Comprehensive Plan. The objectives of these districts are to preserve and enhance the quality of living in residential neighborhoods, to regulate structures and uses which may affect the character or desirability of residential areas, to encourage a variety of dwelling types and locations and a range of population densities consistent with the city’s Comprehensive Plan, and to ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space. The residential districts and their purposes are as follows:
A. GCC Golf Course Community District. The GCC district is intended to permit urban residential developments in conjunction with a golf course and its accessory uses. Development in this district will be enhanced by coordinated site planning; open space and environmental resources; and provision of a safe and efficient system for pedestrian and vehicle traffic. The GCC district is intended to provide areas for densities lower than other Urban Residential Districts, ranging from 1.4 to 1.65 units per acre, with adequate open space buffers to provide a transition between denser, sewered development and rural areas. Residential development within the GCC district will consist of an environment of predominantly single-family dwellings with lots slightly larger on average than those in most Urban Residential Districts.
B. LDR Urban Low Density Residential District. The LDR district provides an environment of predominantly single-family dwellings on moderately sized lots, and is designed to be the most restrictive of the urban residential districts. The LDR district is intended to provide areas for lower density residential development within the city’s planned sewered development areas, and may be used to provide a transition between rural development areas and the city’s urban development and districts. Densities shall range from two 2 to 4 units per acre; however, the overall density for a specific development area must be consistent with the net densities specified in the Comprehensive Plan. The lot size and other district standards allow for the creation of smaller lots with the expectation that common open space will be provided within developments that exceed the base densities (at low end of the land use density range) within the Comprehensive Plan.
C. MDR Urban Medium Density Residential District. The MDR district is established to provide for a diversity of housing types in those areas where such development is consistent with the medium density residential designation of the comprehensive plan and compatible with the development pattern of the surrounding area. Clustering of buildings to permit more orderly development and to preserve open space within new developments is encouraged. Development within the district shall occur at densities in the range of 4 to 7 dwelling units per acre, with two-family dwellings and townhouses permitted. The city will determine the allowed density for a piece of property at the time of the development application, and this determination will be based upon the site-specific characteristics of the property and the requested development. Factors to be considered in increasing or decreasing the allowed density include the existing environmental conditions such as wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, significant trees; the specific site plan; the amount of open space preserved, and the type of housing units
XII-2
proposed, including whether greater density is desirable because the development contains housing that is consistent with the city’s housing goals. The burden of establishing the appropriateness of the high end of the density range will be on the applicant.
D. HDR Urban High Density Residential District. The HDR district is established to provide for an environment of moderate to high-density attached and multi-family housing, designed to present an attractive appearance to neighboring streets and adjacent uses, to include sufficient private and semi-private outdoor space, and to be well integrated into their surroundings. Small office and service businesses of limited size and extent may be allowed as conditional uses. The HDR district is appropriate as a transition between commercial or industrial districts and surrounding neighborhoods, and in already developed higher-density areas. Development within the district may occur at densities in excess of 7 dwelling units per acre, provided the overall densities for within a development area are consistent with the net densities specified in the Comprehensive Plan and that a density analysis is used consistent with the purpose statement for the MDR district.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-167, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 154.451 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Table 10-1 lists all permitted and conditional uses allowed in the urban residential districts. “P” indicates a permitted use, “C” a conditional use. Uses not so indicated shall be considered prohibited. Cross-references listed in the table under “Standards” indicate the location within this chapter of specific development standards that apply to the listed use.
A. Combinations of Uses. Principal and accessory uses may be combined on a single parcel. A principal and secondary dwelling unit may be combined according to the standards of § 154.454 (C). Single-family attached or multi-family complexes designed for rental or condominium occupancy, typically include multiple units and buildings on a single parcel.
Table 10-1: Permitted and Conditional Uses, Residential Districts
GCC
LDR
MDR
HDR
Standard
Residential Uses
Household Living
Single-family detached dwelling
P*
P
P
P
154.174 (B),
(E), *(O)
Two-family dwelling
-
-
P
P
154.174 (F)
Single-family attached dwelling
-
-
P*
P**
154.154 *(G),**(J)
XII-3
GCC
LDR
MDR
HDR
Standards
Multifamily dwelling (rental or condominium)
-
-
C*
P**
154.454 *(H),**(K)
Secondary dwelling
C
C
C
C
154.454 (C)
Live-work unit
-
-
-
C
154.454 (L)
Manufactured home park
-
-
C
-
151.035-151.150
Group Living
Group Home
-
P
P
P
154.301 (C)
Group residential facility
-
-
C
C
154.301 (B)
Halfway House
-
-
-
C
154.301 (B)
Congregate Housing
-
-
C
C
154.301 (C)
Semi-transient accommodations
-
-
C
C
154.301 (D)
Public and Civic Uses
Community services
-
-
-
C
Day care center
-
-
C
C
154.012 (2) (d)
Schools, public and private
-
C
C
C
154.303 (A)
Services
Offices
-
-
C
154.454 (M)
Funeral home
-
-
C
154.454 (I)
Personal services
-
-
C
154.454 (I)
Nursing and personal care
-
-
C
154.303 (C)
Sales of Merchandise
Neighborhood convenience store
-
-
C
154.454 (N)
Wayside stand
P
P
P
154.454 (D)
Outdoor Recreation
Golf course
P
C
-
-
154.306 (A)
Outdoor recreation facility
C
-
-
-
154.306 (C)
Indoor recreation facility
C
-
-
-
154.307, 154.454 (Q)
Parks and open areas
P
P
P
P
XII-4
GCC
LDR
MDR
HDR
Standards
Transportation and Communications
Broadcasting or communication facility
-
C
C
C
Accessory Uses
Home occupation
P
P
P
P
154.310 (E)
Bed and breakfast
P
P
P
P
154.310 (A)
Domestic pets
P
P
P
P
Family day care
P
P
P
P
154.012 (12) (b)
Group family day care
-
C
C
C
154.012 (12) (b)
Temporary sales
P
P
P
P
154.456 (I)
Parking facility
-
-
-
C
Solar equipment
P
P
P
P
154.456 (I)
Swimming pools, hot tubs, and the like
P
P
P
P
154.310 (C)
Water-oriented accessory structures
P
P
P
P
154.800
Restaurant
C
-
-
-
154.454 (P)
Drinking and Entertaining
C
-
-
-
154.454 (P)
Semi-transient accommodations
C
-
-
-
154.454 (R)
Other structures typically incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted uses
P
P
P
P
Note: Standards listed in Table 10-1 are listed by Article, Section and Subsection.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-157, passed 2-7-2017; Am. Ord. 08-197, passed 2-7-2018)
XII-5
§ 154.452 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS.
Lot area and setback requirements shall be as specified in Table 10-2, Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements.
Table 10-2: Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Residential Districts
GCC
LDR
MDR
HDR
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
Single family detached dwelling
9,000
8,000
7,000
5,000
Two-family dwelling (per unit) a
-
-
4,000
3,000
Single-family attached (per unit) b
-
-
4,000
2,500
Multi-family dwelling (per unit)
-
-
4,000
1,800
Secondary dwelling
See 154.454 (C)
Live-work unit
-
-
-
3,600
Congregate housing
-
-
154.301 (C)
Manufactured home park
-
-
151.035-151.150
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
Single family detached dwelling
70
60
50
50
Two-family dwelling (per unit) a
-
35
30
20
Single-family attached (per unit) b
-
-
25
20
Multi-family dwelling (per building)
-
-
75
60
Live-work unit
-
-
-
25
Maximum Height (feet)
35
35
35
50
Maximum Impervious Coverage
30%
40%
50%
75%
Minimum Building Setbacks (feet)
Front yard
25
25 c
25 c
20 c
Interior side yard e
Principal Buildings f,g
10
10
10
10d
Attached Garage or Accessory Structures f,g
5
5
5
10d
Corner side yard g,h
15
15
15
15
Rear yard
20
20
20
20
Notes to Urban Residential Districts Table
XII-6
a. Common open space areas may be used in the determining whether or not the minimum lot areas within a development are met, when provided as part of an overall development plan.
b. Two-family units may be side-by-side with a party wall between them (“twin”) or located on separate floors in a building on a single lot (“duplex”). The per-unit measurements in this table apply to “twin” units, whether on a single lot or separate lots. The standards for single-family detached dwelling shall apply to a “duplex” containing two vertically-separated units on a single lot.
c. In the case of single-family attached dwellings that are not situated on individual lots, minimum lot size shall be applied to each unit as a measure of density; i.e. 1 unit per 2,500 square feet. This standard is also used for multifamily dwellings.
d. Single family dwellings (both attached and detached) and two-family dwellings may use the side yard setbacks within MDR zoning districts.
e. In a block where the majority of the block face has been developed with the same or similar setbacks, the front setback for the remaining lots on that block face shall fall within the range established by the existing setbacks.
f. In situations where a garage or accessory building is set back less than 7 feet from a side property line, the maximum permitted encroachment for anything attached to said building (including eaves, overhangs, steps, chimneys, and other appurtenances as described in Section 154.081) will be two (2) feet.
g. Side yards setbacks shall apply to the ends of attached or two-family dwellings.
h. Corner properties: The side façade of a corner building adjoining a public street shall maintain the front setback of the adjacent property fronting upon the same public street, or the required front yard setback, whichever is less. If no structure exists on the adjacent property, the setback shall be as shown in the table.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-071, passed 3-5-2013; Am. Ord 08-167, passed 2-7-2017)
§ 154.453 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE.
A. Averaging of Lot Area. When lots are clustered within a development to provide common open space, the open space may be used to calculate an average density per lot to determine compliance with the individual lot area requirements.
B. Lot Dimension Reductions. Other reductions in dimensional standards may be considered as part of a planned unit development if these reductions provide for common open space within a development.
XII-7
C. Lots Adjacent to Public Greenway Corridors. On any lot that abuts a public greenway as depicted in the Comprehensive Plan the minimum setback for all structures, including accessory buildings, shall be the required rear yard setback for the district in which said structure is located.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.454 SITE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Development of land within the urban residential districts shall follow established standards for traffic circulation, landscape design, parking, signs and other considerations as specified in Articles 7, 8 and 9. (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016) The following standards apply to specific uses, and are organized by district.
A. Planned Unit Developments, All Urban Residential Districts. A planned unit development may be submitted for consideration within any residential district, subject to the requirements and standards established in Section 154.800, Planned Unit Developments.
1. A residential development that exceeds 15 units per acre in an HDR Zoning District may be allowed as a Planned Unit Development in accordance with the density bonus provisions of Section 154.800, Planned Unit Developments.
B. Single-Family Detached Dwellings, All Urban Residential Districts. All single-family dwellings shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width, at least nine hundred sixty (960) square feet in area, and be placed on a permanent foundation.
C. Secondary Dwelling, All Urban Residential Districts. The purpose of a secondary dwelling is to provide life-cycle housing opportunities for family members or small households of one or two people, while providing more efficient use of large single-family dwellings or large lots.
1. A secondary dwelling unit may be located within a principal structure used as a single-family detached dwelling, above a detached garage, or within a separate detached structure.
2. There shall be no more than one secondary dwelling unit on the zoning lot.
3. At least one dwelling unit on the zoning lot shall be owner-occupied.
4. The minimum lot area shall be 2,500 square feet greater than the minimum lot area required for a single-family detached dwelling in the zoning district.
5. If the secondary unit is included in the principal building, the appearance of the building shall remain that of a single-family dwelling. Any new or additional entrances must face the side or rear of the building.
6. Whether the secondary unit is an addition to an existing structure or a new detached structure, roof pitch, windows, eaves and other architectural features must be the same or visually compatible with those of the principal building. Exterior finish materials and trim must be the same or closely match in type, size and location the materials and trim of the original building.
XII-8
7. A secondary unit within the principal structure shall not contain more than 30% of the principal building’s total floor area or 800 square feet, whichever is less. A detached secondary unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in gross floor area.
8. Impervious limits for the lot within the zoning district in question shall not be exceeded.
D. Wayside Stand, All Urban Residential Districts.
1. No more than one stand per lot shall be permitted.
2. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
E. Single-Family Detached Dwelling, All Urban Residential Districts.
1. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front facade and the street except on a permitted driveway.
2. The primary entrance shall be located on the facade fronting a public street.
F. Two-Family Dwelling, MDR and HDR Districts.
1. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street except on a permitted driveway.
2. Access to the second dwelling unit shall be either through a common hallway with one front entrance, or by means of a separate entrance.
3. New housing types should be introduced in limited quantities to increase diversity and housing choice, not to replace whole blocks of existing housing. Therefore, no more than 1/4 of the lineal frontage of a developed block may be redeveloped as two-family units, and no further two-family or higher density development is permitted once this threshold is reached. Lineal frontage shall be measured around the entire perimeter of the block.
4. Two-family dwellings shall be designed to reflect the general scale and character of surrounding buildings on surrounding blocks, including front yard depth, building width height and roof pitch, primary materials, facade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings.
G. Single-Family Attached Dwelling (Townhouse), MDR District.
1. A maximum of 8 units shall be permitted within a single building. Buildings with more than 8 units may be allowed as a conditional use.
2. Townhouses shall be located on lots in such a way that each individual unit has a minimum of 15 feet of street frontage. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street.
a. Townhouses that do not meet the minimum requirements for frontage along a street or that have frontage along a private street may be allowed as a conditional use.
3. The primary entrance shall be located on the façade fronting a public street unless the townhouses are approved as a Conditional Use under division §154.454 (G) (2)(a) above; an additional entrance may be provided on the rear or side façade.
XII-9
4. New housing types should be introduced in limited quantities to increase diversity and housing choice, not to replace whole blocks of existing housing. Therefore, no more than 1/4 of the lineal frontage of a developed block (measured around the entire block perimeter) may be converted to townhouse units, and no further townhouse, two-family or higher-density development is permitted once this threshold is reached.
5. Townhouse units shall be designed to reflect the general scale and character of existing buildings on surrounding blocks, including front yard depth, height and roof pitch, primary materials, facade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings.
6. Common open space for use by all residents or private open space adjacent to each unit shall be provided. Such open space shall comprise a minimum of 500 square feet per unit.
H. Multi-Family Building, MDR District.
1. A maximum of 8 units shall be permitted within a single building. Buildings with more than 8 units may be allowed as a Conditional Use.
2. The multi-family building shall be designed to reflect the general scale and character of buildings on surrounding blocks, including front yard depth, roof pitch, primary materials, façade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings.
3. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street.
4. New housing types should be introduced in limited quantities to increase diversity and housing choice, not to replace whole blocks of existing housing. Therefore, no more than 1/4 of the lineal frontage of a block (measured around the entire block perimeter) may be developed as multi-family units, and no further multi-family, two-family or townhouse development is permitted on the block once this threshold is reached.
5. Common open space for use by all residents or private open space adjacent to each unit (as a courtyard or balcony) shall be provided. Such open space shall comprise a minimum of 300 square feet per unit.
I. Funeral Home, HDR District. A facility developed after the effective date of this chapter shall have access to an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic that the use will generate. A minimum of two access points shall be provided.
1. Additions or new construction shall be designed to reflect the general scale and character of the existing building and surrounding neighborhood, including front yard depth, roof pitch, primary materials, façade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings.
J. Single-Family Attached Dwelling, HDR District.
1. A maximum of 10 units shall be permitted within a single building. Buildings with more than 10 units may be allowed as a conditional use.
XII-10
2. Townhouse dwellings shall be located on lots in such a way that each individual unit has a minimum of 15 feet of street frontage. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street.
a. Townhouses that do not meet the minimum requirements for frontage along a street or that have frontage along a private street may be allowed as a conditional use.
3. The primary entrance shall be located on the facade fronting a public street unless the townhouses are approved as a conditional use under division (J)(2)(b) of this section; an additional entrance may be provided on the rear or side façade.
4. Common open space for use by all residents or private open space adjacent to each unit shall be provided. Such open space shall comprise a minimum of 300 square feet per unit.
K. Multi-Family Building, HDR District.
1. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street.
2. Common open space for use by all residents or private open space adjacent to each unit (as a courtyard or balcony) shall be provided. Such open space shall comprise a minimum of 200 square feet per unit.
L. Live-Work Unit, HDR District. The purpose of a live-work unit is to provide a transitional use type between a home occupation and a larger commercial enterprise, and to provide neighborhood-oriented commercial services, while maintaining a generally residential character in which the work space is subordinate to the residential use.
1. The work space component shall be located on the first floor or basement of the building.
2. The dwelling unit component shall maintain a separate entrance located on the front or side façade and accessible from the primary abutting public street.
3. The work space component of the unit shall not exceed 30% of the total gross floor area of the unit.
4. A total of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for a live-work unit, located to the rear of the unit or underground/enclosed.
5. The size and nature of the work space shall be limited so that the building type may be governed by residential building codes. An increase in size or intensity beyond the specified limit on floor area would require the building to be classified as a mixed-use building.
6. The business component of the building may include offices, small service establishments, home crafts which are typically considered accessory to a dwelling unit, or limited retailing (by appointment only) associated with fine arts, crafts, or personal services. It may not include a wholesale business, a manufacturing business, a commercial food service requiring a license, a limousine business or auto service or repair for any vehicles other than those registered to residents of the property.
XII-11
7. The business of the live-work unit must be conducted by a person who resides on the same lot. The business shall not employ more than 2 workers on-site at any one time who live outside of the live-work unit.
M. Offices or Personal Services, HDR District. The establishment shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in size, and may be located within a multi-family building or a freestanding building.
1. Additions or new construction shall be designed to reflect the general scale and character of surrounding buildings, including front yard depth, roof pitch, primary materials, facade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings.
2. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front facade and the street.
3. No building shall be constructed and no residential building shall be wholly or partially converted to such a use within a distance of 300 feet from any other retail or service business on the same street within the HDR District.
N. Neighborhood Convenience Store, HDR District.
1. The establishment shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in size, and may be located within a multi-family building or a free-standing building.
2. Additions or new construction shall be designed to reflect the general scale and character of existing buildings on surrounding blocks, including front yard depth, roof pitch, primary materials, facade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings.
3. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front facade and the street.
4. The use shall occupy a corner property. Any freestanding building developed on such a property shall have a minimum setback of 10 feet from each right-of-way line.
5. No building shall be constructed and no residential building shall be wholly or partially converted to such a use within a distance of 500 feet from any other retail or service business on the same street within the HDR District.
O. Development, GCC District.
1. Open Space Required. A minimum of 50% of the gross acreage being developed as Golf Course Community must be designated as either a golf course or as open space.
2. Buffers Required. All residential lots must be a minimum of 100 feet from external residential lots within the City on the periphery of the proposed Golf Course Community. The resulting buffer area shall be part of the required 50% open space. Buffer widths may be reduced as determined by Council in areas where existing mature vegetation and/or changes in topography occurring on the site proposed for development exist or are introduced to provide an effective year-round buffer.
XII-12
3. Connectivity. Trails, walkways, or paths must be provided within the development and make planned connections to planned external trails, walkways or paths within the community. There must also be internal trail connectivity between proposed housing and the golf course or main area of open space being established within the Golf Course community.
P. Restaurant and Drinking and Entertaining, GCC District. Restaurants and drinking and entertaining establishments within the Golf Course Community must adhere to the following standards:
1. Must meet applicable standards set forth by Lake Elmo Design Guidelines and Standards for commercial development.
Q. Indoor Athletic Facility, GCC District.
1. Must be owned and operated by the same entity that owns and operates the golf course or homeowner’s association and must not be a freestanding commercial operation.
R. Semi-Transient Accommodations, GCC District.
1. Must be accessory to a golf course.
2. Must be owned and operated by either the owner(s) of the golf course or homeowners association and must not be a freestanding commercial operation.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-167, passed 2-7-2017) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.455 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS.
Review of Design. For certain development activity as specified in the Lake Elmo Design Guidelines and Standards Manual, design review is required as part of the approval process for a permit or certificate under this Ordinance. All projects subject to design review shall be reviewed for conformance with the Lake Elmo Design Guidelines and Standards Manual and shall follow the review procedures specified in §154.506.A.
(Ord. 08-095, passed 11-19-2013)
§ 154.456 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
Accessory uses are listed in the Urban Residential District Use Table as permitted or conditional accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures in the urban residential districts shall comply with the following standards and all other applicable regulations of this subchapter.
A. Phasing. No accessory use or structure shall be constructed or established on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal use to which it is accessory.
B. Incidental to Principal Use. The accessory use or structure shall be incidental to and customarily associated with the principal use or structure served.
C. Subordinate to Principal Use. The accessory use or structure shall be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use or structure served.
XII-13
D. Function. The accessory use or structure shall contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants of the principal use or structure served.
E. Location. The accessory use or structure shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use or structure.
F. Attached Structures, Urban Residential Districts. An accessory structure shall be considered attached, and an integral part of, the principal structure when it is connected by an enclosed passageway. All attached accessory structures shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. In all residential districts, the design and construction of any garage, carport, or storage building shall be similar to or compatible with the design and construction of the main building. The exterior building materials, roof style, and colors shall be similar to or compatible with the main building or shall be commonly associated with residential construction. Exceptions: Gazebos; swimming pools, tennis and sport courts; and other structures in which the required design is integral to the intended use, such as a greenhouse.
2. The structure shall meet the required yard setbacks for a principal structure, as established for the zoning district in which it is located; and
3. The structure shall not exceed the height of the principal building to which it is attached.
4. Attached Garages, Urban Residential Districts
a. Attached garages are encouraged to be side or rear loaded.
b. For single family detached dwellings, the width of the visible garage door area when closed shall not exceed 60% of the principal building façade (including garage) fronting the primary street.
c. Attached garages shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in area at the ground floor level except by conditional use permit.
d. Garage doors or openings shall not exceed 14 feet in height.
G. Detached Structures, Urban Residential Districts. Detached accessory structures shall be permitted in residential districts in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Detached accessory structures shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building, and are not permitted within the required front yard or within a side yard abutting a street.
2. Detached garages shall not exceed 1,000 square feet at ground floor level and shall not exceed a height of 22 feet or the height of the principal structure. The maximum size and height may be increased upon approval of a conditional use permit, provided that lot coverage requirements are satisfied.
3. Pole barns, as defined herein, exceeding 120 square feet shall be prohibited.
4. No more than 30% of the rear yard area may be covered by accessory structures.
5. Garage doors or openings shall not exceed 14 feet in height.
XII-14
(Ord. 08-104, passed 3-18-2014) (Ord. 08-112, passed 6-3-2014) Penalty, see § 154.999
H. Accessory Uses.
1. Exterior Storage in Residential Districts. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:
a. Laundry drying;
b. Construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises. Materials kept on the premises for a period exceeding 6 months shall be screened or stored out of view of the primary street on which the house fronts;
c. Agricultural equipment and materials, if these are used or intended for use on the premises;
d. Off-street parking and storage of vehicles and accessory equipment, as regulated in § 154.210;
e. Storage of firewood shall be kept at least 10 feet from any habitable structure and screened from view from adjacent properties; and
f. Outdoor parking.
I. Temporary sales. Temporary sales, also known as yard or garage sales, are permitted in all residential districts, limited to 2 per calendar year per residence, not to exceed four 4 days in length.
J. Accessory Uses and Structures Not Listed. Standards for accessory uses and structures that are permitted in all districts, or in all residential buildings in any district, are listed in Article 9, Specific Development Standards. These include uses such as family and group family day care, bed and breakfast facilities, and home occupations, and structures such as swimming pools and solar equipment.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
XIII-7
ARTICLE XIII. VILLAGE MIXED USE DISTRICT
§ 154.500 PURPOSE AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTION
(A) V-LDR Village Low Density Residential. The purpose of the V-LDR zoning district is to provide opportunity for lower density residential development within the Old Village and create a transition and connectivity between the heart of the Old Village and surrounding rural areas. Residential development within areas zoned V-LDR will occur at a density of 1.5-2.49 units per acre.
(B) VMX – Village Mixed Use District. The purpose of the VMX district is to provide an area for compact, mixed use development made mutually compatible through a combination of careful planning and urban design and coordinated public and private investment. This district is intended to continue the traditional mixed use development that has occurred in the Village area by allowing retail, service, office, civic and public uses as well as residential units. The mixture of land uses within the district is essential to establishing the level of vitality and intensity needed to support retail and service uses. Development within areas zoned VMX will occur at a density of 6-10 units per acre. Senior congregate care facilities may exceed this density maximum with a range not to exceed a total of 16 units per acre, provided the facility can satisfy all zoning and applicable conditional use permit review criteria. The placement of building edges and treatment of building, parking, landscaping, and pedestrian spaces is essential to creating the pedestrian friendly environment envisioned for the VMX district. The standards in this chapter are intended to implement and effectuate the principles and relationships established in the Village Master Plan, which will be carried out through specific standards related to site planning, signage, architecture, building materials, and landscaping. Renovation and infill of traditional storefront-type buildings is encouraged, and parking standards may be waived to recognize the availability of on-street and shared parking facilities.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 154.501 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
Table 11-1 lists all permitted and conditional uses allowed in the urban residential districts. “P” indicates a permitted use, “C” a conditional use. Uses not so indicated shall be considered prohibited. Cross-references listed in the table under “Standards” indicate the location within this Ordinance of specific development standards that apply to the listed use.
A. Combinations of uses, Village Districts. The following use types may be combined on a single parcel:
1. Principal and accessory uses may be combined on a single parcel.
2. A principal and secondary dwelling unit may be combined according to the standards of Section 154.454 (C).
B. Combination of uses, VMX District.
XIII-7
1. Single-family attached or multi-family complexes designed for rental or condominium occupancy, since these typically include multiple units and buildings on a single parcel.
2. Other permitted or conditional uses allowed within the district may be combined on a single parcel, provided that a unified and integrated site plan is approved. If one or both of the uses is/are conditional, the entire development must be approved as a conditional use.
3. A mixed-use building that combines permitted or conditionally permitted residential, service, retail and civic uses may be developed meeting the form standards of this Article. Office or studio uses on upper stories are encouraged.
XIII-7
Table 11-1: Permitted and Conditional Uses, Village Districts
V-LDR
VMX
Standard
Residential Uses
Household Living
Single-family detached dwelling
P
C*
154.505 (A) (1), (2), *(4)
Two-family dwelling
-
C*
154.505 (A) (1), *(4)
Single-family attached dwelling
-
C
154.505 (A) (1), (5)
Multifamily dwelling
-
C
154.505 (A) (1), (6)
Secondary dwelling
C
C
154.454 (C) & 154.505 (A) (1), (3)
Live-work unit
-
C
154.505 (B) (6)
Group Living
Group Home
P
P
154.301 (A)
Group Residential Facility
-
C
154.301 (B)
Congregate Housing
-
C
154.301 (C)
Semi-Transient Accommodations
-
C
154.301 (C)
Public and Civic Uses
Community Services
-
P
154.012 (B)
Day Care Center
-
P
154.012 (B)
Public Assembly
-
C
154.012 (B)
Religious Institutions
-
C
154.303 (N)
Schools, Public and Private
-
C
154.303 (A)
Services
Business Services
-
P
154.012 (B)
Business Center
-
P
154.012 (B)
Offices
-
P
154.012 (B)
Communications Services
-
P
154.012 (B)
Education Services
-
P
154.303 (A) 154.012 (B)
Financial Institution
-
P
154.012 (B)
Funeral Home
-
C
154.012 (B)
Lodging
-
C
154.302 (D)
Medical Facility
-
C
154.303 (B)
Membership Organization
-
C
Nursing and Personal Care
-
C
154.303 (C)
Personal Services
-
P
Repair and Maintenance Shop
-
C
154.505 (B) (1)
Trade Shop
-
C
154.505 (B) (2)
Veterinary Services
-
C
154.505 (B) (3)
XIII-7
Food Services
Standard Restaurant
-
P
Restaurant with Drive-through
-
C
154.304 (A)
Drinking and Entertainment
-
P
154.304 (B)
Sales of Merchandise
Retail Trade 1
-
P
Farmer’s Market
-
C
Garden Center
-
C
154.554 (G)
Neighborhood Convenience Store
-
P
Shopping Center
-
C
Wayside Stand
P
P
154.454 (D)
Automotive/Vehicular Uses
Automobile Maintenance Service
-
C
154.505 (B) (5)
Automobile Parts/Supply
-
C
154.505 (B) (5)
Gasoline Station
-
C
154.305 (B)
Parking Facility
-
C
154.505 (B) (7)
Sales and Storage Lots
-
C
154.305 (C)
Outdoor Recreation
Outdoor Recreation Facility
-
C
154.306 (C)
Parks and Open Areas
P
P
Indoor Recreation/Entertainment
Indoor Athletic Facility
-
C
154.307
Indoor Recreation
-
C
154.307
Transportation and Communications
Broadcasting or Communications Facility
-
C
Mixed Uses
Combination of Principal Uses on a single parcel
-
C/P
154.501 (B)
Combination of Principal and Accessory Uses on a single parcel
P
P
154.501 (A)
Accessory Uses
Home Occupation
P
P
154.310 (E)
Bed and Breakfast
P
P
154.310 (A)
Family Day Care
P
P
154.012 (12) (d)
Group Family Day Care
-
C
Temporary Sales
P
P
154.509 (G)
Parking Facility
-
P
154.505 (H) (7)
Solar Equipment
P
P
154.310 (C)
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, Etc.
P
P
Other Structures Typically Incidental and Clearly Subordinate to Permitted Uses
P
P
XIII-7
Note: Standards listed in Table 11-1 are listed by Article, Section and Subsection.
1Retail Trade in the VMX District includes all uses and activities defined as Retail Trade in 154.012 (5) (c) with the exception of building supplies sales and warehouse club sales.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017; Am. Ord. 08-197, passed 2-7-18)
§ 154.502 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS
Lot area and setback requirements shall be as specified in Table 11-2, Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements.
Table 11-2: Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Villages Districts
V-LDR
VMX
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) a
Non-Residential Use
-
None
Single Family Detached Dwelling
9,000
9,000
Two-Family Dwelling (per unit) b
-
3,000
Single-Family Attached (per unit) c
-
2,500
Multi-Family Dwelling (per unit)
-
1,800
Secondary Dwelling
-
See 154.454 (C)
Live-Work Unit
-
3,000
Congregate Housing
-
154.301 (C)
Other Structures
-
3,500
Maximum Lot Area (acres)
Residential Lots
N/A
N/A
Other
N/A
5
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
Single Family Detached Dwelling
70
70
Two-Family Dwelling (per unit) b
-
30
Single-Family Attached (per unit)c
-
25
Multi-Family Dwelling (per building)
-
75
Live-Work Unit
-
25
Maximum Height (feet/stories)
35
35/3 d
Maximum Impervious Coverage
Residential Lots
35%
75%
Other
-
No Limit
XIII-7
Minimum Building Setbacks (feet)
Front Yard
25
Single-Family Detached, Two-Family, and Single-Family Attached:
See LDR standards of 154.452
Multi-Family Dwellings:
154.505 (A) (6) (b)
All Other
Residential Uses:
154.505 (A) (7)
Non-Residential Uses:
154.505 (B) (1)
Interior Side Yard
Principal Building
10
10 e
Attached Garage or Accessory Structure
5
5
Corner Side Yard
15
0 f
Rear Yard
20
10 g
Garages (entrance to right-of-way)
25
25
XIII-7
Notes to Village Districts Table
a. No development may exceed the residential density range as specified in the Comprehensive Plan for the corresponding land use category.
b. Two-family units may be side-by-side with a party wall between them (“twin”) or located on separate floors in a building on a single lot (“duplex”). The per-unit measurements in this table apply to “twin” units, whether on a single lot or separate lots. The standards for single-family detached dwelling shall apply to a “duplex” containing two vertically-separated units on a single lot.
c. In the case of single-family attached dwellings that are not situated on individual lots, minimum lot size shall be applied to each unit as a measure of density; i.e. 1 unit per 2,500 square feet. This standard is also used for multifamily dwellings.
d. Buildings up to 45 feet in height may be permitted as part of a PUD in the VMX District.
e. Side yard setbacks in the VMX District apply only along lot lines abutting residentially zoned parcels or those parcels with residential uses as the sole use.
f. Corner properties: the side yard façade of a corner building adjoining a public street shall maintain the front setback of the adjacent property fronting upon the same public street, or the required front yard setback, whichever is less. If no structure exists on the adjacent property, and provided required setbacks are not otherwise stated herein, the setback shall be shown in the table.
g. Properties zoned V-LDR abutting Stillwater Boulevard North (CSAH 14), Lake Elmo Avenue North (CSAH 17) north of Stillwater Blvd (CSAH 14), and Manning Avenue North (CSAH 15) shall have a minimum structure setback of 50 feet.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 154.503 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND PRESERVATION OF OPEN SPACE
A. Averaging of Lot Area. When lots are clustered within a development to provide common open space, the open space may be used to calculate an average density per lot to determine compliance with the individual lot area requirements.
XIII-7
B. Lot Dimension Reductions. Other reductions in dimensional standards may be considered as part of a Planned Unit Development if these reductions provide for common open space within a development.
C. Village Open Space Overlay District. Development of areas within the Village Open Space Overlay District, as designated by the Comprehensive Plan, is not allowed. Residential lots shall not encroach on the areas designated as open space per this overlay district, unless berming or screening protected by a landscape easement is provided as an alternative approved by Council.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 154.504 GENERAL SITE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS –VILLAGE DISTRICTS
Development of land within the Village Districts shall follow established standards for traffic circulation, landscape design, and other considerations as specified in Article 5, 6 and 7.
A. Circulation. New access points to County State Aid Highway 14 may be refused or restricted to right-in right-out movement if alternatives exist. Internal connections shall be provided between parking areas on adjacent properties wherever feasible.
1. The number and width of curb-cuts shall be minimized. To promote pedestrian circulation, existing continuous curb-cuts shall be reduced to widths necessary for vehicular traffic, and unnecessary or abandoned curb cuts shall be removed as parcels are developed.
B. Fencing and Screening. Fencing and screening walls visible from the public right-of-way shall be constructed of materials compatible with the principle structure.
C. Lighting design. Lighting shall be integrated into the exterior design of new or renovated structures to create a greater sense of activity, security, and interest to the pedestrian, and shall comply with §150.035-150.038 Lighting, Glare Control, and Exterior Lighting Standards.
D. Exterior Storage. Exterior materials storage must be screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties, by a wing of the principal structure or a screen wall constructed of the same materials as the principal structure. Height of the structure or screen wall must be sufficient to completely conceal the stored materials from view at eye level (measured at six feet above ground level) on the adjacent street or property.
XIII-7
E. Screening of Existing Residential Structures. When a new development is proposed adjacent to an existing single family residential structure, screening shall be provided in accordance with §154.258.F. The City may require buffering or screening above and beyond this section in cases where the required screening will not provide an adequate separation between incompatible uses.
F. Sidewalks and/or Trails. Where cul-de-sacs are permitted by the City, sidewalks or trails are required to connect the bulb of the cul-de-sac with the nearest through-road or trail.
G. Lake Elmo Theming Study. Elements of the Lake Elmo Theming Study not herein described must be incorporated in to development within Village Districts where applicable.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 154.505 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
Development of land within the Village Districts shall follow established standards for traffic circulation, landscape design, parking, signs and other considerations as specified in Articles 5, 6 and 7. The following standards apply to specific uses; other standards related to design and building type may be found at §154.506.
A. Residential Units, Village Districts.
1. All Residential Units, Village Districts.
a. Residential housing units shall be designed to reflect the general scale and character of the Village, including front yard depth, height and roof pitch, primary materials, facade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings.
2. Single-Family Detached Dwellings, Village Districts.
a. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street except on a permitted driveway.
b. Primary entrances are required to be along the front façade.
XIII-7
c. Dwelling units shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width, at least nine hundred sixty (960) square feet in area, and be placed on a permanent foundation.
3. Secondary Dwellings, Village District. Restricted to lots occupied by single-family dwellings, and must meet the standards for secondary dwellings in residential districts, §154.13454 (C) and be located within the primary structure.
4. Single-Family Detached and Two-Family Dwellings, VMX District.
a. Unless otherwise specified in this Article, Single and Two-Family Dwellings in the VMX district shall adhere to the MDR LDR district setbacks as specified in §154.452.
5. Single-Family Attached, VMX District.
a. The primary entrance to each unit shall be located on the façade fronting a public street; an additional entrance may be provided on the rear or side façade.
b. Common open space for use by all residents or private open space adjacent to each unit shall be provided. Such open space shall compromise a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet per unit.
c. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street except on a permitted driveway.
d. Unless otherwise specified in this Article, Single-Family Attached dwellings in the VMX district shall adhere to the MDR district setbacks as specified in §154.452.
6. Multi-Family Dwelling Units, VMX District.
a. Dwelling units (both condominium and rental) within a mixed use building are restricted to the upper floors or rear or side ground floors.
b. Setback standards for multi-family dwellings not within a mixed use development shall be determined through the conditional use process.
7. All Other Residential Uses, VMX District. Setbacks for all other residential uses within the Village districts not specifically outlined in this Section shall be determined by either 154.506 or through the conditional use process.
XIII-7
B. Non-Residential Uses, VMX District.
1. Setbacks, Generally. The front yard setback of a new non-residential building within the VMX district shall maintain the prevailing front yard setback of that block, or a maximum setback of 20 feet, whichever is less.
2. Repair and Maintenance Shop. No outdoor storage is permitted unless fully screened from public view.
3. Trade Shop. Exterior materials storage must be totally screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties by a wall of the principal structure or a screen wall constructed of the same materials as the principal structure.
4. Veterinary Services.
a. All activities must be conducted within an enclosed building.
b. Specific veterinary practices shall be limited to veterinary medicine, surgery, dentistry, and related service for small domestic household pets.
5. Garden Center.
a. The storage or display of any materials or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure, and shall be maintained in an orderly manner. Screening along the boundaries of adjacent residential properties may be required, meeting the standards of Section 154.258 (F).
b. All loading and parking shall be provided off-street.
c. The storage of any soil, fertilizer or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses.
6. Automobile Maintenance Service and Automobile Parts/Supply
a. All vehicle repairs shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building
b. The storage or display of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other equipment shall meet all setback requirements of a structure, and shall be totally screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties.
XIII-7
7. Live-Work Unit. The purpose of a live-work unit is to provide a transitional use type between a home occupation and a larger commercial enterprise, and to provide neighborhood-oriented commercial services, while maintaining a generally residential character in which the work space is subordinate to the residential use.
a. The work space component shall be located on the first floor or basement of the building.
b. The dwelling unit component shall maintain a separate entrance located on the front or side façade and accessible from the primary abutting public street.
c. The work space component of the unit shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total gross floor area of the unit.
d. A total of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for a live-work unit, located to the rear of the unit, or underground/enclosed.
e. The size and nature of the work space shall be limited so that the building type may be governed by residential building codes. An increase in size or intensity beyond the specified limit on floor area would require the building to be classified as a mixed-use building.
f. The business component of the building may include offices, small service establishments, home crafts which are typically considered accessory to a dwelling unit, or limited retailing (by appointment only) associated with fine arts, crafts, or personal services. It may not include a wholesale business, a commercial food service requiring a license, a limousine business or auto service or repair for any vehicles other than those registered to residents of the property.
g. The business of the live-work unit must be conducted by a person who resides on the same lot. The business shall not employ more than two (2) workers on-site at any one time who live outside of the live-work unit.
8. Parking Facility. Structured parking is permitted as a ground floor use within a mixed-use building, provided that it the entrance is located on side or rear facades, not facing the primary abutting street. The primary street-facing façade shall be designed for retail, office or residential use.
XIII-7
9. Outdoor Dining Accessory to Food Services. Outdoor dining is allowed as an accessory use in the commercial districts, provided that tables do not block the sidewalk. A minimum of five (5) feet of sidewalk must remain open.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 154.506 VMX DISTRICT DESIGN AND DEMOLITION REVIEW
A. Review of Design. For certain development activity as specified in the Lake Elmo Design Standards Manual, design review is required as part of the approval process for a building permit, conditional use permit, or certificate of zoning compliance under this Ordinance. All projects subject to design review shall be reviewed for conformance with the Lake Elmo Design Standards Manual. A separate process for design review is not established.
1. Review Authority and Process. Design review shall be the responsibility of the individual or body authorizing the permit or certificate and shall be incorporated in the established review of the applicable building permit, conditional use permit, or certificate of zoning compliance. For those applications under this Ordinance that require review by the Planning Commission (i.e. conditional use permits), the Planning Commission shall consider the standards in the Lake Elmo Design Standards Manual as part of its recommendation to the City Council.
2. Review by Professional. The authorizing body may request review by a design professional of the proposed design or demolition. The cost of review by such design professional shall be charged by the applicant, and shall not exceed $1,000 unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant.
3. Development Activity Defined. Development Activity consists of new construction and redevelopment activities, including remodeling that expands the footprint of a structure, altering, or repairing a structure in a manner that will change the exterior appearance of said structure. Development activity also includes the construction of a new parking lots and installation of signage.
a. Exempt Activities. The following activities shall be exempt from under review of this Section:
i. Ordinary repairs and maintenance that will not change the exterior appearance of a structure;
ii. Removal of existing signage without replacement unless said signs are an integral part of the building;
iii. Emergency repairs ordered by the Director of Planning in order to protect public health and safety;
XIII-7
iv. Exterior alteration, addition, or repair of a structure used as a single-family residence, duplex, or two-family residence.
v. Temporary signage, installed in accordance with §154.212 of this Ordnance, or during which time an application for permanent signage is pending under this Ordinance;
vi. Maintenance of existing signage advertising an on-site business;
vii. Alterations only to the interior of a structure.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)
§ 154.507 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
Accessory uses are listed in Table 11-1 as permitted or conditional accessory uses. Accessory uses and structures in the Village Districts shall comply with the following standards and all other applicable regulations of this ordinance:
A. Phasing. No accessory use or structure shall be constructed or established on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal use to which it is accessory.
B. Incidental to Principal Use. The accessory use or structure shall be incidental to and customarily associated with the principal use or structure served.
C. Subordinate to Principal Use. The accessory use or structure shall be subordinate in the area, extent, and purpose to the principal use or structure served.
D. Function. The accessory use or structure shall contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of the occupants of the principal use or structure served.
E. Location. The accessory use or structure shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal use or structure.
F. Residential Accessory Structures
1. Design Compatibility. On parcels used for residential structures within the Village Districts, the design and construction of any garage, carport, or storage building shall
XIII-7
be similar to or compatible with the design and construction of the main building. The exterior building materials, roof style, and colors shall be similar to or compatible with the main building or shall be commonly associated with residential construction.
2. Attached structures. An accessory structure shall be considered attached, and an integral part of, the principal structure when it is connected by an enclosed passageway. All attached accessory structures shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. The structure shall meet the required yard setbacks for a principal structure, as established for the zoning district in which it is located.
b. The structure shall not exceed the height of the principal building to which it is attached.
3. Attached Garages.
a. Attached garages are encouraged to be side or rear loaded. If facing the primary street, garages shall be designed using one of the following techniques, unless specific physical conditions on the lot in question require a different approach:
i. The front façade of the garage shall be offset from the principal structure by a minimum of two (2) feet from the plane of the public right-of-way.
ii. The width of the attached garage shall not exceed 40% of the width of the entire principal building façade (including garage) fronting the primary street within the VMX District and 60% of the width of entire principal building façade (including garage) fronting the primary street within the V-LDR District.
b. Attached garages shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet in area at the ground floor level except by conditional use permit.
c. Garage doors or openings shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height.
4. Detached structures. Detached accessory structures for permitted residential structures in the Village Districts must be in accordance with the following requirements:
XIII-7
a. Detached accessory structures shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building, and are not permitted within the required front yard or within a side yard abutting a street.
b. Detached garages shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet at ground floor level and shall not exceed a height of twenty-two (22) feet or the height of the principal structure, whichever is higher. The maximum size and height may be increased upon approval of a conditional use permit, provided that lot coverage requirements are satisfied.
c. Pole barns, as defined herein, shall be prohibited.
d. No more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard area may be covered by accessory structures.
e. Garage doors or openings shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height.
G. Exterior Storage on Residential Parcels. All materials and equipment shall be stored within a building or be fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:
a. Laundry drying,
b. Construction and landscaping materials and equipment currently being used on the premises. Materials kept on the premises for a period exceeding six (6) months shall be screened or stored out of view of the primary street on which the house fronts.
c. Agricultural equipment and materials, if these are used or intended for use on the premises.
d. Off-street parking and storage of vehicles and accessory equipment, as regulated in Article 5, Section 154.210.
e. Storage of firewood shall be kept at least ten (10) feet from any habitable structure and screened from view of adjacent properties.
f. Outdoor parking.
H. Temporary Sales. Temporary sales, also known as yard or garage sales, are permitted in all residential districts, limited to two (2) per calendar year per residence, not to exceed four (4) days in length for each event.
I. Accessory Uses and Structures Not Listed
Standards for accessory uses and structures that are permitted in all districts, or in all residential buildings in any district, are listed in Article 7, Specific Development Standards. These include uses such as family and group family day care, bed and
XIII-7
breakfast facilities, and home occupations, and structures such as swimming pools and solar equipment.
(Ord. 08-091, passed 11-13-2013; Ord. 08-175, passed 5-16-2017)
XIII-7
ARTICLE XIV. ARTICLE XIV. MIXED USE COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE BUSINESS PARK DISTRICTS
§ 154.508 PURPOSE AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS.
A. MU-C Mixed Use Commercial. The purpose of the mixed use commercial district is to provide areas in the city for and promote mixed use development that supports a sustainable mix of retail, commercial and residential uses that will benefit from proximity and adjacency to one another. The mixed use commercial district will serve as a transitional district between more intense highway-oriented development and less intense rural or medium density residential uses. The intent of the mixed use commercial district is to permit flexibility in the use of the land, while providing a set of minimum development standards in site design, spatial relationships, building architecture and landscape design that will allow property owners to design and construct development projects that respond both to market needs and to City goals and policies. The placement and treatment of buildings, parking, signage, landscaping and pedestrian spaces are essential elements in creating a livable environment in a mixed-use area. The transitional aspect of development in this district requires projects that are designed with a special focus on mitigating any negative impacts on existing and future development in the area. The City will evaluate new development proposals for their consistency with this goal and the City may require developers to amend or change development proposals. The City may deny proposals when the City finds them to be inconsistent with the goals and policies of the City.
The district promotes attractive, inviting, high-quality retail shopping and service areas that are conveniently and safely accessible by multiple travel modes. Development shall incorporate creative design and buffering techniques to ensure smooth transitions between different types of development or different intensities of uses. At least 50 percent of the net developable area of a proposed mixed use commercial development is to be residential, and residential development within these areas shall occur at a density range of 10-15 units per acre. If a proposed development does not include at least 50 percent of the net developable land area in residential development, the City will require the applicant to provide a ‘ghost’ plat (build-out plans) during sketch plan review that proposes how the parcel or area adjacent to the proposed development will be used in order to meet the requirement for at least 50 percent of the project site with residential land use(s). This method of subdivision (by showing future land use and subdivision) and development review is a front-loading process that preserves land for future residential use. The city will use the ghost plat or sketch plan as an official document to establish land use consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
B. MU-BP Mixed Use Business Park. The purpose of the mixed use business park district is to provide areas in the city that will have a mix of general business, Business Park and residential uses. Having a mixture of land uses within the district allows for better integration of uses and more flexibility to respond to market demands. The district promotes high standards of site
XIII-7
design, spatial relationships, building architecture and landscape design that will foster compact developments with pedestrian convenience and human scale and will preserve and strengthen existing businesses and land uses. The placement and treatment of buildings, parking, signage, landscaping and pedestrian spaces are essential elements in creating a livable environment in a mixed-use area. The City will evaluate new development proposals for their consistency with this goal and the City may require developers to amend or change development proposals. The City may deny proposals when the City finds them to be inconsistent with the goals and policies of the City.
The City allows light industrial and limited manufacturing in this district with the city approval of a conditional use permit. All business activities and storage in this district are to be conducted inside buildings that are of high quality and attractive. The city will require developers and builders in the district to provide open space, quality landscaping and berming as part of their projects. Development in this district shall incorporate creative design and buffering techniques to ensure smooth transitions between different types of development or different intensities of uses. At least 50 percent of the net developable area of a proposed mixed use business park development is to be residential, and residential development within these areas shall occur at a density range of 6-10 units per acre. If a proposed development does not include at least 50 percent of the net developable land area in residential development, the City will require the applicant to provide a ‘ghost’ plat (build-out plans) during sketch plan review that proposes how the parcel or area adjacent to the proposed development will be used in order to meet the requirement for at least 50 percent of the project site with residential land use(s). This method of subdivision (by showing future land use and subdivision) and development review is a front-loading process that preserves land for future residential use. The City will use the ghost plat or sketch plan as an official document to establish land use consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 154.509 MIXED USE COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE BUSINESS PARK REVIEW PROCEDURE
All development within the Mixed Use Commercial and Mixed Use Business Park zoning districts shall follow the review and approval process outlined in this section. No development in the MU-C or MU-BP will be permitted prior to the completion of all stages of review, nor with the submission of all required documents, including any additional documents that may be required by the City in the review of the proposed MU-C or MU-BP development.
A. Submittal Requirements. In general, the submittal requirements outlined in the City’s Subdivision Regulations shall apply in addition to the application requirements outlined below. If the development is proposed to be a Planned Unit Development, the application requirements outlined in the City’s Planned Unit Development process also shall apply. These submittal requirements shall be submitted to the City for the Sketch Plan and Preliminary Stages of any development. If the property has already been platted, the development shall still be subject to the following submittal requirements, and the
XIII-7
development shall be subject to Mixed Use Development Review. The application requirements for a Mixed Use Development Review shall be the same as those required in City Code Section 154.101 (Applications Review Process) regardless if the proposed use(s) is (are) permitted.
The following outlines the minimum application requirements applicable for a proposed development within the MU-C and MU-BP districts:
1. A narrative description of the mixed use project, including how the project fulfills the purposes of the MU-C or MU-BP district.
2. Identification of minimum required land area to be devoted for residential uses and the land area proposed for commercial, industrial or other land uses based on Zoning Ordinance and Comprehensive Plan documents governing land use on the subject property or properties.
3. Clear demonstration and documentation that the project or development can achieve the required residential densities.
4. For all business and/or commercial areas, a sketch plan illustrating the proposed layout of commercial buildings and related improvements; alternatively, where business or commercial areas not proposed to be developed immediately, the applicant may submit an estimate of the commercial development capacity of the property in square feet of commercial building space.
5. A statement identifying the minimum and maximum development capacity, by land use category, for future phases of the project.
6. If a proposed development does not include at least 50 percent of the developable land area in residential development, the applicant will be required to provide a ‘ghost’ plat (build-out plans) during sketch plan review that proposes how the parcel or area adjacent to the proposed development will be used in order to meet the 50% residential/50% commercial requirement. If an adjacent parcel is included in this ‘ghost’ plat, the adjacent property owner must sign off on the application or the City will determine that the request does not meet the minimum residential requirements of this code and will deny the development application or proposal.
B. Mixed Use Commercial and Mixed Use Business Park Review and Approval Procedures. The review procedures outlined in the City’s Subdivision Regulations shall apply as applicable, in addition to the review procedures outlined below. If the development is proposed to be a Planned Unit Development, the review procedures outlined in the City’s Planned Unit Development process shall also apply. If the property has already been platted, the development shall be subject to Mixed Use Development Review. The City review and approval process for a Mixed Use Development Review of a previously platted property shall be the same as outlined in Section 154.106 of this Code regardless if the proposed use(s) is (are) permitted. Expansion of existing permitted uses on the same parcel on which they exist will not require a Mixed Use Development Review.
1. ‘Ghost’ Plat as an Official Document.
If a ‘ghost’ plat submitted with the Mixed Use Development Review because the proposed development could not meet the required mix of having at least 50 percent
XIII-7
of the site in residential land uses the City will use the ‘ghost” as an official document to establish a land use mix consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The ghost plat or build-out plan shall show a realistic future urban-style lot and block layout and street system, taking into consideration existing streets and access points, utilities, topography, natural features (water bodies, wetlands, etc.) and shall show how the proposed development will not isolate the adjacent land or property making them undevelopable.
2. Rules and Regulations.
The City shall review and process mixed use development requests consistent with all City and State requirements. No requirement outlined in the Mixed Use Development Review process shall restrict the City Council from taking action on an application if necessary to meet state mandated time deadlines.
3. Preconstruction.
No building permit shall be granted for any structure within the MU-C or MU-BP districts without approval from the City of the Mixed Use Development Review unless the proposed building is part of an existing development.
4. Effect on Conveyed Property
In the event that any real property in an approved Mixed Use Development Review is conveyed in total, or in part, the new owners thereof shall be bound by the provisions of the Mixed Use Development Review and approvals.
5. Tracking of Required 50% Residential/50% Commercial Requirement.
The City shall create a database to track the residential units, the associated residential density (in units per acre) and the acreages of residential and other land uses associated with each development approved by the City with and by the Mixed Use Development Review process.
6. Changes or Modifications.
Requests for changes or modifications of an approved mixed use development shall be made in writing to the city and shall be submitted to the Planning Director. The determination of whether a proposed modification is minor or major shall be made at the discretion of the Planning Director.
§ 154.510 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL AND INTERIM USES
Table 14-1 lists all permitted and conditional uses allowed in the commercial areas of the MU-C and MU-BP zoning districts. “P” indicates a permitted use, “C” a conditional use and “I” an interim use. Uses not so indicated are prohibited. Cross-references listed in the table under “Standards” indicate the location within this chapter of specific development standards that apply to the listed use.
A. Combinations of Uses. The following use types may be combined on a single parcel.
1. Principal and accessory uses.
2. Single-family attached or multi-family complexes designed for rental or condominium occupancy, since these typically include multiple units and buildings on a single parcel.
XIII-7
3. Other permitted or conditional uses allowed within the district may be combined on a single parcel, provided the city approves a unified and integrated site plan. The City must approve the entire development as a conditional use.
4. A mixed-use building that combines permitted or conditionally permitted residential, service, retail and civic uses may be developed meeting the form standards of this subchapter. Office or studio uses on upper stories of such buildings are encouraged.
5. Compatible Uses: In the event of any question as to the appropriate use type or compatibility of any proposed land use or activity in a mixed use development, the Planning Director shall have the authority to determine if the City should consider the use or activity as permitted, conditional or prohibited from a location in a mixed use zoning district. In making such a determination, the Planning Director shall consider the operational and physical characteristics of the proposed use or activity in question. In addition, the Planning Director shall consider the specific requirements of the use in common with those included as permitted or conditional uses in the zoning district. Where a question or conflict arises as to the appropriateness or compatibility of a proposed use or activity, the Planning Director shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation about the matter to the City Council, who shall make the final determination as to whether the city will allow (or not allow) a proposed use; is compatible as a permitted use or as a conditional use; is compatible as an accessory use; or is a use that may be added to a specific mixed use development within the zoning district.
Table 14-1: Permitted, Conditional and Interim Uses, Mixed Use Commercial and Mixed Use Business Park Districts
MU-C
MU-BP
Standard
Residential Uses
Household Living
Single-family detached dwelling
P
P
154.513 (A)
Single-family attached dwelling
P
P
154.513 (B)
Multifamily residential dwelling
P
P
154.513 (C)
Secondary dwelling
C
C
154.513 (D)
Live-work unit
C
C
154.513 (E)
Group Living
Group Home
P
P
154.301 (A)
Group Residential Facility
C
C
154.301 (B)
Congregate Housing
C
C
154.301 (C)
Semi-transient accommodations
C
C
154.301 (D)
XIII-7
Public and Civic Uses
Community Services
C
C
154.513 (F)
Day Care Center
C
C
154.012 (B)
Public Assembly
C
C
154.513 (F)
Services
Business Center
P
P
154.012 (B)
Business Services
P
P
154.012 (B)
Offices
P
P
154.012 (B)
Communication Services
P
P
154.012 (B)
Educational Services
P
P
154.303 (A); 154.513 (G)
Financial Institution
P
P
154.012 (B)
Funeral Home
C
-
154.513 (H)
Lodging (Transient Accommodations)
C
C
154.302 (D)
Medical Facility
C
C
154.303 (B); 154.513 (I)
Nursing and Personal Care
C
C
154.303 (C)
Personal Services
P
P
154.012 (B)
Repair and Maintenance Shop
P
P
154.513 (J)
Transportation Services
C
C
154.012 (B)
Veterinary Services
C
C
154.513 (L)
Food Services
Standard Restaurant
P
P
Restaurant with Drive-Through
C
C*
154.304 (A); 154.513 (M); *154.513 (N)
Drinking and Entertainment
C
C
154.304 (B)
Sales of Merchandise
Garden Center
P
-
154.513 (P)
Neighborhood Convenience Store
P
-
154.012 (B)(5)
Retail Trade
C
C*
*154.012(B) (5)
Shopping Center
C
-
154.012 (B)(5)
Wholesaling
C
C
Automotive/Vehicular Uses
Motor Vehicle (Automobile) Parts/Supply
C
-
154.505 (B) (5)
Vehicle (Car) Wash
C
-
Motor Fuel (Gasoline) Station
C
-
154.505 (B)
Parking Facility
C
C
154.505 (B) (7)
Outdoor Recreation
Outdoor Recreation Facility
C
-
154.306 (C)
Parks and Open Areas
P
P
154.012
Indoor Recreation/Entertainment
Indoor Athletic Facility
C
C
154.307
Indoor Recreation
C
C
154.307
Industrial and Manufacturing Uses
Light Industrial/limited manufacturing
C
154.012
XIII-7
Non-Production Industrial
C
(See Note X on page 17).
Research and Testing
C
C
154.012
Transportation and Communications
Broadcasting or Communications Facility
C
C
Accessory Uses
Home Occupation
P
P
154.012 (B) (13) and 154.310 (E)
Bed and Breakfast
P
P
154.310 (A)
Family Day Care
P
P
154.012 (12) (d)
Group Family Day Care
P
P
Temporary Sales
P
P
154.509 (G)
Parking Facility
P
P
Outdoor Storage
C
-
Outdoor Display
C
-
Solar Energy System
P
P
154.310 (C)
Wind Generator – Ground Mounted
C
C
154.308 (B)
Wind Generator – Roof/Structure Mounted
C
C
154.308 (B)
Swimming Pools, Hot Tubs, Etc.
P
P
Other Structure Typically Incidental and Clearly Subordinate to Permitted Uses
P
P
§ 154.511 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS.
Lot area and setback requirements shall be as specified in Table 14-2: Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Mixed Use-Commercial and Mixed Use-Business Park Districts.
Table 14-2: Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Mixed Use-Commercial and Mixed Use-Business Park Districts.
MU-C
MU-BP
Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)a,c
Single-family detached dwelling
4,000
5,000
Two-family dwelling (per unit)
3,000
4,000
Single-family attached dwelling (per unit)b
3,000
4,000
Multifamily dwelling (per unit)
1,500
2,200
Secondary dwelling
See Section 154.454 (C)
Live-work unit
3,000
3,000
Non-residential uses
20,000
85,000
XIII-7
Minimum Lot Width (feet)
Single-family detached dwelling
50
50
Two-family dwelling (per unit)
20
20
Single-family attached dwelling (per unit)b
20
20
Multifamily dwelling (per building)
60
60
Live-work unit
25
25
Non-residential uses
100
200
Maximum Height (feet)i
50
50
Maximum impervious coverage (non-shoreland areas)
75%
75%
Building setback requirements (feet)
Residential uses
Front yard d
20
20
Interior side yard f
Principal Buildings
7
7
Attached Garage or Accessory Structures e,f
5
5
Corner side yard g
10
10
Rear yard
20
20
Non-residential uses
Front yard d
30
50
Interior side yard j
10
30
Corner side yard g
25
30
Rear yard
30
30
From Residential zones
50
150
Parking setback requirements (feet)
XIII-7
Front yard
15
30
Interior side yard
10
15
Corner side yard
15
30
Rear yard
10
15
From Residential zones
35
50
Notes to Mixed Use Commercial and Mixed Use Business Park Districts Table
a. Common open space areas may be used in determining whether or not the minimum lot areas within a development are met, when provided as part of an overall development plan.
b. Two-family units may be side-by-side with a party wall between them (“twin”) or located on separate floors in a building on a single lot (“duplex”). The per-unit measurements in this table apply to “twin” units, whether on a single lot or separate lots. The standards for single-family detached dwelling shall apply to a “duplex” containing two vertically-separated units on a single lot.
c. In the case of single-family attached dwellings that are not situated on individual lots, minimum lot size shall be applied to each unit as a measure of density; i.e. 1 unit per 2,500 square feet. This standard also is used for multifamily dwellings.
d. In a block where the majority of the block face has been developed with the same or similar setbacks, the front setback for the remaining lots on that block face shall fall within the range established by the existing setbacks.
e. In situations where a garage or accessory building is set back less than 7 feet from a side property line, the maximum permitted encroachment for anything attached to said building (including eaves, overhangs, steps, chimneys, and other appurtenances as described in Section 154.081) will be two (2) feet.
f. Side yard setbacks shall apply to the ends of attached or two-family dwellings.
g. Corner properties: The side façade of a corner building adjoining a public street shall maintain the front setback of the adjacent property fronting upon the same public street, or the required front yard setback, whichever is less. If no structure exists on the adjacent property, the setback shall be as shown in the table.
h. Attached garages and accessory structures on parcels on which single family homes are located may have a side yard setback of 5 feet.
i. Buildings higher than 50 feet may be allowed through a Conditional Use Permit and would be subject to a separate technical and planning evaluation.
XIII-7
j. All accessory buildings for non-residential uses must be set back at least 10 feet from property lines.
Ground mounted wind generators may exceed the allowable height restriction designated in all commercial districts and are subject to different setback requirements as identified in section 154.308 (B).
§ 154.512 GENERAL SITE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS – MIXED USE COMMERCIAL AND MIXED USE BUSINESS PARK
Development of land within the Mixed Use Commercial and Mixed Use Business Park shall meet the following general standards, in addition to those standards set forth in the City’s Design Guidelines and Standards Manual and the Development Standards for Specific Uses (listed below).
a. Design and Layout. The design and layout of a mixed use development shall take into account the relationship of the site to the surrounding area. The perimeter of a mixed use site shall be designed and constructed to minimize undesirable impacts of the mixed use site on adjacent or nearby properties.
b. Location of Residential and Commercial Development, Generally. Residential development within the mixed use development shall be located adjacent to existing residential development in order to provide a transition to commercial development unless sufficient buffering and screening, as determined by the City, is provided.
c. Commercial and Business Park Development, Generally. Developers and applicants shall design additions and all new construction to reflect the general scale and character of existing buildings on surrounding blocks, including front yard depth, roof pitch, primary materials, facade detailing and size and placement of window and door openings. All commercial/business/industrial buildings and sites are expected to meet or exceed the Lake Elmo Design Guidelines and Standards.
d. Mitigation. Where the industrial or commercial nature of adjacent uses would be incompatible with residential development due to noise, vibration, odor, light, glare or other disturbance, reasonable effort shall be taken to minimize such impacts. Mitigation may include, but is not limited to, increased setbacks, the planting of substantial landscaping for buffering and/or the construction of a wall, fence or earth berm between properties.
e. Circulation. New access points to a County State Aid Highway may be refused or restricted to right-in right-out movement if alternatives exist. Internal connections shall be provided between parking areas on adjacent properties wherever feasible. In addition, the number and width of curb-cuts shall be minimized. To promote pedestrian circulation, existing continuous curb-cuts shall be reduced to widths necessary for vehicular traffic, and unnecessary or abandoned curb cuts shall be removed as parcels are developed.
XIII-7
f. Fencing and Screening. Fencing and screening walls visible from the public right-of-way shall be constructed of materials compatible with the principle structure(s).
g. Lighting design. Lighting shall be integrated into the exterior design of new or renovated structures to create a greater sense of activity, security and interest to the pedestrian, and shall comply with §150.035-150.038 Lighting, Glare Control, and Exterior Lighting Standards.
h. Exterior Storage. Exterior materials storage must be screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties, by a wing of the principal structure or by a screen wall constructed of the same materials as the principal structure. The City may approve other materials for the required screening if the City determines the proposed design and materials of the screening would be of a similar design and character of the principle structure. The height of the structure or screen wall must be sufficient to completely conceal the exterior stored materials from view at eye level (measured at six feet above ground level) on the adjacent street.
i. Screening of Existing Residential Structures. When a new development is proposed adjacent to existing single family residential homes, the developer shall provide screening in accordance with §154.258.F. The City may require buffering or screening above and beyond this section in cases where the City determines the required screening will not provide an adequate separation between incompatible uses.
§ 154.513 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
A. Single-Family Detached Dwellings.
1. All single-family dwellings shall be at least twenty-four (24) feet in width, at least nine hundred sixty (960) square feet in area, and be placed on a permanent foundation.
2. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street except on a permitted driveway.
3. The primary entrance shall be located on the façade that fronts a public street.
B. Single-Family Attached Dwellings
1. A maximum of 10 units shall be allowed within a single building. Buildings with more than 10 units may be allowed as a conditional use.
2. Townhouse dwellings shall be located on lots in such a way that each individual unit has a minimum of 15 feet of street frontage. No parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street except on a permitted driveway. Townhouses that do not meet the minimum requirements for frontage along the street or that have frontage along a private street may be allowed as a conditional use.
C. Multi-Family Dwellings
1. No vehicle parking shall be located in the front yard or between the front façade and the street.
XIII-7
2. Common open space for use by all residents or private open space adjacent to each unit (such as a courtyard or balcony or a combination of these) shall be provided. Such open space shall comprise a minimum of 300 square feet per unit.
D. Secondary Dwellings.
1. A secondary dwelling unit may be located within a principal structure used as a single-family detached dwelling, above a detached garage, or within a separate detached structure.
2. There shall be no more than one secondary dwelling unit on any one lot or parcel.
3. At least one dwelling unit on each lot or parcel shall be owner-occupied.
4. The minimum lot area shall be 2,500 square feet greater than the minimum lot area required for a single-family detached dwelling in the zoning district.
5. If the secondary unit is included in the principal building, the appearance of the building shall remain that of a single-family dwelling. Any new or additional entrances must face the side or rear of the building.
6. Whether the secondary unit is an addition to an existing structure or a new detached structure, roof pitch, windows, eaves and other architectural features must be the same or visually compatible with those of the principal building. Exterior finish materials and trim must be the same or closely match in type, size and location the materials and trim of the principal building.
7. A secondary unit within the principal structure shall not contain more than 30% of the principal building’s total floor area or 800 square feet, whichever is less. A detached secondary unit shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in gross floor area.
E. Live-Work Unit
1. The work space component of the unit shall be located on the first floor or basement of the building.
2. The dwelling unit component shall maintain a separate entrance located on the front or side façade and accessible from the primary abutting public street.
3. The work space component of the unit shall not exceed 30% of the total gross floor area of the unit.
4. A total of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for a live-work unit, located to the rear of the unit or underground or in an enclosed space.
5. The size and nature of the work space shall be limited so that the building type may be governed by residential building codes. An increase in size or intensity beyond the specified limit on floor area would require the building to be classified as a mixed-use building.
6. The business component of the building may include offices, small service establishments, home crafts, etc., that are typically considered accessory to a dwelling unit, or limited retailing (by appointment only) associated with fine arts, crafts, or personal services. It may not include a wholesale business, a manufacturing business, a commercial food service requiring a license, a limousine business, small engine or power equipment repair or service or a motor vehicle service or repair facility for any motor vehicles other than those registered to residents of the property.
XIII-7
7. The business of the live-work unit must be conducted by a person who resides on the same lot. The business shall not employ more than 2 workers on-site at any one time who live outside of the live-work unit.
F. Public Assembly and Community Services.
1. No exterior bells or loudspeakers are allowed.
2. The structure containing the use shall be no less than 100 feet from residential properties.
3. Outdoor recreation areas shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from residential properties with adequate screening.
4. The building’s meeting space seating capacity shall not exceed 500 persons.
G. Educational Services.
1. The structure containing the use shall be no less than 100 feet from residential properties.
2. Outdoor recreation areas shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from residential properties with adequate screening.
3. The number of persons on-site at any given time shall not exceed 700, with the exception of larger events occurring no more than four times per year.
H. Funeral Home
1. The site shall have access to an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic that the use will generate. The site shall have a minimum of two driveways or vehicle access points. Crematoriums are not allowed.
I. Medical Facilities.
1. Medical facility structure(s), primary vehicular access points, and landing pads for helicopters involved in emergency transport or rescue operations shall not be located within 1,500 feet of a residential property
J. Repair and Maintenance Shop. No outdoor storage is permitted. All business activities (including repairs and maintenance) shall be conducted completely indoors.
K. (Reserved.)
L. Veterinary Services. All activities and services must be conducted within an enclosed building. Crematoriums are not allowed.
M. Restaurant with Drive-Through.
1. All parts of the drive-through lane(s) shall be no less than 200 feet from residential properties.
N. Standard Restaurant and Restaurant with Drive-Through, MU-BP District. Must be incorporated as part of a larger business center or lodging use.
O. Retail Trade, MU-BP District. Limited to uses clearly incidental and accessory to a permitted or conditionally permitted principal use of the land.
XIII-7
1. The compounding, dispensing or sale of drugs, prescription items, patient or proprietary medicine, sick room supplies, prosthetic devices or items relating to any of the permitted or conditionally permitted uses is only allowed when conducted in the building occupied primarily by medical facilities or offices.
P. Garden Center
1. The storage or display of any materials or products shall meet all primary building setback requirements of a structure, and shall be maintained in an orderly manner. Screening along the boundaries of adjacent residential properties may be required, meeting the standards of 154.554 (G).
2. All loading and vehicle parking associated with the business shall be provided off-street.
3. The storage of any soil, fertilizer, landscape rock, mulch or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any negative effects on adjacent uses.
Q. Motor Vehicle Parts/Supply
1. The structure containing the parts supply shall be no less than 200 feet from residential properties or land uses.
2. The storage or display of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other equipment shall meet all setback requirements of a primary structure, and shall be totally screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties.
3. No test driving of vehicles shall be permitted on local residential streets.
4. The City does not allow the sales, exterior storage, or display of motor vehicles in the mixed use zoning districts.
R. Motor Vehicle Washes.
1. The structure containing the vehicle wash shall be no less than 200 feet from residential properties.
2. The city may require additional screening to limit sight and noise impacts of service or wash bays.
3. The owner or operator shall submit equipment specifications to the City. The City may require the owner or operator of the vehicle wash to implement noise reduction measures to minimize potential negative impacts to nearby residential properties.
4. The developer and owner shall make adequate provisions for vehicle circulation and stacking on site. Stacking requirements shall be based on the specifications of the vehicle wash and the amount of time required to wash each vehicle.
S. Motor Vehicle Fuel Stations.
1. Fuel pumps, canopies and structures shall be no less than 200 feet from residential uses.
2. The City may require additional screening to limit the impact of headlights and noise on adjacent property.
T. Parking Facility.
1. Within a Mixed Use Building.
a. Structured parking is allowed only as a ground floor use within a mixed-use building, provided that it is located on side or rear facades, not facing the primary abutting street.
XIII-7
b. The primary street-facing facade shall be designed for retail, office or residential use.
2. In General, as an Accessory Use.
a. The parking structure shall not exceed the height of the principal structure on the parcel.
b. The parking structure meet the exterior building material requirements of the district and shall be consistent with the architectural design of the principal structure.
U. Sales and Storage Lots.
1. All inventory shall be stored and displayed inside of a building or within an approved outdoor storage area that shall meet the standards required herein.
2. The outdoor storage of vehicles is prohibited.
V. Outdoor Recreation Facility
1. The City may require performance standards or conditions to minimize the impact of noise and lighting and to minimize the likelihood of the recreational activity spilling over onto adjacent property or right-of-ways. The conditions may include, but are not limited to: limiting hours of use, restricting the location of outdoor courts or rinks, and requiring the installation of fencing and/or screening.
2. Sport courts or ice rinks shall not be located in the front yard or in a side yard adjacent to a right-of-way of a residential property, and shall abide by structure setback requirements.
W. Indoor Recreation and Indoor Athletic Facility
1. Entrances for public access as well as other outdoor areas where patrons may congregate shall be no less than 200 feet from residential districts.
2. Provisions for noise reduction shall be identified and implemented based on the type of use.
X. Non-Production and Light Industrial, MU-BP District. Non-production industrial use shall be allowed as a principal use, and may include wholesale and off-premise sales, provided that:
1. The structure containing the use shall be no less than 200 feet from residential land uses.
2. The use shall be served by a street of sufficient capacity to handle the traffic the use will generate;
3. The use shall include a retail or office component equal to at least 25% of the floor area of the use;
4. An appropriate transition area between the use and adjacent property may be required, to include landscaping, screening and other site improvements consistent with the character of the area;
5. The owner or operator shall submit equipment specifications to the city. The city may require the owner or operator to implement vibration and noise reduction measures as part of their business.
Y. Outdoor Dining Accessory to Food Services.
1. Tables shall not block a public sidewalk or other walkway needed for pedestrian circulation. A minimum of 5 feet of sidewalk or walkway must remain open.
2. All outdoor dinner space shall be at least 200 feet from any residential property.
XIII-7
3. The outdoor dining area shall be directly adjacent to the principal structure and shall be clearly delineated by fencing and decorative landscaping.
4. Outdoor loudspeakers and lighting shall be designed to limit impacts on adjacent property or rights-of-way.
Z. Medical Facilities.
1. Medical facility structure(s), primary vehicular access points, and landing pads for helicopters involved in emergency transport and rescue operations shall be located at least 1,500 feet from a residential property.
AA. Outdoor Storage Yard/Facility
1. Outdoor storage of display of goods used in conjunction with and on the same site as the permitted or conditional use:
a. The display area shall be directly adjacent to a structure or under a permanent canopy.
b. The display area shall not exceed 2% of the area of the footprint of the principal building or 400 square feet, whichever is less.
c. Goods in the display area shall be neatly organized and stored.
d. The display area shall not occupy parking/loading or landscaping areas, and shall not interfere with fire and safety access to the building.
2. Outdoor storage of materials and inventory:
a. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted on parcels less than three acres in size.
b. The area of storage shall not exceed an area equal to 10% of the gross area of the lot or 20% of the footprint area of the principal structure, whichever is less.
c. The area of storage shall not be located within the front yard or a side yard adjacent to a right-of-way.
The outdoor storage of damaged or inoperable motor vehicles or equipment is prohibited.
XIII-7
ARTICLE XV. ARTICLE XIV COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
§ 154.550 PURPOSE AND DISTRICT DESCRIPTIONS.
The commercial districts are established to provide a range of goods and services for City residents within the City’s existing commercial corridors and districts, to promote employment opportunities and the adaptive reuse of existing commercial buildings, and to maintain and improve compatibility with surrounding areas. In all the commercial districts, consideration should be given to building and site design to provide for efficient and well-integrated use of land, ensure compatibility with adjacent residential districts, to control traffic and improve the pedestrian environment. The commercial districts are as follows.
A. LC Neighborhood Office/Limited Commercial District. The purpose of the LC District is to provide for the establishment of limited scale neighborhood commercial centers that offer basic convenience type goods and services to the immediately surrounding residential neighborhoods in areas that are not planned for public sanitary sewer services. Office uses and other business uses are allowable on a limited scale. It is the intent of this district to promote a high quality of business design and development that produces a positive visual image and minimizes adverse effects from traffic congestion, noise, odor, glare, and similar impacts.
B. CC Convenience Commercial District. The CC District is established to provide for smaller scale commercial development and attractive neighborhood shopping centers that are compatible with surrounding residential and business park development, ideally located at the intersection of two or more collector streets or at the intersection of an arterial and collector street. Convenience goods and services are those which are purchased frequently, i.e., at least weekly; for which comparison buying is not required; and which can be sustained in a limited trade area. Such uses include convenience markets, personal services and repair shops. A limited number of other uses, including but not limited to restaurants, gas stations, medical centers, religious institutions, transit-related park-and-ride lots, and facilities with drive-up windows, are also allowed.
C. C Commercial District. The purpose of the C District is to provide for the establishment of commercial and service activities which draw from and serve customers from the entire community or region and are located in areas that are well served by collector or arterial street facilities outside the Village Area. It is intended to allow the widest range of commercial uses, especially those that are oriented towards the traveling public or that need large sites with highway access and visibility. Residential uses may be appropriate as part of a mixed-use commercial development, with unit densities being determined by either the identified range within the comprehensive plan or to a level deemed appropriate as part of a planned unit development.
D. BP Business Park/Light Manufacturing District. The purpose of the BP District is to provide areas for attractive, high quality business park development primarily for office, high quality manufacturing and assembly, and non-retail uses in developments which provide a harmonious transition to residential development and neighborhoods by: 1) Conducting all business activities and essentially all storage inside buildings; 2) Consisting of high quality and attractive buildings which blend in with the environment; 3) providing open space, quality landscaping and berming; 4) including berming and buffering of parking, loading docks and other similar functions; and 5) protecting and enhancing the natural environment; and 6) providing users with an attractive working
XIII-7
environment that is unique in the eastern metropolitan area with immediate access to I-94.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012)
§ 154.551 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL AND INTERIM USES.
Table 12-1 lists all permitted and conditional uses allowed in the commercial districts. “P” indicates a permitted use, “C” a conditional use and “I” an interim use. Uses not so indicated shall be considered prohibited. Cross-references listed in the table under “Standards” indicate the location within this chapter of specific development standards that apply to the listed use.
A. Combinations of Uses. The following use types may be combined on a single parcel.
1. Principal and accessory uses.
2. Other permitted or conditional uses allowed within the district may be combined on a single parcel, provided that a unified and integrated site plan is approved. The entire development must be approved as a conditional use.
3. A mixed-use building that combines permitted or conditionally permitted residential, service, retail and civic uses may be developed meeting the form standards of this subchapter. Office or studio uses on upper stories are encouraged.
Table 12-1: Permitted, Conditional and Interim Uses, Commercial Districts
LC
CC
C
BP
Standard
Residential Uses
Household Living
Single-family attached dwelling
-
-
C
-
154.554 (A)
Multifamily dwelling
-
-
C
-
154.554 (B)
Live-work unit
C
C
C
-
154.012 (B) (1)
Group Living
Semi-transient accommodations
-
-
C
-
154.301 (D)
Congregate housing
-
-
C
-
154.301 (C)
Public and Civic Uses
LC
CC
C
BP
Standard
Colleges and universities
-
-
C
C
154.012 (B) (2), 154.303 (A)
Community service
-
C
C
C
154.012 (B) (2)
Day care center
C
C
C
C
154.012 (B) (2)
Schools, public and private
-
-
C
C
154.012 (B) (2), 154.303 (A)
Local Transit
-
-
-
C
154.454 (O)
Public assembly
-
-
C
C
154.012 (B) (2)
XIII-7
Religious institutions
-
-
C
-
154.012 (B) (2), 154.303 (N)
Services
Business services
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (3)
Business center
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (3)
Offices
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (3)
Commercial kennel
-
-
C
-
Communication services
C
C
P
P
154.012 (B) (3)
Educational services
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (3), 154.303 (A)
Financial institution
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (3)
Funeral home
-
C
P
-
154.012 (B) (3)
Lodging
-
-
P
C*
154.012 (B) (3), 154.302 (D), *154.554 (C)
Medical facility
-
-
C
C
154.012 (B) (3), 154.303 (B)
Membership organization
P
P
P
-
154.012 (B) (3)
Nursing and personal care
C
C
C
-
154.012 (B) (3), 154.303 (C)
Personal services
P
P
P
-
154.012 (B) (3)
Services
Repair and maintenance shop
-
-
P
-
154.554 (D)
Trade shop
-
-
P
-
154.554 (E)
Transportation services
-
-
-
C
154.012 (B) (3)
Veterinary services
P
P
P
C
154.554 (F)
Food Services
Standard restaurant
-
P
P
C*
154.012 (B) (4), 154.554 (L)
Drive-in restaurant
-
C
C
-
154.304 (A)
Drinking & entertainment
-
C
P
-
154.304 (B)
Fast food restaurant
-
P
P
C*
*154.554 (M)
Sales of Merchandise
General retail sales1
C
P
P
C*
154.554 (N)
Building supplies sales
-
-
C
-
XIII-7
Warehouse club sales
-
-
C
-
Furniture and appliance sales
-
-
P
-
Grocery, supermarket
-
-
P
-
Liquor store
-
P
P
-
Garden center
-
-
P
-
154.554 (G)
Neighborhood convenience store
-
P
P
-
Shopping center
-
P
P
-
Sales of Merchandise
Wholesaling
-
-
P
-
Automotive/Vehicular Uses
Automobile maintenance service
-
-
C
-
154.554 (H)
Automobile parts/supply
-
-
P
-
154.554 (H)
Car wash
-
-
C
-
154.012 (B) (6)
Commercial vehicle repair
-
-
-
-
154.554 (H)
Gasoline station
-
C
C
-
154.305 (B)
Parking facility
-
-
C*
C
*154.554 (I)
Sales and storage lots
-
-
C
-
154.305 (C)
Outdoor Recreation
Campgrounds and trailering
-
-
-
-
Golf course
-
-
-
-
Marina
-
-
-
-
Outdoor entertainment
-
-
-
-
Outdoor recreation facility
-
-
C
-
154.306 (C)
Parks and open areas
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (7)
Restricted recreation
-
-
-
-
Indoor Recreation/Entertainment
LC
CC
C
BP
Standard
Adult establishment
-
-
-
C
Chapter 113
Indoor athletic facility
-
C
P
C
154.307 (A)
Indoor recreation
-
-
C
-
154.307 (A)
Agricultural and Related Uses
LC
CC
C
BP
Standard
Agricultural sales business
-
I
P
-
154.012 (B) (9)
Agricultural services
-
-
C
-
154.012 (B) (9)
Agricultural support
-
-
C
-
154.012 (B) (9)
XIII-7
Greenhouses - non retail
-
-
-
-
154.012 (B) (9)
Wayside stand
P
P
P
P
154.012 (B) (9)
Industrial and Extractive Uses
LC
CC
C
BP
Standard
Heavy industrial
-
-
-
-
Landfill
-
-
-
-
Light industrial
-
-
-
C
154.012 (B) (10)
Non-production industrial
-
-
-
C
154.554 (J)
Motor freight and warehousing
-
-
-
C
154.012 (B) (10)
Research and testing
-
-
-
C
154.012 (B) (10)
Resource extraction
-
-
-
-
154.012 (B) (10)
Salvage/recyclable center
-
-
-
-
154.012 (B) (10)
Transportation and Communications
Broadcasting and communications
C
C
C
C
154.012 (B) (11), 154.083
Alternative Energy
Wind Generator – Ground Mounted
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Wind Generator – Roof/Structure Mounted
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Accessory Uses
Bed and breakfast
-
-
P
-
154.310 (A)
Drive-through facility
-
C
C
-
154.304 (A)
Family day care
-
-
-
-
154.012 (B) (12)
Group family day care
-
-
-
-
154.012 (B) (12)
Home occupation
-
-
-
-
154.310 (E)
Parking facility
C
C
P*
P
*154.554 (I)
Outdoor storage
-
-
C
-
Outdoor display
-
-
C
-
Solar equipment
P
P
P
P
154.310 (C)
Wind Generator – Ground Mounted
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Wind Generator – Roof/Structure Mounted
C
C
C
C
154.308 (B)
Other structures typically incidental and clearly subordinate to permitted use
P
P
P
P
1. General Retail Sales shall include all of the subcategories identified in the § 154.012(B)(5) under Retail Trade with the exception of those subcategories listed separately in Table 12-1 above.
XIII-7
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012) (Ord. 08-116, passed 3-3-2015) (Am. Ord. 08-199, passed 2-7-2018) (Am. Ord. 08-197, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 154.552 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS.
Lot area and setback requirements shall be as specified in Table 12-2 Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Commercial Districts.
Table 12-2: Lot Dimension and Setback Requirements, Commercial Districts
LC
CC
C
BP
Minimum lot area (sq. Ft.)
3.5 acres
12,000
20,000
2 acres
Minimum lot width (feet)
300
75
100
200
Minimum lot depth (feet)
400
-
-
-
Maximum height (feet/stories) d
35
35
45
50a
Maximum impervious coverage
40%
60%
75%
75%
Building setback requirements (feet) d
Front yard
100
30
30
50
Interior side yard
50
20
10
30
Corner side yard
100
25c
25c
30
Rear yard
50
30b
30b
30
Residential zones
150
50
50
150
Parking setback requirements (feet)
Front yard
50
15
15
30
Interior side yard
50
10
10
15
Corner side yard
50
15
15
30
Rear yard
50
10
10
15
Residential zones
100
35
35
100
Minimum building floor size (sq. ft.)
4,000
-
-
5,000
Notes to Table 12-2
a. Buildings higher than 50 feet may be allowed through a Conditional Use Permit and would be subject to a separate technical and planning evaluation.
b. Accessory buildings must be set back 10 feet from property lines.
c. Corner properties: The side facade of a corner building adjoining a public street shall maintain the front setback of the adjacent property fronting upon the same public street, or the required front yard setback, whichever is less. If no structure exists on the adjacent property, the setback shall be as shown in the table.
XIII-7
d. Ground mounted wind generators may exceed the allowable height restriction designated in all commercial districts and are subject to different setback requirements as identified in section 154.308.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-199, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 154.553 GENERAL SITE DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS, COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
Development of land within the commercial districts shall follow established standards for traffic circulation, landscape design, and other considerations as specified in Articles 7, 8 and 9. (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
A. Circulation. Internal connections shall be provided between parking areas on adjacent properties wherever feasible.
1. The number and width of curb-cuts shall be minimized. To promote pedestrian circulation, existing continuous curb-cuts shall be reduced to widths necessary for vehicular traffic, and unnecessary or abandoned curb cuts shall be removed as parcels are developed.
B. Fencing and Screening. Fencing and screening walls visible from the public right-of-way shall be constructed of materials compatible with the principal structure.
C. Lighting Design. Lighting shall be integrated into the exterior design of new or renovated structures to create a greater sense of activity, security, and interest to the pedestrian. All lighting shall be installed in conformance to §150.035 through §150.038.
D. Exterior Storage. Exterior materials storage must be screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties, by a wing of the principal structure or a screen wall constructed of the same materials as the principal structure. Height of the structure or screen wall must be sufficient to completely conceal the stored materials from view at eye level (measured at 6 feet above ground level) on the adjacent street or property.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.554 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES.
The following standards apply to specific uses allowed within the Commercial Districts. Other specific use standards are located in Article 9. (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
A. Single-family attached dwellings, C District. Limited to areas that are designated as mixed-use in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
B. Multi-family dwelling units, C District. Dwelling units (both condominium and rental) are allowed as follows:
1. Within those areas designated as mixed-use in the Comprehensive Plan; and
2. On the upper floors or rear or side ground floors of a mixed-use building approved as part of a Planned Unit Development
C. Lodging, BP District. Must incorporate a full-service restaurant and rooms accessible only through interior corridors and be subordinate to a main business complex.
XIII-7
D. Repair and Maintenance Shop. No outdoor storage is permitted.
E. Trade Shop. Exterior materials storage must be totally screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties, by a wall of the principal structure or a screen wall constructed of the same materials as the principal structure.
F. Veterinary Services. All activities must be conducted within an enclosed building. Crematoriums are not allowed.
G. Garden Center
1. The storage or display of any materials or products shall meet all primary building setback requirements of a structure, and shall be maintained in an orderly manner. Screening along the boundaries of adjacent residential properties may be required, meeting the standards of 154.554 (G).
2. All loading and parking shall be provided off-street.
3. The storage of any soil, fertilizer or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses.
H. Automobile Maintenance Service and Automobile Parts/Supply
1. All vehicle repairs shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building.
2. The storage or display of inoperable or unlicensed vehicles or other equipment shall meet all setback requirements of a primary structure, and shall be totally screened from view from adjacent public streets and adjacent residential properties.
I. Parking Facility, C District. Structured parking is permitted as a ground floor use within a mixed-use building, provided that it is located on side or rear facades, not facing the primary abutting street. The primary street-facing facade shall be designed for retail, office or residential use.
J. Non-Production Industrial, BP District. Non-production industrial use shall be allowed as a principal use, and may include wholesale and off-premise sales, provided that:
1. The use is served by a street of sufficient capacity to handle the traffic the use will generate;
2. The use includes a retail or office component equal to at least 25% of the floor area of the use; and
3. An appropriate transition area between the use and adjacent property may be required, to include landscaping, screening and other site improvements consistent with the character of the area.
K. Outdoor Dining Accessory to Food Services. Outdoor dining is allowed as an accessory use in the commercial districts, provided that tables do not block a public sidewalk or other walkway needed for pedestrian circulation. A minimum of 5 feet of sidewalk or walkway must remain open.
L. Standard Restaurant, BP District. Must be incorporated as part of a larger business center or lodging use.
M. Fast Food Restaurant, BP District. Must be incorporated as part of a larger business center or lodging use.
XIII-7
N. Retail Trade, BP District. Limited to uses clearly incidental and accessory to a permitted or conditionally permitted principal use of the land.
1. The compounding, dispensing or sale of drugs, prescription items, patient or proprietary medicine, sick room supplies, prosthetic devices or items relating to any of the permitted or conditionally permitted uses is only allowed when conducted in the building occupied primarily by medical facilities or offices.
O. Local Transit, BP District. School bus terminals shall be allowed as a conditional principal use within the Business Park zoning district, provided that:
1. The use shall be limited to a school district transportation center, owned by a public school district, serving as a bus terminal for buses which transport passengers to and from schools or between school programs and community residences.
2. The property on which the use is located must be located within one half mile of property owned by a public school district for an active school or school administration building.
3. Must be on property of at least 10 acres in size or more.
4. Must be sufficiently screened, as determined by the City, from adjacent residential properties through techniques such as berming and landscaping.
5. Accessory uses to bus terminals may include an office and routine maintenance of school buses, including but not limited to washing and fueling.
(Ord. 2012-062, passed 9-18-2012; Am. Ord. 08-215, passed 7-17-2018) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.555 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS.
Review of Design. For certain development activity as specified in the Lake Elmo Design Guidelines and Standards Manual, design review is required as part of the approval process for a permit or certificate under this Ordinance. All projects subject to design review shall be reviewed for conformance with the Lake Elmo Design Guidelines and Standards Manual and shall follow the review procedures specified in §154.506.A.
(Ord. 08-095, passed 11-19-2013)
XIII-7
ARTICLE XVI. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC DISTRICTS
§ 154.600 PF – PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC OPEN SPACE.
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the PF Zoning District is to allow uses and structures that are incidental and subordinate to the overall land uses permitted in the city. While allowing certain uses within the city, general performance standards have been established. This is intended to assure maintenance and preservation of the established rural character of the city by preserving agricultural land, woodlands, corridors, and other significant natural features, and provide buffering between PF and residential or other uses.
B. Uses Allowed by Conditional Use Permit. In addition to the specific standards and criteria which may be cited below for respective uses, each application shall be evaluated based on the standards and criteria set forth in §§ 154.106 of this code. Uses allowed herein that are in existence within the city at the effective date of this chapter may continue the use as a permitted use. The following uses are conditionally permitted in the PF Zoning District:
1. Cemeteries, provided that:
a. Direct access is provided to a public street classified by the Comprehensive Plan as major collector or arterial; and
b. No mausoleum, crematorium, or other structure is permitted, except a 1-story tool or storage shed of 160 square feet floor maximum floor area.
2. Places of worship, provided that:
a. Direct access is provided to a public street classified by the Comprehensive Plan as major collector or arterial;
b. No use may exceed 235 gallons wastewater generation per day per net acre of land;
c. No on-site sewer system shall be designed to handle more than 5,000 gallons per day;
d. Exterior athletic fields shall not include spectator seating, public address facilities or lighting; and
e. No freestanding broadcast or telecast antennas are permitted. No broadcast dish or antenna shall extend more than 6 feet above or beyond the principal structure.
3. Facilities for local, county and state government, provided that:
a. Direct access is provided to a public street classified by the Comprehensive Plan as major collector or arterial;
b. The use and location is consistent with the community facilities element of the Comprehensive Plan; and
XIII-7
c. No use may exceed a ratio of 3.0 SAC units per 3.5 acres or 235 gallons per day per net acre of land based on design capacity of all facilities, whichever is more restrictive
4. Libraries and museums (public and private), provided that:
a. No use may exceed a ratio of 3.0 SAC units per 3.5 acres or 235 gallons per day per net acre of land based on design capacity of all facilities, whichever is more restrictive;
b. For private facilities, a plan is provided, together with a declaration and covenants to run with the title to the land, that prescribes perpetual maintenance, insurance and ownership responsibilities for all facilities and land area; and
c. Direct access is provided to a public street classified by the Comprehensive Plan as a major collector or arterial.
5. Public and private schools (except licensed day care), provided that:
a. No use may exceed a ratio of 3.0 SAC units per 3.5 acres or 235 gallons per day per net acre of land based on design capacity of all facilities, whichever is more restrictive; and
b. Direct access is provided to a public street classified by the Comprehensive Plan as a major collector or arterial.
6. Historic sites and interpretive centers, provided that:
a. Direct access is provided to a public street classified by the Comprehensive Plan as a major collector or arterial; and
b. No use may exceed a ratio of 3.0 SAC units per 3.5 acres or 235 gallons per day per net acre of land based on design capacity of all facilities, whichever is more restrictive.
C. Uses Allowed by Interim Use Permit. The keeping of horses in conjunction with churches provided that:
1. The keeping of horses does not constitute a feedlot per Minn. Rules.
2. The property is directly adjacent to only Agricultural (A) and Rural Residential (RR) zoned properties that are not developed as open space preservation subdivisions. Roadways shall be considered an adequate buffer.
3. Evidence is provided to show adherence to all livestock and horse regulations in city code.
D. Accessory Uses and Structures. Uses and structures, which are clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted uses and structures. All exterior materials of accessory structures must be the same as those of the principal structure.
E. Minimum district requirements.
1. District requirements in PF Zoning District.
XIII-7
District Requirements in PF Zoning District
With Structure
Without Structure
Maximum Parcel Area
20
N.A.
Lot Width – Minimum:
100 Feet
N.A.
Lot Depth – Minimum:
150 Feet
N.A.
Primary Structure Setback from Property Line
Front – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Side (Interior) – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Side (Corner) – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Rear – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Accessory Structure Setback from Property Line
Front – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Side (Interior) – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Side (Corner) – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Rear – Minimum:
50 Feet
N.A.
Principal Structure Height - Maximum
50 Feet – Structure Side Walls Not to Exceed 3.5 feet
N.A.
Accessory Structure Height - Maximum
35 Feet – Structure Side Walls Not to Exceed 18 Feet
N.A.
Unoccupied Structure Above the Highest Point of the Roof
25 Feet
-
Septic Drainfield Regulations
See §§51.002 through §§51.008
See §§51.002 through §§51.008
Signage
See §§154.212
See §§154.212
a. Essential services shall be exempt from the minimum district requirements of § 154.600, Subd. E, 1. Essential services with buildings shall maintain a minimum 10 foot setback from property lines.
b. Essential services that do not meet the minimum district requirements of § 154.600, Subd E, 1, shall have increased four season screening and fencing.
2. Maximum lot area, buffer width and impervious coverage shall be in compliance with the following table:
Maximum Parcel Area
Buffer Width (Feet)
Maximum Impervious Site Coverage
0 to 5 acres
50
39.5%
XIII-7
5.1 to 10 acres
100
38%
10.1 to 20 acres
150
35%
a. Essential services shall be exempt from the buffering requirements of the PF zoning district.
F. Performance standards.
1. Generally
a. Architectural Standards
i. It is the purpose and intent of the city, by the adoption of the performance standards of this division (F), to ensure commercial buildings constructed within the city are of a high quality of exterior appearance, consistent with the terms of Non-Residential Development Policy #5 of the 2000-2010 Lake Elmo Comprehensive Plan. It is the finding of the city that a limited selection of primary exterior surfacing materials meets this standard of quality.
ii. It is the further finding of the city that several specific exterior surfacing materials are appropriate, and of sufficient quality, to be utilized only as accent materials in varying percentages. The variations of percentage of specific accent materials relates to a finding by the city as to the relative quality and rural character of those respective accent materials.
b. Architectural and Site Plan Submittals. New building proposals shall include architectural and site plans prepared by registered architect and shall show the following as a minimum:
i. Elevations of all sides of the buildings;
ii. Type and color of exterior building materials;
iii. Typical general floor plans;
iv. Dimensions of all structures; and
v. Location of trash containers, heating, cooling and ventilation equipment and systems.
c. Applicability – structure additions and renovation.
i. Additions to existing structures resulting in an increase of gross floor area of the structure of less than 100%; and/or installation of replacement exterior surfacing any portion of an existing structure shall be exempt from the standards of this subdivision where it is found that the new or replacement exterior surfacing proposed is identical to that of the existing structure.
ii. Where additions to an existing structure result in an increase in the gross floor area of the existing structure of 100% or greater, the entire
XIII-7
structure (existing structure and structure addition) shall be subject to the standard of this subdivision.
d. Performance standards – primary exterior surfacing.
i. The primary exterior surfacing of structures shall be limited to natural brick, stone, or glass. Artificial or thin veneer brick or stone less than nominal 4 inches thick shall not qualify as complying with this performance standard
ii. Primary exterior surface shall be defined as not less than 70% of the sum of the area of all exterior walls of a structure nominally perpendicular to the ground. All parapet or mansard surfaces extending above the ceiling height of the structure shall be considered exterior surface for the purposes of this division. Windows and glass doors shall be considered a primary surface, but the sum area of this glass shall be deducted from the wall area for purposes of the 70% primary/30% accent formulas of this section. Doors of any type of material, except glass, shall not be considered a primary exterior surface.
iii. Each wall of the structure shall be calculated separately and, individually comply with the 70/30 formula.
e. Performance Standard – Exterior Surfacing Accents. Not more than 30% of the exterior wall surfacing, as defined by division (F)(1)(d) above may be of the following listed accent materials, but no single accent material, except natural wood, may comprise more than 20% of the total of all accent materials; and no combustible materials shall be used:
i. Cedar, redwood, wood siding
ii. Cement fiber board;
iii. Standing seam metal;
iv. Architectural metal;
v. Stucco;
vi. Poured in place concrete (excluding “tilt-up” panels);
vii. Architectural metal panels; and
(Am. Ord. 97-172, passed 6-20-2006)
viii. Porcelain or ceramic tile.
f. Performance Standards – Accessory Structures. All accessory structures shall comply with the exterior surfacing requirements specified by this division.
g. Performance Standard – HVAC Units and Exterior Appurtenances. All exterior equipment, HVAC and trash/recycling and dock areas shall be screened from view of the public with the primary exterior materials used on the principal structure
XIII-7
h. Performance Standard – Visible Roofing Materials. Any roofing materials that are visible from ground level shall be standing seam metal, fire-treated cedar shakes, ceramic tile, clay tile, concrete, or slate.
i. Applicability – New Construction. The standards of this division (F)(1) shall be applicable to all structures and buildings constructed in the city, on and after the effective date of this division. The performance standards of this division shall not be in any manner minimized by subsequent planned unit development plans or agreement.
(Am. Ord. 97-168, passed 5-2-2006)
2. Parking. Each site shall be provided with off-street automobile parking as follows:
a. Places of Worship. One space for each permanent and temporary 4 seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall. Facilities as may be provided in conjunction with such buildings and uses shall be subject to additional requirements that are imposed by the city code.
b. Facilities for Local, County and State Government. One space for each 250 square feet of office area. Facilities as may be provided in conjunction with such buildings and uses shall be subject to additional requirements that are imposed by the city code.
c. School, Elementary and Junior High (public or private). Three spaces for each class room.
d. School, High School (public or private). One space for each 2 students.
e. Historic Sites and Interpretive Centers, libraries, and museums (public or private). One space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
3. Landscaping. All yard area shall either be landscaped green areas or open and left in a natural state. Yards to be landscaped shall be landscaped attractively with lawn, trees, and shrubs in accordance with a plan prepared by a landscape architect. Areas left in a natural state shall be kept free of litter, debris, and noxious weeds. Yards adjoining any residential zone shall contain a buffer area consisting of berming, landscaping, and/or fencing for the purpose of screening noise, sight, sound, and glare.
4. Buffering. Where areas abut residential districts, a buffer area and setback in compliance with this division (F) is required. The buffer requirement shall be applicable to any interior parcel property line, and not applied to property lines abutting improved public streets. No public/private streets or driveways, or off-street parking facilities may be located in the buffer area. The buffer area shall be completely defined and designed, and approved by the city prior to all final city approvals for construction on site. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or commencement of any improvements on site, the owner shall provide the city with a financial security for a minimum of 24 months unless a shorter term of security is specifically approved by the City Council, approved by the City
XIII-7
Attorney, to assure construction of the buffer area. All landscaping shall comply with § 154.258.
5. Signage. All signs shall comply with § 154.212 of this Code.
6. Lighting. All lighting shall comply with §§ 150.035 through 150.038.
7. Traffic. All applications for a building permit responsive to the requirements of this section shall include a detailed report, certified by a registered engineer, demonstrating the extent of and quantitative impact on public roads from forecasted traffic of the use, based on ITE average daily and peak hour/event traffic. Forecasted traffic generation within the design capacity of an impacted public street, as determined by the City Engineer, shall be the primary determinant for approval of the site plan.
8. Noise. All uses in the PF Zoning District shall comply with the City’s noise standards found in section 130.45 through 130.48 of the City Code.
(Am. Ord. 97-62, passed 9-5-2000; Am. Ord. 97-192, passed 6-19-2007; Am. Ord. 97-204, passed 12-11-2007; Am. Ord. 08-130, passed 1-19-16 )
XVII-1
ARTICLE XVII. OPEN SPACE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 154.650 PURPOSE.
The purpose of open space planned unit developments is to provide greater development flexibility within rural portions of the community while maintaining the rural character by preserving agricultural land, woodlands, wildlife or natural corridors, pollinator & wildlife habitat, and other significant natural features consistent with the goals and objectives of the city’s Comprehensive Plan. The City reserves the right to deny establishment of an open space PUD overlay district and direct a developer to re-apply under standard zoning provisions if it is determined that proposed benefits of the open space PUD do not justify the requested flexibilities.
(Ord. 97-79, passed 5-1-2001; Am. Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.651 INTENT.
It is the intent of the City of Lake Elmo that open space planned unit developments will offer needed development flexibility within the Agricultural, Rural Residential, and Rural Estate zoning districts to provide for:
A. A variety of lot configurations and housing styles that may not otherwise exist within the City’s rural areas;
B. An avenue to provide a development density equal to or greater than what could be achieved via underlying zoning;
C. A reduction in the costs to construct and maintain public facilities and infrastructure in a rural setting;
D. Protected open space to enhance and preserve the natural character of the community; and
E. The creation of distinct neighborhoods that are interconnected within rural areas.
F. To preserve large contiguous open spaces.
(Ord. 97-79, passed 5-1-2001; Am. Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.652 DEFINITIONS.
Unless specifically defined in Article II, common definitions, words, and phrases used in this Article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage throughout this code and as may be found in § 11.01.
(Ord. 97-79, passed 5-1-2001; Am. Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.653 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS.
The owner of property on which an open space PUD is proposed shall file the applicable application for a PUD by paying the fee(s) set forth in § 11.02 of this Code and submitting a completed application form and supporting documents as set forth on the application form and
XIII-7
within this Section. Complete applications shall be reviewed by City Commissions as deemed necessary by the Director of Planning and be acted upon by the City Council. If a proposed PUD is denied, any subsequent application for a substantially similar PUD within one (1) year of the date of denial shall fully address all findings which supported the denial prior to being accepted as complete.
(Ord. 97-79, passed 5-1-2001; Am. Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.654 REFLECTION ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
A. PUD provisions provide an optional method of regulating land use which permits flexibility from standard regulating provisions. Establishment of a PUD shall require adoption of an ordinance creating an overlay zoning district atop the boundaries of the development area. For each PUD District, a specific ordinance shall be adopted establishing all rules which shall supersede underlying zoning. Issues not specifically addressed by the PUD Overlay district shall be governed by the underlying zoning district regulations.
B. All Open Space Preservation developments approved prior to October 4, 2016 shall be allowed to continue per the original conditions of approval.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.655 PREREQUISITES FOR OPEN SPACE PUDs.
A. Only land zoned as Agricultural, Rural Residential, or Rural Estate may be considered for establishment of an open space planned unit development.
B. The minimum land area for establishment of an open space planned unit development is a nominal contiguous twenty (20) acres.
C. Establishment of an open space planned unit development will be considered only for areas of land in single ownership or control. Alternatively, multiple party ownership, in the sole discretion of the City, is acceptable when legally sufficient written consent from all persons and entities with ownership interest is provided at the time of application.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.656 USES WITHIN OPEN SPACE PUDs.
A. Primary Uses.
1. Permitted.
a. Single-family, detached;
b. Preserved open space;
c. Conservation easements;
d. Agriculture;
e. Suburban farms;
XIII-7
f. Private stables;
g. Single-family, attached;
h. Townhouses (no more than 25% in any development)
i. Wayside stand; and
j. Public parks and trails.
2. Conditionally Permitted.
None
3. Interim Permitted.
None
B. Accessory Uses.
1. Permitted.
Uses deemed by the Director of Planning to be typically accessory to an established permitted use on the property as listed in 154.656(A)(1).
2. Conditionally Permitted.
None
3. Interim Permitted.
None
C. Prohibited Uses.
All other uses not listed in 154.656(A) or 154.656(B) are hereby prohibited.
D. Use Restrictions and Allowances
The final PUD overlay district ordinance may include specific provisions governing uses which supersede underlying zoning and the general PUD regulations herein.
(Ord. 97-79, passed 5-1-2001; Am. Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.657 OPEN SPACE PUD DESIGN.
Open space PUDs shall comply with all of the following minimum design standards unless modifications are authorized for consideration by the City Council via a super-majority vote at the time of PUD Sketch Plan review. Authorization of such modifications resulting from a PUD Sketch Plan review shall not be construed as approvals for the change(s), but rather as an authorization to present such modifications as a component of the plan during the PUD Preliminary Plan review.
A. Density
The maximum dwelling unit density within an open space planned unit development shall be 18 units per 40 acres of buildable land on the undeveloped parcel; however, the total
XIII-7
number of dwelling units shall not exceed the density limitations contained in the Comprehensive Plan for Opens Space Preservation Development.
B. Lot Design
Lot locations and configurations within open space planned unit developments shall be derived utilizing the following methodology. An applicant must be able to demonstrate how these steps resulted in the plan being proposed.
1. Soils Analysis Conducted
A certified septic designer or soils scientist shall complete a review of the soils on the site, and categorize all areas as highly suitable for septic systems, moderately suitable for septic systems, or poorly suited for septic systems.
2. Septic Design Identification
Based on the soils analysis, an applicant must identify whether the proposed development will be serviced by individual septic tanks and drain fields, or via a system of individual septic tanks which utilize one or more communal drain fields.
a. If individual septic tanks and drain fields can be supported by the available soils and is the chosen methodology to serve the development, all proposed lots must be able to provide primary and secondary drain field sites on each lot (outside of drainage and utility easements), and must meet the minimum lot size standards outlined herein.
b. If individual septic tanks which utilize a communal drain field (or fields) is the chosen methodology to serve the development, then the location(s) for communal drain fields shall be identified within the area(s) deemed the most suitable on the site for supporting septic utilities according to the soils analysis. All such areas shall be clearly denoted on provided plan sets.
3. Identification of Required Buffers
No build zones from each property boundary shall be derived as follows:
a. A two-hundred (200) foot buffer from all adjacent property lines that abut an existing residential development or a parcel of land not eligible for future development as an open space planned unit development due to insufficient parcel area.
b. A one-hundred (100) foot buffer from all adjacent property lines that abut land that is eligible for future development as an open space planned unit development.
c. If the development site is adjacent to an existing or approved OP development, the required buffer shall be equivalent to the buffer that was required of the adjacent development [see § 154.035(B)].
4. Identification of Preferred Building Pad Locations
Building pad locations [up to the maximum number of units permitted by
XIII-7
154.657(A)] which preserve natural topography and drainage ways, minimize tree loss, protect historic sites or structures, and limit the need for soil removal and/or grading shall then be identified. The orientation of individual building sites shall maintain maximum natural topography and ground cover.
a. Building pads shall be located outside of required buffers, and shall be sited so as to provide ample room for accessory structures on future lots.
b. If individual septic tanks and drain fields for each lot are to be utilized, locations for primary and secondary facilities for each proposed building pad shall also be identified. Generalized locations for such may be shown during the PUD Sketch Plan phase, but all such sites must be verified as being viable as a component of PUD Preliminary Plan review.
c. If individual septic tanks utilizing communal drain fields is intended, the plan must clearly identify which communal drain field will service each of the proposed building pads.
5. Placement of Streets
a. Streets shall then be designed and located in such a manner as to:
i. Maintain and preserve natural topography, groundcover, significant landmarks, and trees;
ii. Minimize cut and fill;
iii. Preserve and enhance both internal and external views and vistas;
iv. Promote road safety;
v. Assure adequate access for fire and rescue vehicles; and
vi. Assure and promote adequate vehicular circulation both within the development and with adjacent neighborhoods.
b. The design of streets and the dedication of right-of-way shall be in compliance with the City’s standard plates and specifications as may be amended.
c. Streets shall not encroach into a required buffer area unless it can be demonstrated that such an alignment is necessary to achieve the goals outlined above, and that no equivalent option exists outside of the buffer. Driving surfaces that cross the buffer area at a 90 degree angle to provide current or future access to an adjacent property or boundary road shall be the only exception.
6. Lot Creation
Based on the street location(s), building pad locations, and septic system location(s); lines to delineate individual lots shall then be identified in accordance with the following:
XIII-7
a. Lots
i. Single-family lots being served by individual septic tanks and drain fields shall be a minimum of one (1) acre in size;
ii. Single-family lots being served by individual septic tanks utilizing communal drain fields shall be a minimum of 1/2 acre (21,780 square feet) in size;
iii. All land reserved for Communal septic system use shall be located within a dedicated Outlot to be owned by the homeowners association (HOA) of the development.
iv. Base lots for townhomes shall be large enough such that individual unit lots can meet all required structure setbacks contained herein.
b. Lot Specific Buildable Areas
i. The buildable area on each proposed lot which remains after consideration of each of the following shall be shown:
1. Required buffers from adjacent lands [see § 154.035(B)]
2. Required setbacks from waterbodies and non-buildable land per Shoreland district regulations [see Article XIX] ;
3. Steep slopes;
4. Easements; and
5. Land within the following setbacks:
HOUSING TYPE
Single Family Homes
Townhomes
Front Yard
30
20
Side Yard
15 feet or 10% of lot width
Corner Lot Front Yard
30
Corner Lot Street Side Yard
30
Rear Yard
20
ii. Proposed buildable area on each lot shall be sufficient to accommodate primary and accessory structures that are normal and customary to the type of development being proposed.
7. Open Space and Parkland Adjustments
a. Open Space
XIII-7
i. The total preserved open space area within an open space planned unit development shall be no less than 50% of the total gross land area, as defined by § 11.01. If this threshold is not achieved after following the first six steps of lot design, the proposed lot areas will need to be adjusted or lots eliminated until this requirement is met.
ii. Land needed for storm water facilities as required by other provisions of the Lake Elmo City Code may count towards required open space for the purposes of Open Space PUD design, but must ultimately be placed in Outlots to be dedicated to the City.
iii. Excluding land needed for compliant storm water facilities, not less than 60% of the remaining preserved open space shall be in contiguous parcels which are five (5) acres or more in size.
iv. Preserved open space parcels shall be contiguous with preserved open space or public park land on adjacent parcels.
b. Parkland
i. Parks and recreational facilities shall be provided in addition to preserved open space as specified in the Lake Elmo Parks Plan.
ii. Determination of whether a land or cash dedication will be required to fulfil parkland requirements will be at the discretion of the City Council, with direction to be provided as a component of PUD Sketch Plan review. If a required parkland dedication causes overall open space to drop below the minimum threshold, the proposed lot areas will need to be adjusted or lots eliminated until the open space requirement is once again met.
iii. Any dedication shall be consistent with the dedication and fee-in-lieu standards specified in Chapter 153.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.658 OPEN SPACE PUD DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Open space PUDs shall comply with all of the following development standards unless modifications are authorized for consideration by the City Council via a super-majority vote at the time of PUD Sketch Plan review. Authorization of such modifications resulting from a PUD Sketch Plan review shall not be construed as approvals for the change(s), but rather as an authorization to present such modifications as a component of the plan during the PUD Preliminary Plan review.
A. Preserved Open Space Standards
1. With the exception of storm water facilities which must be dedicated to the City, all preserved open space within an open space planned unit development shall be subject to a conservation easement and used for the purposes listed in § 154.650.
2. Preserved open space land shall be controlled in one or more of following manners as
XIII-7
determined at the sole discretion of the City Council:
a. Owned by an individual or legal entity who will use the land for a specific set of purposes outlined by a permanent conservation easement (in accordance with M.S. Ch. 84C.01-.05, as it may be amended from time to time), which is conveyed to an acceptable land trust as approved by the city; and/or
b. Conveyed by conservation easement to the city.
c. Owned as an Outlot by the City (this option may only be used for land being dedicated to the City for stormwater maintenance and conveyance purposes).
3. Preserved open space land shall be maintained for the purposes for which it was set aside. If preserved open space was set aside for agricultural purposes or for natural habitat, a plan shall be submitted which will indicate how the land will be maintained or returned to a natural state and who will be responsible for plan implementation. Developers shall provide copies of common interest community (CIC) declarations to prospective purchasers, and conservation easements to the city, describing land management practices to be followed by the party or parties responsible for maintaining the preserved open space.
4. Where applicable, a Common Interest Community association shall be established to permanently maintain all residual open space and recreational facilities. The Common Interest Community association agreements, guaranteeing continuing maintenance, and giving lien right to the city if there is lack of the maintenance shall be submitted to the city as part of the documentation requirements of § 154.661(3) for an open space PUD Final Plan.
B. Septic System Design Standards
1. In General
The placement and design of all septic systems shall conform to the requirements of Washington County.
2. Individual Septic Drain fields
Sites for individual septic drain fields, both primary and secondary, must be located entirely within each lot and cannot be located within any easement.
3. Communal Drain Fields.
a. Communal drain fields may be partially or completely located in an area designated as preserved open space provided the ground cover is restored to its natural condition after installation, and recreational uses are prohibited above or within 50 feet of communal drain fields or as approved by the City Engineer.
b. Communal drain fields, if installed, shall be professionally maintained, and are acceptable once legally sufficient documentation has been provided by the developer to ensure such maintenance will continue in perpetuity.
XIII-7
C. Building Standards
1. Principal structures within open space planned unit developments shall not exceed 2 and ½ stories or 35 feet in height.
2. It is desired that the structures within neighborhoods convey a particular architectural style with similar building components, materials, roof pitches. The PUD Overlay ordinance crafted for each individual development should establish minimum architectural standards for the neighborhood.
3. All wells shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from septic tanks and septic fields.
D. Landscaping Standards
1. A landscape plan for the entire site is required and shall consist of at least 10 trees per building site; and trees shall not be not less than 1.5 inch in caliper measured at 54 inches above grade level.
2. Boulevard landscaping is required along all streets to consist of at least 1 tree per every 30 feet or placed in clusters at the same ratio.
E. Impervious Surface Standards
The maximum impervious surface allowable within an open space planned unit development shall be 20% of the land area not dedicated as preserved open space subject to the following:
1. Impervious surfaces created by roads, trails, and other planned impervious improvements shall count against the maximum allowed impervious coverage.
2. Remaining allowed impervious surface acreage may be distributed between the planned building sites, and maximums for each lot shall be clearly documented within the overlay district ordinance governing the development.
3. On individual lots, areas covered by pervious pavers or comparable systems may receive a 25% credit against the lot’s hardcover if the system is installed consistent with the City of Lake Elmo Engineering Standards Manual, and adequate storm water mitigation measures (as may be necessary) are installed to mitigate potential runoff created by the additional coverage above the allowed impervious surface threshold. All such credits shall be at the discretion of the City Engineer.
F. Trail Standards
A trail system or sidewalks shall be established within open space planned unit developments in accordance with the following:
1. The linear footage of trails provided shall be at least equal in length to the sum of the centerline length of all public roads within the development.
2. All trails shall be constructed of asphalt or concrete in compliance with the standard city design plate for trails.
XIII-7
3. Proposed trails shall provide connections between and access to the buildable land areas and preserved open space land being created by the development.
4. Proposed trails shall connect to existing, planned, or anticipated trails or roads on adjacent parcels.
5. If applicable, trails shall be linked (or be designed to provide a future link) to the “Old Village” to emphasize the connection between existing and new development.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.659 RESERVED.
§ 154.660 OPEN SPACE PUD REVIEW CRITERIA
The following findings shall be made by the City Council prior to approval of a new or amended open space planned unit development:
A. The proposed development is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
B. All prerequisites for an open space PUD as outlined in § 154.655 are met.
C. All open space PUD design standards (as outlined in § 154.657) and all open space development standards (as outlined in § 154.658) are met; or if deviations are proposed, that all such deviations are supported because they achieve the following three (3) goals:
1. The deviation(s) allow for higher quality building and site design that will enhance aesthetics of the site;
2. The deviation(s) help to create a more unified environment within the project boundaries by ensuring one or more of the following: architectural compatibility of all structures, efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, enhanced landscaping and site features, and/or efficient use of utilities;
3. The overall design provides appropriate solutions to eliminate adverse impacts that proposed deviations may impose on surrounding lands.
D. If the proposed PUD involves construction over two or more phases, the applicant has demonstrated that each phase is capable of being a stand-alone development independent of other phases.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.661 OPEN SPACE PUD REVIEW PROCEDURE.
All requests to establish an open space Planned Unit Development shall be initiated by following the steps below.
A. Open Space PUD Sketch Plan
1. Purpose
1. The open space PUD Sketch Plan is the first step in the development process
XIII-7
which gives the applicant an opportunity to present their ideas to the City Council and public so as to gain general feedback on areas that will require additional analysis, study, design, changes, etc. Feedback gained during the open space PUD Sketch Plan phase should be addressed within the subsequent PUD Preliminary Plan.
2. Specific open space PUD Sketch Plan Submittal Requirements
Except as may be waived by the Director of Planning, the following information shall constitute a complete application for an open space PUD Sketch Plan.
a. A listing of contact information including name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of: the owner of record, authorized agents or representatives, engineer, surveyor, and any other relevant associates;
b. A listing of the following site data: Address, current zoning, parcel size in acres and square feet and current legal description(s);
c. A narrative explaining the applicant’s proposed objectives for the open space PUD, a listing of the proposed modifications from standard in § 154.657 and § 154.658 as may be applicable, and an explanation of how the proposal addresses the PUD review criteria in § 154.660.
d. A listing of general information including the following:
i. Number of proposed residential units.
ii. Calculation of the proposed density of the project showing compliance with § 154.657(A).
iii. A listing of all proposed land uses (i.e. preserved open space, buildable sites, parkland, etc).
iv. Square footages of land dedicated to each proposed land use.
e. An existing conditions exhibit, including topography, that identifies the location of the following environmental features along with calculations (in acres) for each:
i. Gross site acreage;
ii. Existing wetlands;
iii. Existing woodlands;
iv. Areas with slopes greater than 12%, but less than 25%;
v. Areas with slopes of 25% or greater;
vi. Woodlands;
vii. Other pertinent land cover(s).
f. An open space PUD Sketch Plan illustrating the nature of the proposed
XIII-7
development. At a minimum, the plan should show:
i. Existing zoning district(s) on the subject land and all adjacent parcels;
ii. Layout of proposed lots and proposed uses denoting Outlots planned for public dedication and/or preserved open space;
iii. Area calculations for each parcel;
iv. General location of wetlands and/or watercourses over the property and within 200 feet of the perimeter of the subdivision parcel;
v. Location of existing and proposed streets within and immediately adjacent to the subdivision parcel;
vi. Proposed sidewalks and trails;
vii. Proposed parking areas;
viii. General location of wooded areas or significant features (environmental, historical, cultural) of the parcel;
ix. Location of utility systems that will serve the property;
x. Calculations for the following:
(a) Gross land area (in acres);
(b) Number of proposed residential units.
(c) Proposed density of the project showing compliance with § 154.657(A).
(d) Acreage & square footage of land dedicated to each proposed land use (i.e. preserved open space, buildable sites, parkland, etc.).
(e) Acreage & square footage of land proposed for public road right-of-way;
(f) Acreage & square footage of land dedicated to drainage ways and ponding areas;
(g) Acreage & square footage of land for Trails and/or sidewalks (if outside of proposed road right-of-way);
xi. Other: An applicant may submit any additional information that may explain the proposed PUD or support any requests for modifications (i.e. a landscaping plan to support the lessening or elimination of an otherwise required buffer).
xii. The outline of a conceptual development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the project, or stages of the same, can be expected to begin and be completed (including the proposed phasing of construction of public improvements and recreational &
XIII-7
common space areas).
xiii. A statement of intent to establish a Common Interest Community association with bylaws and deed restrictions to include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Ownership, management, and maintenance of defined preserved open space;
(b) Maintenance of public and private utilities; and
(c) General architectural guidelines for principal and accessory structures.
xiv. If applicable, a historic preservation plan for any historic structures on the site shall be submitted.
3. Open Space PUD Sketch Plan Proposal Review
a. Planning Commission
i. Upon receiving an open space PUD Sketch Plan proposal, the City shall schedule a date upon which the Planning Commission will review the proposal.
ii. Upon completing their review, the Planning Commission shall adopt findings and recommendations on the proposed open space PUD as soon as practical.
iii. The Director of Planning may forward an application to the City Council without a recommendation from the Planning Commission only if it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with state mandated deadlines for application review.
b. City Council
i. The City Council may listen to comments on the proposed development if they deem such necessary prior to discussing the proposed open space PUD Sketch plan.
ii. After consideration of the Director of Planning’s recommendation, the Planning Commission recommendation, and any public comments received, the City Council may comment on the merit of the request, needed changes, and suggested conditions that the proposer should adhere to with any future application.
iii. For each of the identified modifications to the minimum standards outlined in
iv. § 154.657 and § 154.658, the City Council shall take a vote to instruct the applicant as to whether the modification can be pursued as a component of the PUD Preliminary Plan review.
XIII-7
4. Effect of a PUD Sketch Plan Review
a. The City Council and Planning Commission’s comments during the PUD Sketch Plan review are explicitly not an approval or denial of the project, and are intended only to provide information for the applicant to consider prior to application for an open space PUD Preliminary Plan.
b. Proposed modifications that receive a majority vote of support from Council may be requested as part of the future PUD Preliminary Plan application, but support to pursue the modification as part of the PUD Sketch Plan in no way guarantees that the modification will be approved as part of the PUD Preliminary Plan.
5. Limitation of Approval
The City Council’s review of an open space PUD Sketch Plan shall remain valid for a period of six (6) months. The City Council, in its sole discretion, may extend the validity of their findings for an additional year.
B. PUD Preliminary Plan
1. Prerequisite
No application for an open space PUD Preliminary Plan will be accepted unless an applicant’s proposal is distinctly similar to one reviewed in the completed the open space PUD Sketch Plan review process which is valid upon the date of application.
2. PUD Preliminary Plan Submittal Requirements
Except as may be waived by the Director of Planning, the following information shall constitute a complete application for an open space PUD Preliminary Plan.
a. All required information for a preliminary plat per Chapter 1102, § 1102.01(C) and § 1102.02.
b. A separate open space PUD Preliminary Plan which includes the following information:
i. Administrative information (including identification of the drawing as an “Open Space PUD Preliminary Plan,” the proposed name of the project, contact information for the developer and individual preparing the plan, signature of the surveyor and civil engineer certifying the document, date of plan preparation or revision, and a graphic scale and north arrow);
ii. Area calculations for gross land area, wetland areas, right-of-way dedications, and proposed public and private parks or open space;
iii. Existing zoning district(s) on the subject land and all adjacent parcels;
iv. Layout of proposed lots with future lot and block numbers. The perimeter boundary line of the subdivision should be distinguishable from the other property lines. Denote Outlots planned for public dedication and/or open space (schools, parks, etc.);
XIII-7
v. The location of proposed septic disposal area(s);
vi. Area calculations for each parcel;
vii. Proposed setbacks on each lot (forming the building pad) and calculated buildable area;
viii. Proposed gross hardcover allowance per lot (if applicable);
ix. Existing contours at intervals of two feet. Contours must extend a minimum of 200 feet beyond the boundary of the parcel(s) in question;
x. Delineation of wetlands and/or watercourses over the property;
xi. Delineation of the ordinary high water levels of all water bodies;
xii. Location, width, and names of existing and proposed streets within and immediately adjacent to the subdivision parcel;
xiii. Easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the subdivision parcel(s);
xiv. The location and orientation of proposed buildings;
xv. Proposed sidewalks and trails;
xvi. Vehicular circulation system showing location and dimension for all driveways, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, service roads, loading areas, fire lanes, emergency access, if necessary, public and private streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, direction of traffic flow and traffic control devices;
xvii. Lighting location, style and mounting and light distribution plan.
xviii. Proposed parks, common areas, and preservation easements (indicate public vs. private if applicable);
xix. Location, access and screening detail of large trash handling and recycling collection areas
c. Proposed architectural theming and performance standards for the development;
d. A grading drainage and erosion control plan prepared by a registered professional engineer providing all information as required by Public Works, the City Engineer, and/or the Director of Planning;
e. A utility plan providing all information as required by Public Works, the City Engineer, and/or the Director of Planning;
f. Results of deep soil test pits and percolation tests, at the rate of no fewer than 2 successful test results for each proposed septic disposal area;
g. The location and detail of signage providing all pertinent information necessary to determine compliance with § 154.212;
h. A tree preservation plan as required by § 154.257;
XIII-7
i. A landscape plan, including preliminary sketches of how the landscaping will look, prepared by a qualified professional providing all information outlined in § 154.258;
j. A traffic study containing, at a minimum, the total and peak hour trip generation from the site at full development, and the effect of such traffic on the level of service of nearby and adjacent streets, intersections, and total parking requirements;
k. A plan sheet or narrative clearly delineating all features being modified from standard open space PUD regulations;
l. Common Interest Community Association documents including bylaws, deed restrictions, covenants, and proposed conservation easements.
m. Any other information as directed by the Director of Planning.
3. PUD Preliminary Plan Review
a. As part of the review process for an open space PUD Preliminary Plan, the Director of Planning shall generate an analysis of the proposal against the expectations for PUDs, and make a recommendation regarding the proposed overlay district for Planning Commission and City Council consideration.
b. The Director of Planning shall prepare a draft ordinance to establish the potential overlay district to be established as a component of the PUD Final Plan.
c. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and consider the application’s consistency with the goals for PUDs, the PUD review criteria, and applicable comprehensive plan goals. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council on the merit, needed changes, and suggested conditions to impose on the PUD.
d. In approving or denying the PUD Preliminary Plan, the City Council shall make findings on the PUD review criteria outlined in § 154.660.
e. As a condition of PUD Preliminary Plan approval; finalization, adoption, and publication of an overlay district ordinance shall need to occur prior to the filing of any future final plat.
4. Effect of a PUD Preliminary Plan Review
Preliminary Plan approval governs the preparation of the PUD Final Plan which must be submitted for final approval in accordance with the requirements of this Article.
5. Limitation of Approval
The City Council’s review of an open space PUD Preliminary Plan shall remain valid for a period of one (1) year. The City Council, in its sole discretion, may
XIII-7
extend the validity of their findings for an additional year.
C. PUD Final Plan
1. Application Deadline
Application for an open space PUD Final Plan shall be submitted for approval within ninety (90) days of City Council approval of the open space PUD Preliminary Plan unless a written request for a time extension is submitted by the applicant and approved by the City Council.
2. PUD Final Plan Submittal Requirements
Except as may be waived by the Director of Planning, the following information shall constitute a complete application for an open space PUD Final Plan.
a. All required information for a final plat per City Code § 153.08;
b. All required PUD Preliminary Plan documents, other than the preliminary plat, shall be updated to incorporate and address all conditions of PUD Preliminary Plan approval.
c. Any deed restrictions, covenants, agreements, and articles of incorporation and bylaws of any proposed homeowners’ association or other documents or contracts which control the use or maintenance of property covered by the PUD.
d. A final staging plan, if staging is proposed, indicating the geographical sequence and timing of development, including the estimated start and completion date for each stage.
e. Up-to-date title evidence for the subject property in a form acceptable to the Director of Planning.
f. Warranty deeds for Property being dedicated to the City for all parks, Outlots, etc., free from all liens and encumbrances.
g. All easement dedication documents for easements not shown on the final plat including those for trails, ingress/egress, etc., together with all necessary consents to the easement by existing encumbrancers of the property.
h. Any other information deemed necessary by the Director of Planning to fully present the intention and character of the open space PUD.
i. If certain land areas or structures within the open space PUD are designated for recreational use, public plazas, open areas or service facilities, the owner of such land and buildings shall provide a plan to the city that ensures the continued operation and maintenance of such areas or facilities in a manner suitable to the city.
3. PUD Final Plan Review
XIII-7
a. The Director of Planning shall generate an analysis of the final documents against the conditions of the open space PUD Preliminary Plan approval, and make a recommendation as to whether all conditions have been met or if additional changes are needed.
b. Staff should once again identify any information submittals that were waived so Council may determine if such is needed prior to making a final decision.
c. The Director of Planning shall finalize the ordinance to establish the proposed overlay district for consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council.
d. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Overlay District ordinance and open space Final PUD Plans, and shall submit a recommendation to the City Council for consideration. Because an open space PUD Preliminary Plan was previously approved, the Planning Commission’s recommendation shall only focus on whether the Ordinance and open space PUD Final Plan are in substantial compliance with the open space PUD Preliminary Plan and the required conditions of approval.
e. The City Council shall then consider the recommendations of the Director of Planning, the public, and the Planning Commission; and make a decision of approval or denial, in whole or in part, on the open space PUD Final Plan. A denial shall only be based on findings that an open space PUD Final Plan is not in substantial compliance with the approved open space PUD Preliminary Plan and/or the required conditions of approval.
f. As a condition of PUD Final Plan approval, publication of the overlay district ordinance shall be required prior to filing of the approved final plat.
g. Planned Unit Development Agreement.
i. At its sole discretion, the City may as a condition of approval, require the owner and developer of the proposed open space PUD to execute a development agreement which may include but not be limited to all requirements of the open space PUD Final Plan.
ii. The development agreement may require the developers to provide an irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the City. The letter of credit shall be provided by a financial institution licensed in the state and acceptable to the City. The City may require that certain provisions and conditions of the development agreement be stated in the letter of credit. The letter of credit shall be in an amount sufficient to ensure the provision or development of improvement called for by the development agreement.
h. As directed by the City, documents related to the PUD shall be recorded against the property.
4. Time Limit
XIII-7
a. A Planned Unit Development shall be validated by the applicant through the commencement of construction or establishment of the authorized use(s), subject to the permit requirements of this Code, in support of the Planned Unit Development within one (1) year of the date of open space PUD Final Plan approval. Failure to meet this deadline shall render the open space PUD Final Plan approval void. Notwithstanding this time limitation, the City Council may approve extensions for validation of up to one (1) year if requested in writing by the applicant; extension requests shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and shall identify the reason(s) why the extension is necessary along with an anticipated timeline for validation of the Planned Unit Development.
b. An application to reinstate an open space PUD that was voided for not meeting the required time limit shall be administered in the same manner as a new open space PUD beginning at open space PUD Preliminary Plan.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.662 OPEN SPACE PUD AMENDMENTS.
Approved open space PUDs may be amended from time to time as a result of unforeseen circumstances, overlooked opportunities, or requests from a developer or neighborhood. At such a time, the applicant shall make an application to the city for an open space PUD amendment.
A. Amendments to Existing Open Space PUD Overlay District(s)
Amendments to an approved open space PUD Overlay district shall be processed as one of the following:
1. Administrative Amendment
The Director of Planning may approve minor changes if such changes are required by engineering or other circumstances, provided the changes conform to the approved overlay district intent and are consistent with all requirements of the open space PUD ordinance. Under no circumstances shall an administrative amendment allow additional lots, or changes to designated uses established as part of the PUD. An Administrative Amendment shall be memorialized via letter signed by the Planning Director and recorded against the PUD property.
2. Ordinance Amendment
A PUD change requiring a text update to the adopted open space PUD overlay district language shall be administered in accordance with adopted regulations for zoning code changes in § 154.105. Ordinance amendments shall be limited to changes that are deemed by the Director of Planning to be consistent with the intent of the original open space PUD approval, but are technically necessary due to construction of the adopted overlay district language.
3. PUD Amendment
Any change not qualifying for an administrative amendment or an Ordinance
XIII-7
amendment shall require an open space PUD amendment. An application to amend an open space PUD shall be administered in the same manner as that required for a new PUD beginning at open space PUD Preliminary Plan.
B. Pre-existing OP Developments
1. Pre-existing OP developments authorized prior to October 4, 2016 shall continue to be governed per the original conditions of approval until the OP development is cancelled by the City, or the OP development is converted to an open space PUD overlay district.
2. An application to amend an existing OP development shall require the development to be converted into an open space PUD beginning at open space PUD Preliminary Plan.
a. Replatting of lots will only be required if the Director of Planning determines such is necessary to implement the requested change.
b. The resulting overlay zoning district shall be applied to all properties within the OP development being amended.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
§ 154.663 PUD CANCELLATION.
An open space PUD shall only be cancelled and revoked upon the City Council adopting an ordinance rescinding the overlay district establishing the PUD. Cancellation of a PUD shall include findings that demonstrate that the PUD is no longer necessary due to changes in local regulations over time; is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan or other application land use regulations; threatens public safety, health, or welfare; or other applicable findings in accordance with law.
§ 154.664 ADMINISTRATION.
In general, the following rules shall apply to all open space PUDs:
A. Rules and regulations
No requirement outlined in the open space PUD review process shall restrict the City Council from taking action on an application if necessary to meet state mandated time deadlines;
B. Preconstruction
No building permit shall be granted for any building on land for which an open space PUD plan is in the process of review, unless the proposed building is allowed under the existing zoning and will not impact, influence, or interfere with the proposed open space PUD plan.
C. Effect on Conveyed Property
In the event that any real property in an approved open space PUD is conveyed in total, or in part, the new owners thereof shall be bound by the provisions of the approved overlay district.
(Ord. 08-152, passed 10-4-2016)
XIII-7
ARTICLE XVIII. RESERVED
XIX-1
ARTICLE XIX. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) REGULATIONS
§ 154.750 INTENT.
This article establishes the procedures and standards for the development of areas as unified, planned developments in accordance with the intent and purpose of this zoning ordinance and the applicable policies of the Comprehensive Plan. Because of the larger size of PUDs and to help achieve the identified objectives for planned unit development sites, this article provides for flexibility in the use of land and the placement and size of buildings in order to better utilize site features and obtain a higher quality of development. Approval of a planned unit development shall result in a zoning change to a specific PUD district, with specific requirements and standards that are unique to that development.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.751 IDENTIFIED OBJECTIVES.
When reviewing requests for approval of a planned unit development, the city shall consider whether one or more of the objectives listed below will be served or achieved. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide a narrative of how the proposed planned development meets one or more of the city’s identified objectives ((A) through (J)). Planned unit developments should not be allowed simply for the purpose of increasing overall density or allowing development that otherwise could not be approved.
A. Innovation in land development techniques that may be more suitable for a given parcel than conventional approaches.
B. Promotion of integrated land uses, allowing for a mixture of residential, commercial, and public facilities.
C. Provision of more adequate, usable, and suitably located open space, recreational amenities and other public facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development techniques.
D. Accommodation of housing of all types with convenient access to employment opportunities and/or commercial facilities; and especially to create additional opportunities for senior and affordable housing.
E. Preservation and enhancement of important environmental features through careful and sensitive placement of buildings and facilities.
F. Preservation of historic buildings, structures or landscape features.
G. Coordination of architectural styles and building forms to achieve greater compatibility within the development and surrounding land uses.
H. Creation of more efficient provision of public utilities and services, lessened demand on transportation, and the promotion of energy resource conservation.
I. Allowing the development to operate in concert with a redevelopment plan in certain areas of the City and to ensure the redevelopment goals and objectives will be achieved.
XIII-7
J. Higher standards of site and building design than would otherwise be provided under conventional land development technique.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.752 ALLOWED DEVELOPMENT.
Uses within the PUD may include only those uses generally considered associated with the general land use category shown for the area on the official Comprehensive Land Use Plan. Specific allowed uses and performance standards for each PUD shall be delineated in an ordinance and development plan. The PUD development plan shall identify all the proposed land uses and those uses shall become permitted uses with the acceptance of the development plan. Any change in the list of uses approved in the development plan will be considered an amendment to the PUD, and will follow the procedures specified in Article 5, Section 154.105 for zoning amendments. (Ord. 08-152, passed 10-01-2016)
A. Permitted Uses. The PUD application shall identify all proposed land uses and those uses shall become permitted uses upon the approval of the planned unit development.
B. Placement of Structures. More than one principal building may be placed on a platted lot within a planned unit development. The appearance and compatibility of buildings in relation to one another, other site elements, and surrounding development shall be considered in the review process.
C. Development Intensity. The PUD may provide for an increase in the maximum gross floor area or floor area ratio by up to 20% of that allowed in the base zoning district, for the purpose of promoting project integration and additional site amenities.
D. Density. The PUD may provide for an increase in density of residential development by up to 20% of that allowed in the base zoning district, for the purpose of promoting diversity of housing types and additional site amenities. Increased residential densities of varying levels will be awarded based upon the provision of a combination of various site amenities outlined in § 154.209. In addition, the city retains the right to evaluate all proposals for bonus density in accordance with the overall goals of the city’s Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan.
E. Building Setbacks. The PUD may provide for a reduction in or elimination of required setbacks in the base zoning district, provided that a landscaped setback area of the minimum width established for the base zoning district is maintained along the periphery of the adjacent zoning district(s).
F. Lot Requirements. The Council may authorize reductions in the area and width of individual lots within a PUD from that required for the base zoning district, provided that such reductions are compensated for by an equivalent amount of open space or other public amenities elsewhere in the planned unit development. Any open space shall not include areas designated as public or private streets. The plan may increase the maximum density beyond that permitted in the base zoning district for the purpose of promoting an integrated project with a variety of housing types and additional site amenities.
G. Other Exceptions. As part of PUD approval, the Council is authorized to approve other exceptions to the zoning controls applicable to the base zoning district, such as the
XIII-7
maximum height of structures or the minimum off-street parking requirements. Such exceptions shall only be granted when they are clearly warranted to achieve the objectives identified in § 154.751.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.753 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
A. Lot Area. A PUD must include a minimum of 5 acres for undeveloped land or 2 acres for developed land within the approved development. Tracts of less than 2 acres may be approved only if the applicant can demonstrate that a project of superior design can be achieved to meet one or more of the identified objectives listed in § 154.751, or that compliance with the Comprehensive Plan goals and policies can be attained through the use of the PUD process. The Planning Commission shall authorize submittal of a PUD for a tract of less than 2 acres prior to submittal of a general concept plan application.
B. Open Space. For all PUDs, at least 20% of the project area not within street rights-of-way shall be preserved as protected open space. Other public or site amenities may be approved as an alternative to this requirement. Any required open space must be available to the residents, tenants, or customers of the PUD for recreational purposes or similar benefit. Land reserved for storm water detention facilities and other required site improvements may be applied to this requirement. Open space shall be designed to meet the needs of residents of the PUD and the surrounding neighborhoods, to the extent practicable, for parks, playgrounds, playing fields and other recreational facilities.
C. Street Layout. In existing developed areas, the PUD should maintain the existing street grid, where present, and restore the street grid where it has been disrupted. In newly developing areas, streets shall be designed to maximize connectivity in each cardinal direction, except where environmental or physical constraints make this infeasible. All streets shall terminate at other streets, at public land, or at a park or other community facility, except that local streets may terminate in stub streets when those will be connected to other streets in future phases of the development or adjacent developments.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.754 DENSITY.
The PUD may provide for an increase in density of residential development by up to 20% of that allowed in the base zoning district. Applicants seeking increased residential density through a Planned Unit Development are required to provide at least 1 or a combination of site amenities that equal the required amount of amenity points to achieve the desired density bonus.
A. Amenity Points and Equivalent Density Increases. Increases in density will be awarded through a 1:1 ratio with amenity points. For every increase in amenity points for a Planned Unit Development, the applicant will be allowed an equivalent amount of density increase, up to a maximum increase of 20%. Table 16-1 outlines the required amount of amenity points to achieve various density increases.
XIII-7
Table 16-1: Amenity Points and Equivalent Density Increases
Amenity Points
Density Increase
5
5%
10
10%
15
15%
20
20%
B. Site Amenities. Site amenities that are eligible for amenity points are listed in Table 16-2, including the associated standards of implementation. Some of the amenities may be awarded a range of amenity point based upon the quality and magnitude of the amenity. Where the amenity does not meet all of the standards required in Table 16-2, no points shall be awarded. Partial points for site amenities shall not be awarded, except as otherwise allowed in Table 16-2.
C. Site Amenities Not Listed. The city may also consider the allotment of amenity points for site amenities that are not otherwise specified within this ordinance as part of the preliminary plan phase of the planned development.
Table 16-2: Site Amenities
Points
Amenity
Standards
5-10
Underground or Structure Parking
Proposed underground or structured parking must be integrated into the primary structure. The purpose of this amenity is to better integrate parking into the site, reduce the amount of surface parking stalls, and reduce the amount of impervious surface. Proposed underground or structured parking must reduce the amount of surface parking stalls located outside of the footprint of the principal structure by a minimum of 25%. Amenity points will be awarded based upon the amount of surface parking stalls reduced (between 25-50%). For every additional 5% of surface parking stalls reduced above 25%, the applicant will be awarded 1 additional amenity point, up to a maximum of 10 amenity points. The facade of any underground or structure parking areas must match the architectural design of the principal structure.
10
Historic Preservation
Preservation, rehabilitation or restoration of designated historic landmarks in a manner that is consistent with the standards for rehabilitation of the Secretary of the Interior as part of the development.
Points
Amenity
Standards
10
Additional Open Space
A minimum of 50% of the site not occupied by buildings shall be landscaped outdoor open space. A minimum of 50% of the provided open space shall be contiguous. Open space classifications that qualify may include natural habitat, neighborhood recreation, trail corridors or open space buffers.
10
Public Right-of-Way
Dedication of land and construction of a public road, trail, pathway, or
XIII-7
Dedication
greenway that is part of an approved city plan, but outside the scope of the immediate project area. Right-of-way improvements should be designed per the specification of the City Engineer.
5
Fire Sprinkler Systems
The installation of fire sprinkler systems, per NFPA 13, 13D or 13R, in structures that are not currently required to install these systems under state code. Amenity points will only be awarded in situations where there are a significant proportion of structures in the development that are not required to be sprinkled under State Building Code. In addition, the density bonus calculation shall only be applied to the number of structures that do not require fire sprinkler systems.
5
Contained Parking
The purpose of this amenity is to better integrate surface parking into the site and reduce the amount of visible surface parking from the public right-of-way. Parking should be rear-loaded and hidden by the building facade, or integrated into the site in some other fashion that is acceptable to the city. This amenity is separate from underground or structure parking.
5
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
The proposed development shall meet the minimum standards for LEED Silver certification. The project does not have to achieve actual LEED certification; however, the developer must submit the LEED checklist and documentation to the city, approved by a LEED Accredited Professional (LEED-AP), which shows that the project will comply with LEED Silver requirements.
5
Pedestrian Improvements
A site and building design that allows for exceptional and accessible pedestrian and/or bicycle access through and/or around a site. The improvements shall use a combination of trails, landscaping, decorative materials, access control and lighting to create safe, clear and aesthetically pleasing pedestrian facilities through and /or around the site that comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act accessibility requirements.
5
Adaptive Reuse
Significant renovation, rehabilitation and adaptive reuse of an existing building(s), rather than demolition.
5
Plaza
The development shall include some form of plaza or public square that is wholly or partly enclosed by a building or buildings. Plazas are landscaped or paved open areas that shall have a minimum area not less than 1,000 square feet. Plazas for commercial or mixed-use development shall be open to the public during daylight hours.
Points
Amenity
Standards
1-5
Enhanced Landscaping
A Landscaping Plan of exceptional design that has a variety of native tree, shrub and plan types that provide seasonal interest and that exceeds the requirements of the Lake Elmo Design Standards Manual. The landscaped areas should have a resource efficient irrigation system. The Landscaping Plan shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect. Amenity points shall be awarded based upon the quality and magnitude of the Landscaping Plan.
3
Enhanced Storm Water Management
Provide capacity for infiltrating stormwater generated onsite with artful rain garden design that serves as a visible amenity. Rain garden designs shall be visually compatible with the form and function of the space and shall include long-term maintenance of the design. The design shall conform to the requirements per the Minnesota Stormwater Manual and shall meet the
XIII-7
approval of the City Engineer.
1-3
Theming
Significant utilization of various elements of Theming consistent with the 2013 Lake Elmo Theming Project, including but not limited to signage, fencing, landscaping, lighting and site furnishings. Amenity points will be awarded based upon the quality and magnitude of Theming elements integrated into the project.
3
Natural Features
Site planning that preserves significant natural features or restores ecological functions of a previously damaged natural environment.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.755 COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
A. Coordination with Subdivision Review. Subdivision review under the subdivision regulations shall be carried out simultaneously with the review of the PUD. The plans required under this subchapter shall be submitted in a form that will satisfy the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance for the preliminary and final plat.
B. Coordination with Other Zoning Requirements. All of the provisions of this chapter applicable to the original district within which the Planned Unit Development District is established shall apply to the PUD District except as otherwise provided in approval of the Final Plan.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.756 PHASING AND GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE.
A. Development Schedule. The City shall compare the actual development accomplished in the various PUD zones with the approved development schedule.
B. Schedule Extension. For good cause shown by the property owner, the City Council may extend the limits of the development schedule.
C. Phasing of Amenities. The construction and provision of all of the common open space, site amenities and public and recreational facilities which are shown on the final development plan must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units, if any. The Development Review Committee shall review all of the building permits issued for the PUD and examine the construction which has taken place on the site. If they find that the rate of construction of dwelling units is greater than the rate at which common open spaces, site amenities and public and recreational facilities have been constructed and provided, they shall forward this information to the City Council for action.
D. Guarantees. A financial guarantee or letter of credit shall be required to guarantee performance by the developer. The amount of this guarantee or letter of credit, and the specific elements of the development program that it is intended to guarantee, will be stipulated in the development agreement.
E. Changes During Development Period
XIII-7
1. Minor changes in the location, placement and height of structures may be authorized by the Development Review Committee if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved and filed with the Planning Director.
2. Changes in uses, any rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, changes in the provision of common open spaces, and all other changes to the approved final development plan may be made only under the procedures for zoning amendments, §§ 154.105. Any changes shall be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final development plan.
F. Rezoning to Original District. If substantial development has not occurred within a reasonable time after approval of the PUD Zoning District, the City Council may instruct the Planning Commission to initiate rezoning to the original zoning district. It shall not be necessary for the City Council to find that the rezoning was in error.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.757 CONTROL OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT FOLLOWING COMPLETION.
A. Final Development Plan Controls Subsequent Use. After the certificate of occupancy has been issued, the use of the land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the planned development shall be governed by the final development plan.
B. Allowed Changes. After the certificate of occupancy has been issued, no changes shall be made in the approved final development plan except upon application as provided below:
1. Any minor extensions, alterations or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be authorized by the Development Review Committee if they are consistent with the purposes and intent of the final plan. No change authorized by this section may increase the cubic volume of any building or structure by more than 10%; and
2. Any building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final development plan unless an amendment to the final development plan is approved under this chapter.
C. Amendment Required for Major Changes. Any other changes in the final development plan, including any changes in the use of common open space, must be authorized by an amendment of the final development plan under the procedures for Zoning Amendments, Article 3.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.758 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING A PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
There are four stages to the PUD process: application conference, general concept plan, preliminary plan and final plan, as described below.
XIII-7
A. Application Conference. Upon filing of an application for PUD, the applicant of the proposed PUD shall arrange for and attend a conference with the Planning Director. The primary purpose of the conference shall be to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain guidance as to the general suitability of his or her proposal for the area for which it is proposed and its conformity to the provisions of this subchapter before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data.
B. General Concept Plan. The general concept plan provides an opportunity for the applicant to submit a plan to the city showing his or her basic intent and the general nature of the entire development without incurring substantial cost. The plan should include the following: overall density ranges, general location of residential and nonresidential land uses, their types and intensities, general location of streets, paths and open space, and approximate phasing of the development.
C. Preliminary Plan. Following approval of the general concept plan, the applicant shall submit a preliminary plan application and preliminary plat, in accordance with the requirements described in § 153.07. The application shall proceed and be acted upon in accordance with the procedures in this subchapter for zoning changes.
D. Final Plan. Following approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit a final plan application and final plat, in accordance with the requirements described in § 153.08. The application shall proceed and be acted upon in accordance with the procedures in this ordinance for zoning changes. If appropriate because of the limited scale of the proposal, the preliminary plan and final plan may proceed simultaneously.
E. Schedule for Plan Approval
1. Developer presents the general concept plan to the Planning Commission for their review and comment.
2. After verification by the Planning Director that the required plan and supporting data are adequate, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, with public notice.
3. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council.
4. The City may request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors.
5. The Council may hold a public hearing after the receipt of the report and recommendations from the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after receipt of the application, then the City Council may proceed without the report. The Council may approve the general concept plan and attach such conditions as it deems reasonable.
6. Following approval of the General Concept Plan, the application may proceed to the preliminary plan phase.
7. Developer presents the preliminary plan to the Planning Commission for their review and comment.
XIII-7
8. After verification by the Planning Director that the required plan and supporting data are adequate, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, with public notice.
9. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council.
10. The City may request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors.
11. The Council may hold a public hearing after the receipt of the report and recommendations from the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to make a report within 60 days after receipt of the application, then the City Council may proceed without the report. The Council may approve the preliminary plan and attach such conditions as it deems reasonable.
12. Following approval of the Preliminary Plan, the application may proceed to the final plan phase.
13. Developer presents the Final Plan to the Planning Commission for their review and comment.
14. After verification by the Planning Director that the required plan and supporting data are adequate, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, with public notice.
15. The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council.
16. The City may request additional information from the applicant concerning operational factors or retain expert testimony at the expense of the applicant concerning operational factors.
17. After the receipt of the report and recommendations from the Planning Commission, the City Council may approve the Final Plan and attach such conditions as it deems reasonable.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.759 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR GENERAL CONCEPT PLAN, PRELIMINARY PLAN AND FINAL PLAN.
Ten copies of the following plans, exhibits and documents shall be submitted at the general concept plan stage, preliminary plan stage and the final plan stage.
A. General Concept Plan Stage
1. General Information
a. The landowner’s name and address and his/her interest in the subject property.
b. The applicant’s name and address if different from the landowner.
XIII-7
c. The names and addresses of all professional consultants who have contributed to the development of the PUD plan being submitted, including but not limited to attorney, land planner, engineer and surveyor.
2. Present Status
a. The address and legal description of the property.
b. The existing zoning classification and present use of the subject property and all lands within 350 feet of the subject property.
c. A map depicting the existing development of the subject property and all land within 350 feet of the subject property and showing the location of existing streets, property lines, easements, water mains, and storm and sanitary sewers, with invert elevations on and within 100 feet of the subject property.
d. Site conditions. Where deemed necessary by the city, graphic reproductions of the existing site conditions at a scale of 1 inch equals 100 feet shall be submitted and contain the following:
i. Contours; minimum 5 foot intervals;
ii. Location, type and extent of tree cover;
iii. Slope analysis; and
iv. Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands, streams, and flood plains within 300 feet of the subject property.
e. A written statement generally describing the proposed PUD and showing its relationship to the City Comprehensive Plan.
f. Schematic drawing of the proposed development concept, including but not limited to the general location of major circulation elements, public and common open space, residential and other land uses.
g. Proposed design features related to proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths, typical cross-sections, and areas other than streets including but not limited to pedestrian ways, utility easements and storm water facilities.
h. Statement of the estimated total number of dwelling units proposed for the PUD and a tabulation of the proposed approximate allocations of land use expressed in acres and as a percent of the total project area, which shall include at least the following:
i. Area devoted to residential use by building type
ii. Area devoted to common open space;
iii. Area devoted to public open space and public amenities;
iv. Approximate area devoted to, and number of, off-street parking and loading spaces and related access;
v. Approximate area, and floor area, devoted to commercial uses; and
vi. Approximate area, and floor area, devoted to industrial or office use.
XIII-7
i. When the PUD is to be constructed in stages during a period of time extending beyond a single construction season, a preliminary schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate beginning and completion date for each such stage and overall chronology of development to be followed from stage to stage
j. The City may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required in this stage which it finds to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal.
k. The City may require the submission of any additional information or documentation which it may find necessary or appropriate to full consideration of the proposed PUD.
B. Preliminary Plan Stage
1. Preliminary plat and information required by § 153.07.
2. General Information
a. The landowner’s name and address and his interest in the subject property.
b. The applicant’s name and address if different from the landowner.
c. The names and addresses of all professional consultants who have contributed to the development of the PUD plan being submitted, including but not limited to attorney, land planner, engineer and surveyor.
d. Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject property to effectuate the proposed PUD, including a statement of all legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual interests held in or affecting the subject property and including an up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered property report, and such other evidence as the City Attorney may require to show the status of title or control of the subject property.
3. Present Status
a. The address and legal description of the property.
b. The existing zoning classification and present use of the subject property and all lands within 350 feet of the property.
c. A map depicting the existing development of the property and all land within 350 feet thereof and indicating the location of existing streets, property lines, easements, water mains and storm and sanitary sewers, with invert elevations on and within one hundred feet of the property.
d. A written statement generally describing the proposed PUD and the market which it is intended to serve and its demand showing its relationship to the city’s Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed PUD is to be designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable regulations of the city.
e. A statement of the proposed financing of the PUD.
XIII-7
f. Site conditions. Graphic reproductions of the existing site conditions at a scale of one 1 inch equals 100 feet. All of the graphics should be at the same scale as the final plan to allow easy cross-reference. The use of overlays is recommended for ease of analysis
i. Contours; minimum two 2 foot intervals.
ii. Location, type and extent of tree cover.
iii. Slope analysis.
iv. Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands and streams and flood plains within 300 feet of the property.
v. Significant rock outcroppings.
vi. Existing drainage patterns
vii. Vistas and significant views.
viii. Soil conditions as they affect development.
g. Schematic drawing of the proposed development concept, including but not limited to the general location of major circulation elements, public and common open space, residential and other land uses.
h. A statement of the estimated total number of dwelling units proposed for the PUD and a tabulation of the proposed approximate allocations of land use expressed in acres and as a percent of the total project area, which shall include at least the following:
i. Area devoted to residential use by building type;
ii. Area devoted to common open space;
iii. Area devoted to public open space and public amenities;
iv. Approximate area devoted to streets;
v. Approximate area devoted to, and number of, off-street parking and loading spaces and related access;
vi. Approximate area, and floor area, devoted to commercial uses; and
vii. Approximate area, and floor area, devoted to industrial or office use.
i. When the proposed PUD includes increases in density of residential development above the base zoning district, a statement describing the site amenities to be included within the PUD, and demonstrating that the proposed site amenities sufficiently achieve the desired density bonus. Applicant is required to demonstrate that all site amenity standards have been met in order to be awarded increased density for residential development.
j. When the PUD is to be constructed in stages during a period of time extending beyond a single construction season, a schedule for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit and the proportion of the total
XIII-7
PUD public or common open space and dwelling units to be provided or constructed during each such state and overall chronology of development to be followed from stage to stage.
k. When the proposed PUD includes provisions for public or common open space or service facilities, a statement describing the provision that is to be made for the care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities.
l. Any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect to property included in the proposed PUD.
m. Schematic utilities plans indicating placement of water, sanitary and storm sewers.
n. The City may excuse an applicant from submitting any specific item of information or document required in this stage which it finds to be unnecessary to the consideration of the specific proposal.
o. The City may require the submission of any additional information or documentation which it may find necessary or appropriate to full consideration of the proposed PUD.
C. Final Plan Stage. Development stage submissions should depict and outline the proposed implementations of the Preliminary Plan stage for the PUD. Information from the general concept and preliminary plan stages may be included for background and to provide a basis for the submitted plan. The development stage submissions shall include but not be limited to:
1. A final plat and information required by § 153.08;
2. Final plans drawn to a scale of not less than 1 inch equals 100 feet (or a scale requested by the Zoning Administrator) containing at least the following information:
a. Proposed name of the development (which shall not duplicate nor be similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat heretofore recorded in the county where the subject property is situated);
b. Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and any significant topographical or physical features of the property;
c. The location, size, use and arrangement including height in stories and feet and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area of proposed buildings, including manufactured homes, and existing buildings which will remain, if any;
d. Location, dimensions of all driveways, entrances, curb cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles, and all other circulation elements including bike and pedestrian; and the total site coverage of all circulation elements;
e. Location, designation and total area of all common open space;
XIII-7
f. Location, designation and total area proposed to be conveyed or dedicated for public open space, including parks, playgrounds, school sites and recreational facilities;
g. The location of applicable site amenities, if any;
h. Proposed lots and blocks, if any and numbering system;
i. The location, use and size of structures and other land uses on adjacent properties;
j. Detailed sketches and provisions of proposed landscaping;
k. General grading and drainage plans for the developed PUD; and
l. Any other information that may have been required by the Planning Commission or Council in conjunction with the approval of the Preliminary Plan;
3. An accurate legal description of the entire area within the PUD for which final development plan approval is sought;
4. A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling units and expected population;
5. Density calculations, including proposed density bonuses above the base zoning district. To be granted increased density of residential development, the applicant must submit a schedule of site amenities with proposed designs and standards. The applicant must demonstrate that site amenity standards in Table 15-2 have been met to be rewarded additional density;
6. A tabulation indicating the gross square footage, if any, of commercial and industrial floor space by type of activity (e.g. retail or office);
7. Preliminary architectural “typical” plans indicating use, floor plan, elevations and exterior wall finishes of proposed building, including manufactured homes;
8. A detailed site plan, suitable for recording, showing the physical layout, design and purpose of all streets, easements, rights of way, utility lines and facilities, lots, block, public and common open space, general landscaping plan, structure, including mobile homes, and uses;
9. Preliminary grading and site alteration plan illustrating changes to existing topography and natural site vegetation. The plan should clearly reflect the site treatment and its conformance with the approved concept plan; and
10. A soil erosion control plan acceptable to watershed districts, Department of Natural Resources, Natural Resources Conservation Service, or any other agency with review authority, clearly illustrating erosion control measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 154.760 CITY COSTS.
XIII-7
The applicant shall make a deposit of a fee escrow with the City for the purpose of reimbursing any costs directly related to a given development. Such costs include but are not limited to professional fees and expenses incurred by the City for consultants (including but not limited to planners, engineers, architects and attorneys) who the City determines in its sole judgment are necessary to assist in reviewing, implementing or enforcing the provisions of this article. The amount of the deposit, and any addition to it that the City may later require, shall be established by the Planning Director. The City and the applicant may agree to share the costs of consultants based upon a specific written agreement. Any funds not used by the City shall be returned to the applicant at the conclusion of the project.
(Ord. 08-070, passed 2-19-2013)
XIII-7
ARTICLE XX. SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
§ 154.800 SHORELAND MANAGEMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.
A. Purpose. The ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103F, Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462. The purpose of the Shoreland Management Overlay District is to preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters and conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands through the following activities:
1. Regulate placement of sanitary and waste treatment facilities on shorelands of public waters to prevent pollution of public waters and public health hazards resulting from the facilities.
2. Regulate alteration of shorelands of public waters to prevent excessive sediment pollution, increased water runoff and excessive nutrient runoff pollution.
3. Preserve and enhance the unique aesthetic appearance and ecological value of the shoreland.
4. Regulate the construction of buildings and changes of land use in shorelands to minimize property damage during periods of high water.
B. Definitions. Words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in Subd. 01: Definitions; of Chapter 11: General Code Provisions, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
C. Shoreland Management Overlay District
1. Shoreland Classifications. The public waters in Table 17-1 have been classified by the commissioner of natural resources, consistent with the classifications assigned by the commissioner under Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3300, as: natural environment (NE), recreational development (RD) and tributary (T) shorelands.
Table 17-1: Shoreland Classifications
DNR ID #
Name
Location
Ordinary High Water Level
Class
82011601
Armstrong (north of CSAH 10)
Sec 28, T29, R21
1020.3
NE
82011602
Armstrong (south of CSAH 10)
Sec 28, T29, R21
1019.3
NE
82009900
Clear
Sec 2 & 11, T29, R21
-
NE
82010100
DeMontreville
Sec 4, 5 & 9,T29, R21
929.3
RD
82010500
Berschen’s Pond
NE
82011000
Downs
Sec 24, T29, R21
889.1
NE
82010900
Eagle Point
Sec 22 & 27, T29, R21
896.5
NE
82010600
Elmo
Sec 13, 14, 23, 24 & 26, T29, R21
885.6
RD
82010800
Friedrich Pond
Sec 15 & 22, T29, R21
-
NE
XIII-7
82011300
Goose
Sec 27, 34 & 35, T29, R21
924.4
NE
82011100
H.J. Brown Pond
Sec 26, T29, R21
-
NE
82007400
Horseshoe
Sec 25, T29, R21
876.8
NE
82010400
Jane
Sec 9 & 10, T29, R21
924.0
RD
82011700
Kramer
Sec 35, T29, R21
-
NE
82010300
Olson
Sec 8 & 9, T29, R21
929.3
RD
N/A
Raleigh Creek North (to Eagle Point Lake)
Sec 16, 21 & 22, T29, R21
-
T
N/A
Raleigh Creek South (Eagle Point Lake to Lake Elmo)
Sec 22, 23 & 227, T29, R21
-
T
82011200
Rose
Sec 25 & 36, T29, R21
-
NE
82010700
Sunfish
Sec 14, T29, R21
896.4
NE
82010000
Unnamed
Sec 4, T29, R21
-
NE
82031300
Unnamed
Sec 12, T29, R21
-
NE
N/A
Unnamed to Wilmes Lake
Sec 33, T29, R21
-
T
N/A
Unnamed Tributary
Sec 25, T29, R21
-
T
Classifications
RD = Recreational Development Lake Classification
NE = Natural Environment Lake Classification
T = Tributary River Classification
Notes to Table 17-1:
a. As measured from and perpendicular to the ordinary high water level (OHWL)
2. Land Uses in Shoreland Districts. All uses of land shall be regulated by the applicable zoning district subject to applicable conditions. Notwithstanding the underlying zoning district, the following uses shall be regulated in shoreland districts as specified in Table 17-2:
Table 17-2: Permitted (P) and Conditional (C) Uses, Shoreland Classifications
Shoreland Classification
Land Uses
Recreational Development
Natural Environment
Tributary River
Residential
P
P
P
Commercial
P
C
C
XIII-7
Public and Civic Uses
P
C
C
Outdoor Recreationa
C
C
C
Agricultural and Related Usesb, c
P
P
P
Industrial and Extractive Uses
-
-
-
Utilities, Transportation and Communications
C
C
C
Accessory Uses
P
P
P
Planned Developments (PUDs)
C
C
C
Forest Land Conversion
C
C
C
Notes to Table 17-2:
a. City owned parks and open space and any uses or structures accessory to such uses are permitted within shoreland areas.
b. Vegetative clearing within shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not permitted.
c. New feedlots are not allowed in any Shoreland Management Overlay District.
3. Shoreland Standards. The standards in Table 17-3 shall apply within shoreland areas to principal, conditional and accessory uses and structures:
Table 17-3: Shoreland Standards
Shoreland Classification
Standards
Recreational Development
Natural Environment
Tributary River
Minimum structure setback from County, State or Federal road right-of-way
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
Minimum setback from right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads or streets not classified
20 feet
20 feet
20 feet
Minimum structure setback from an unplatted cemetery or historical sitea
50 feet
50 feet
50 feet
Minimum structure setback from the Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL)b, c, e
Seweredd
75 feet
150 feet
50 feet
Unseweredd
100 feet
150 feet
100 feet
Minimum structure setback from top of bluff
30 feet
30 feet
30 feet
Minimum septic system setback from OHWL
75 feet
150 feet
75 feet
Minimum low floor elevation above the 100-year flood elevation
2 feet
2 feet
2 feet
Maximum impervious lot coverage
Sewerede
30%
XIII-7
Unsewered
15%
Minimum lot sizef, riparian lots
Sewered
Single family detached
20,000 sf
40,000 sf
Same as zoning district
Two-family or duplex
35,000 sf
70,000 sf
Triplex
120,000 sf
160,000 sf
Same as zoning district
Quad
160,000 sf
200,000 sf
Unsewered
Single family detached
40,000 sf
80,000 sf
Same as zoning district
Two-family or duplex
80,000 sf
120,000 sf
Minimum lot sizef, non-riparian lots
Sewered
Single family detached
15,000 sf
20,000 sf
Same as zoning district
Two-family or duplex
26,000 sf
35,000 sf
Triplex
38,000 sf
52,000 sf
Quad
49,000 sf
65,000 sf
Unsewered
Single family detached
40,000 sf
80,000 sf
Same as zoning district
Two-family or duplex
80,000 sf
160,000 sf
Minimum lot width,f, g riparian lots
Sewered
Single family detached
75 feet
125 feet
75 feet
Two-family or duplexe
135 feet
225 feet
115 feet
Triplexe
195 feet
325 feet
150 feet
Quade
255 feet
425 feet
190 feet
Unsewered
Single family detached
150 feet
200 feet
100 feet
Two-family or duplexe
225 feet
300 feet
150 feet
Minimum lot width, nonriparian Lots
Sewered
Single family detached
75 feet
125 feet
75 feet
Two-family or duplexe
135 feet
220 feet
115 feet
Triplexe
190 feet
315 feet
150 feet
XIII-7
Quade
245 feet
410 feet
190 feet
Unsewered
Single family detached
150 feet
200 feet
100 feet
Two-family or duplexe
265 feet
400 feet
150 feet
Maximum Structure Height
35 feet
35 feet
35 feet
Notes to Table 17-3:
a. Reduction of the required setback from a historic site is permitted with the approval of the office of the Minnesota State Archeologist.
b. Where structures exist on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to the adjoining setbacks from the Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL), provided the proposed building is not located in a shore impact zone or bluff impact zone.
c. Roads, driveways and parking areas shall meet the minimum structure setback. Where no alternative exists, such improvements may be placed within the required structure setbacks provided they are designed to adapt to the natural landscape, soil erosion is minimized and no construction shall occur in shore or bluff impact zones. Exceptions to setback requirements must comply with the rules and regulations of local watershed districts.
d. Commercial, public and civic uses located on lots with public waters frontage shall be setback double the required setback or be substantially screened from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
e. Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads within Natural Environment Shoreland districts must also meet standards set forth in Section (C)(5)(c).
f. Minimum lot size and width requirements apply to residential uses only.
g. Lots Intended As Controlled Accesses to Public Waters or as Recreation Areas for Use by Owners of Nonriparian Lots within Subdivisions. Must meet or exceed the following standards:
They must meet the width and size requirements for residential lots, and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled access lots.
i. If docking, mooring, or over-water storage of more than six (6) watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the percent of the requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond six, consistent with the following table:
Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements
Ratio of Lake Size to Shore Length
(acres/mile)
Required increase in frontage (percent)
Less than 100
25%
100-200
20%
201-300
15%
301-400
10%
Greater than 400
5%
ii. They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the subdivision who are provided
XIII-7
riparian access rights on the access lot; and covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring, or docking. They must also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the non-significant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing, or picnicking. The covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked, or stored over water, and must require centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also require all parking areas, storage buildings, and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
4. Design Criteria for Structures
a. Water Oriented Accessory Structures. Each lot may have one (1) water oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setbacks if the structure complies with the following provisions:
i. Structure Height. The structure or facility must not exceed ten (10) feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, from the average grade of the structure to the peak of the roof. Detached decks must not exceed eight (8) feet above grade at any point.
ii. Structure Size. Water oriented accessory structures cannot occupy an area greater than two-hundred and fifty (250) square feet.
iii. Structure Setback. The setback of the structure or facility landward from the Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL) must be at least ten (10) feet on a recreational development lake and fifty (50) feet on a natural environment lake.
iv. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
v. The roof of the structure may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area.
vi. The structure or facility must not be used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
vii. Watercraft Storage Facilities. As an alternative for recreational development water bodies, water oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and including the storage of related boating and water oriented sporting equipment, may occupy up to four hundred (400) square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is twenty (20) feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
XIII-7
b. Stairways, Lifts and Landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
i. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four (4) feet in width. Wider stairways may be used for public open space or recreation properties.
ii. Landings for stairways and lifts must not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Landings larger than thirty-two (32) square feet may be used for public open space or recreation properties.
iii. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings.
iv. Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above ground on posts or pilings or placed into the ground, provided that they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
v. Stairways, lifts and landing must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.
vi. Facilities such as public and private watercraft access ramps, lifts, access-related parking areas, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of subsections (i) through (v) above are satisfied and provided the vegetative screening and erosion control requirements are met.
c. Roads, Driveways, and Parking Areas. Public and private roads, driveways, and parking areas must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.
d. Steep slopes. Local government officials must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
5. Subdivision Standards. The following standards shall apply to subdivisions in shoreland areas:
a. Each lot created through subdivision must be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. In determining suitability the City will consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health,
XIII-7
safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision, or of the community at large.
b. Subdivisions must conform to all other official controls adopted by the City of Lake Elmo. Subdivisions will not be approved that are designed so variances from one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be approved.
c. On natural environment lakes, subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes, and quads must also meet the following standards:
i. Each building must be set back at least 200 feet from the ordinary high water level.
ii. Each building must have common sewage treatment and water systems that serve all dwelling units in the building.
iii. Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building.
iv. No more than 25 percent of a lake’s shoreline can be in a duplex, triplex, or quad environment.
6. Agricultural Activities. The following standards shall apply to agricultural activities in shoreland areas:
a. The shore impact for parcels with permitted agricultural uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the OHWL.
b. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (resource management systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district or the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service.
c. New animal feedlots are not allowed in shoreland. Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots or resumption of old feedlots are conditional uses and must meet the following standards:
i. Feedlots must be designed consistent with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7020;
ii. Feedlots must not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or the bluff impact zone and must not expand to a capacity of 1,000 animal units or more; and,
iii. Old feedlots not currently in operation may resume operation consistent with Minnesota Statute Section 116.0711.
d. The use of pesticides, fertilizers or animal wastes within shoreland areas shall be done in such a way as to minimize impacts on shore impact zones by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
7. Shoreland Alterations. The purpose of this section is to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent back slumping and protect fish and wildlife habitat. Shoreland alterations shall be allowed in accordance with the following standards:
XIII-7
a. No principal or accessory structure or use shall be placed within bluff or shore impact zones other than agricultural activities as permitted by subsection (C)(6)(b).
b. Shore impact zones shall be maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district.
c. Intensive Vegetative Clearing. Intensive vegetation clearing within shore and bluff impact zones and/or steep slopes is not permitted. Intensive clearing within shoreland areas outside of bluff or shore impact zones and steep slope areas is subject to standards set forth in Sub. (C) (8) of this Section.
d. Limited Tree Clearing. Limited clearing of trees and shrubs and the cutting, pruning and trimming of trees within bluff and shore impact zones or steep slopes to accommodate picnic areas, trails and water access and to provide a view to the water from a principal dwelling site shall be permitted provided the screening of structures, as viewed from the water, is not substantially reduced and that the shading of water surface is along rivers is preserved. These provisions do not apply to the removal of tree limbs or branches that are dead or pose a safety hazard.
e. Grading in Shoreland Areas. All grading and filling activities must be in conformance with the Wetland Conservation Act. Any grading or filling on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones involving the movement of ten (10) or more cubic yards of material or involving more than fifty (50) cubic yards of material elsewhere in a shoreland area shall require the submission of a Grading Permit. Approval shall be granted only if the following conditions are met:
i. The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;
ii. Ground cover such as mulch is used for temporary bare soil coverage and permanent ground cover, such as sod, is established;
iii. Methods to prevent erosion and trap sediment during construction are employed;
iv. Altered areas are stabilized to accepted erosion control standards;
v. Fill is not placed so as to create unstable slopes;
vi. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes are certified by qualified professionals as to slope stability and must not create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater;
vii. Alterations below the OHWL of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources per Minn. Stats. § 103G.245 and 103G.405;
viii. Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the OHWL and the height of the riprap above the OHWL does not exceed three feet; and
ix. Alterations of topography shall only be permitted if accessory to a permitted or conditional use.
x. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zone.
XIII-7
8. Forest management standards. The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation or conversion of forested use to a nonforested use must be conducted consistent with the following standards:
a. Timber harvesting and associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the Sustaining Minnesota Forest Resources: Voluntary Site-Level Forest Management Guidelines for Landowners, Loggers and Resource Managers
b. Forest land conversion to another use requires issuance of a conditional use permit and adherence to the following standards:
i. Shore and bluff impact zones must not be intensively cleared of vegetation.
ii. An erosion and sediment control plan is developed and approved by the City and local soil and water conservation district and is consistent with the City’s Storm Water and Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance (150.270) before issuance of a conditional use permit for the conversion.
9. Stormwater Management. Stormwater management shall be in accordance with the City’s Storm Water and Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance (§150.270). In addition, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Minnesota Stormwater Manual shall be used as guidance. Within shoreland areas, the following standards also apply:
a. Existing natural drainage ways, wetlands and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter and retain storm water in a manner consistent with local watershed district rules and regulations before discharge to public waters.
b. Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, and erosion potential and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as grading is complete and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site are removed.
c. Use of fertilizers, pesticides or animal wastes within shoreland areas must be done in a way to minimize impact on the shore impact zone or public water by proper application.
d. New constructed storm water outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
10. Private Utilities. The following provisions shall apply in shoreland areas:
a. Private subsurface sewage treatment systems shall meet applicable City and County requirements and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's Chapter 7080 standards. Publicly owned sewer systems shall be used where available.
b. Any private water supply to be used for domestic purposes shall meet quality standards established by the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
i. Private wells must be located, constructed, maintained, and sealed in accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the Water Well Construction Code of the Minnesota Department of Health.
11. Planned Unit Developments (PUD)
a. Purpose. To protect and enhance the natural and scenic qualities of shoreland areas during and after development and redevelopment of high density residential uses.
b. Density. Deviation from the minimum lot size standards of Table 17-3 of this ordinance is allowed if the standards in this Section are met.
XIII-7
c. Processing of PUDs. Planned unit developments are processed according to the procedures and standards of Article XVI and Article XVII, whichever is more restrictive. Approval cannot occur until all applicable environmental reviews are complete.
d. Application for a PUD. The applicant for a PUD must submit the following documents prior to final action on the application request:
i. A property owners association agreement with mandatory membership, and consistent with 11 (h) (iv) of this ordinance.
ii. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other instruments that:
1. Address future vegetative and topographic alterations, construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft, and construction of commercial buildings in residential PUDs; and
2. Ensure preservation and maintenance of open space in perpetuity accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in 11 (h) of this ordinance.
e. Density Determination. Proposed new or expansions to existing planned unit developments must be evaluated using the following procedures.
i. Step 1. Identify Density Analysis Tiers. Divide the project parcel into tiers by drawing one or more lines parallel to the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:
Classification
Tier Depth
No Sewer (ft)
Sewer (ft)
Recreational Development Lakes
267
267
Natural Environment Lakes
400
320
Tributary Rivers
300
300
ii. Step 2. Calculate Suitable Area for Development. Calculate the suitable area within each tier by excluding all wetlands, bluffs, or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters.
iii. Step 3. Determine Base Density
1. Divide the suitable area within each tier by the minimum single residential lot area in Table 17-3 (use required minimum riparian lot areas for the 1st tier unless no lots within the 1st tier are riparian) for lakes to determine the allowable number of dwelling units, or base density, for each tier. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any tier closer to the waterbody.
XIII-7
2. All PUDs must meet the design standards in Section 11 (f) of this ordinance.
iv. Step 4. Determine if the Site can Accommodate Increased Density.
1. The PUD may provide for an increase in density of up to 20% allowed in the base zoning district or in Table 17-3, whichever is more restrictive, if: Structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level:
2. Are increased to at least 50 percent greater than the minimum setback; or
3. The impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography, or additional acceptable means and the setback is at least 25 percent greater than the minimum setback.
f. Design Criteria. All PUDs must meet the following design criteria:
i. General Design Standards.
1. Dwelling units must be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development.
2. Dwelling units must be designed and located to meet the dimensional standards, other than those for lot area and width, in Table 17-3:
3. Shore recreation facilities:
a. Must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them based on a suitability analysis (as explained in Subd. (C) (5) (a) of this Section).
b. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring, or docking of watercraft must not exceed one for each allowable dwelling unit in the first tier.
c. Launching ramp facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units located in other tiers.
4. At least 50 percent of the total project area shall be preserved as open space and must meet standards outlined in 11 (g) of this ordinance.
5. PUDs shall be connected to public water supply and sewer systems. When sewer is not available, individual septic systems are not allowed; community sewage treatment systems are required.
XIII-7
6. Approval from the DNR is required to ensure compliance with additional regulations.
ii. Structures, parking areas, and other facilities must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color, or other means acceptable to the local unit of government, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided.
iii. Accessory structures and facilities, except water oriented accessory structures, must meet the required structure setback and must be centralized.
g. Open Space Requirements.
i. Open space must constitute at least 50 percent of the total project area within the shoreland and must include:
1. Areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;
2. Portions of the shore impact zone preserved in its natural or existing state as follows:
a. For existing residential PUD’s, at least 50 percent of the shore impact zone
b. For new residential PUDs, at least 70 percent of the shore impact zone.
ii. Open space may include:
1. Outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of lots in the subdivision and by the general public; and
2. Stormwater detention facilities, subsurface sewage treatment systems (if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems), and other required site improvements not prohibited herein may be applied to this requirement.
3. Non-public water wetlands
iii. Open space shall not include:
1. Road rights-of-way, or land covered by roads, structures or parking surfaces;
2. Lots, unless owned in common by an owners association;
XIII-7
3. Commercial facilities or uses;
4. Land below the OHWL of public waters.
h. Open Space Maintenance and Administration Requirements.
i. Open space preservation. The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation, and allowable uses, must be preserved.
ii. Before final approval of a PUD is granted, the developer/owner shall provide for the preservation and maintenance, in perpetuity, of open space and the continuation of the development as a community.
iii. The instruments must prohibit:
1. Commercial uses ;
2. Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine maintenance;
3. Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and other materials; and
4. Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft.
iv. Development organization and functioning. All planned unit developments must use an owners association with the following features:
1. Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit owner and any successive owner;
2. Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association’s expenses, and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or dwelling sites;
3. Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing conditions; and
4. The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes, and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facilities.
12. Nonconformities.
a. All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this ordinance may continue, but will be managed according to Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.357 Subd. 1e and other regulations of this community for alterations and additions; repair after damage; discontinuance of use; and intensification of use.
b. All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other requirements of this ordinance. Any deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance.
c. Setback averaging. Where structures exist on the adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to
XIII-7
the adjoining setbacks from the OHWL, provided the proposed structure is not located in a shore impact zone or in a bluff impact zone;
d. Setbacks of decks. Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following criteria and standards are met:
i. The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established.
ii. A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure.
iii. The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive.
iv. The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.
13. Surface Water-Oriented Uses. Uses with needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters must meet the following standards:
a. In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards, uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures.
b. Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need.
c. No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the county sheriff.
d. Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information.
e. Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights.
D. Administration.
1. Variances. Variances may only be granted in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Section 462.357 and are subject to the following:
a. A variance may not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this ordinance; and
b. For properties with existing sewage treatment systems, a certificate of compliance, consistent with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7082.0700 Subp. 3, is required for variance approval. A sewage treatment system shall be considered compliant if the only deficiency is the system’s improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
XIII-7
2. Conditional Uses. All conditional uses in the shoreland area are subject to a thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic, vegetation, and soil conditions to ensure:
a. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;
b. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed form public waters is limited;
c. There is adequate water supply and on-site sewage treatment; and
d. The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.
3. Mitigation.
a. In evaluating all variances, conditional uses, zoning and building permit applications, the zoning authority shall require the property owner to address, when related to and proportional to the impact, the following conditions to meet the purpose of this ordinance, to protect adjacent properties, and the public interest:
i. Advanced storm water runoff management treatment;
ii. Reducing impervious surfaces;
iii. Increasing setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
iv. Restoration of wetlands;
v. Limiting vegetation removal and/or riparian vegetation restoration;
vi. Provisions for the location, design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, water supply systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and parking areas; and
vii. Other conservation-designed conditions the zoning authority deems necessary.
b. In evaluating plans to construct sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes, conditions to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation shall be attached to permits.
4. Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources
a. All notices of public hearings to consider variances, ordinance amendments, or conditional uses under shoreland management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner’s designated representative at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat.
b. All approved ordinance amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions approving variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing
XIII-7
record, the notification of the approved variance shall also include the summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.
c. Any request to change the shoreland management classification of public waters must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner’s designated representative for approval, and must include a resolution and supporting data as required by Minnesota Rules, part 6120.3000, subp.4.
d. Any request to reduce the boundaries of shorelands of public waters must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner’s designated representative for approval. The boundaries of shorelands may be reduced when the shoreland of water bodies with different classifications overlap. In these cases, the topographic divide between the water bodies shall be used for adjusting the boundaries.
5. Subsurface Sewage Treatment System Certificate of Compliance. A certificate of compliance, consistent with Minnesota Rules Chapter 7082.0700 Subp. 3, is required whenever a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on or use of the property. A sewage treatment system shall be considered compliant if the only deficient is the system’s improper setback from the ordinary high water level.
(Ord 08-111 passed 5-20-2014; Am. Ord. 08-166 passed 3-7-2017)
XIII-7
ARTICLE XXI. CLOSED LANDFILL RESTRICTED
§ 154.801 CLOSED LANDFILL RESTRICTED
A. Purpose. The ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes § 115B.412, Sub. 9. The purpose of the Closed Landfill Restricted zoning district is to protect the integrity of the landfill’s remediation and monitoring systems; protect human healthy and public safety at each landfill; and accommodate local government needs and desires for land use at the qualified facility with consideration for health and safety requirements.
§ 154.802 PERMITTED, CONDITIONAL, AND INTERIM USES.
Table 18-1 lists all permitted, conditional, and interim uses allowed in the Closed Landfill Restricted (CLR) zoning district. “P” indicates a permitted use, “C” a conditional use, and “I” an interim use. Uses not so indicated shall be considered prohibited. Cross-references listed in the table under “Standards” indicate the location within this Ordinance of specific development standards that apply to the listed use.
CLR
Standard
Closed Landfill Management
P
154.012 (B) (10)
Solar Farms
C
154.802, 154.803 (A), 154.915
§ 154.803 LOT DIMENSIONS AND BUILDING BULK REQUIREMENTS.
CLR
Structure setback requirements (feet)
Front yard
50
Side yard
50
Rear yard
25
§ 154.804 SITE DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Solar Farms. Proposed locations and plans for Solar Farms must be approved by both the City and Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA). Required buffer width may be waived through conditional use permit approval
ARTICLE XXII. DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS –
XIII-7
RESTRICTIONS ON NUISANCE AND HAZARDOUS ACTIVITIES
§ 154.900 MINIMUM STANDARDS; PURPOSES.
All uses, buildings, and structures permitted pursuant to this chapter shall conform to the performance and design standards set forth in this subchapter; the standards are determined to be the minimum standards necessary to comply with the intent and purposes of this Code as set forth in this subchapter.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 1)
§ 154.901 PRINCIPAL BUILDING.
A. There shall be no more than 1 principal building on any 1 parcel of land.
B. No cellar, garage, recreational vehicle or trailer, basement with unfinished exterior structure above, or accessory building shall be used at any time as a dwelling unit.
C. All principal buildings hereafter erected on unplatted land shall be so placed as to avoid obstruction of future street or utility extensions and shall be so placed as to permit reasonably anticipated future subdivisions and land use.
D. All principal buildings shall meet or exceed the minimum standards of the Minnesota State Building Code, the Minnesota State Uniform Fire Code, the Minnesota Department of Health, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and the city’s on-site sewage treatment ordinance.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Subd. 2)
§ 154.902 PUBLIC CONVENIENCE STRUCTURES.
No public use or convenience structure shall be located within the public right-of-way. The structure shall include but is not limited to trash containers, institutional direction signs, bicycle racks, benches, plating boxes, awnings, flag poles, bus shelters, light standards, stairs, stoops, light wells, newspaper storage containers, mail boxes for private mail delivery firms, loading wells, signs, and others. The structures do not include utility facilities.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Subd. 5)
§ 154.903 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
A. The traffic generated by any use shall be controlled so as to prevent:
1. Congestion of the public streets;
2. Traffic hazards; and
3. Excessive traffic through residential areas, particularly truck traffic. Internal traffic shall be so regulated as to ensure its safe and orderly flow. Traffic into and out of business and industrial areas shall in all cases be forward-moving with no backing into street.
XIII-7
B. On any corner lot, nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in a manner that impedes vision between a height of 2-1/2 and 10 feet above the center line grades of the intersecting streets within 15 feet of the intersecting street right-of-way lines. This restriction shall also apply to the planting of crops and to yard grades that result in elevations that impede vision within 15 feet of any intersecting street right-of-way lines.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 8)
§ 154.904 STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
No uses associated with the bulk storage of over 2,000 gallons of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, chemicals, and similar liquids shall be permitted except as are specifically permitted by the Council after finding that fire, explosion, or water or soil contamination hazards are not present that would be detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare. All existing above-ground liquid storage tanks having a capacity in excess of 2,000 gallons shall secure such permission within 12 months following enactment of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall require the development of diking around the tanks, suitably sealed to hold a leakage capacity equal to 115% of the tank capacity. Any existing storage tank that, in the opinion of the Planning Commission or the Council, constitutes a hazard to the public safety shall discontinue operations within 5 years following enactment of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 9)
Cross-reference: Explosives, see § 154.099
§ 154.905 EXPLOSIVES.
No activities involving the storage, use, manufacture of materials or products which could be detonated shall be permitted except those that are specifically permitted by the Council. The materials shall include but not be confined to all primary explosives such as lead azide and mercury fulminate; all high explosives and boosters such as TNT, tetryl and nitrates; propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, and nitroglycerin; blasting explosives such as dynamite; and nuclear fuel and reactor elements such as uranium 235 and plutonium.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 10)
§ 154.906 FALLOUT SHELTERS.
Fallout shelters may be permitted in any district, subject to yard regulations of the district. The shelters may contain or be contained in other structures or be constructed separately, and in addition to shelter use, may be used for any use permitted in the district, subject to the district regulations on that use.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 11)
§ 154.907 DWELLING UNITS IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
XIII-7
Dwelling units for watchman and family shall be considered as an accessory use and shall conform to all applicable regulations for the district in which located, except as modified in this section:
A. A dwelling unit in the commercial district located in a commercial structure shall not occupy the front half of the ground floor or basement.
B. A dwelling unit in a commercial or industrial building shall not contain more than 1 bedroom, unless the building is part of a planned unit development.
C. No detached dwelling unit shall be permitted in the commercial or industrial districts, except as part of a planned unit development.
D. A dwelling unit which is a part of the principal building shall be provided with 2 exits; 1 shall be a direct outside exit.
E. All buildings shall conform to the Building Code and applicable fire codes.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 12)
§ 154.908 RADIATION AND ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation of ordinary business or household equipment and appliances. Any such emissions are declared to be a nuisance.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 14) Penalty, see § 154.999
§ 154.909 TEMPORARY FARM DWELLING.
A. No person shall park or occupy a mobile home on the premises of a lot with any occupied dwelling or on any land which is situated outside an approved mobile park, except as provided in this section: The mobile home will be an accessory dwelling unit located on a farm of at least 75 acres in size.
B. Occupants
1. The mobile home will be occupied by persons who are either:
a. Members of the family of the persons occupying the principal dwelling house on the premises; or
b. Members of the family engaged in the occupation of farming on the premises as partners or other business associates of the persons living in the principal dwelling house on the premises, and who earn 50% or more of their annual gross income for federal income tax purposes from farming on the premises.
2. The mobile home use will expire and terminate at such time as the persons occupying the mobile home are no longer engaged in farming on the premises as required by § 154.102(B); and
XIII-7
3. At the time of termination, the mobile home temporary farm dwelling shall be removed from the premises within 30 days when practicable.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 16)
§ 154.910 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION OFFICE.
A temporary mobile home may be permitted in any district if the Zoning Administrator finds the following conditions are satisfied:
A. The mobile home will be utilized as a field headquarters for directing the ongoing construction of a project;
B. Only 1 mobile home shall be permitted on each project;
C. The mobile home shall have adequate sanitary facilities or the site shall have temporary sanitary facilities installed;
D. The mobile home and parking spaces shall adhere to all setbacks for the zoning district and shall only utilize the permitted access driveway;
E. The mobile home shall not be used as a dwelling unit; and
F. The mobile home shall be removed within 30 days of the permit termination.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 17)
§ 154.911 RECREATION VEHICLES.
A. RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE includes the following:
1. Any vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses;
2. Any structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation;
3. Any portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation, constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle; and
4. Any folding structure, mourned on wheels and designed for travel, recreation and vacation use.
B. A recreational vehicle may not be parked on any land outside of an approved camping area or an approved sales lot, except that the parking of 1 unoccupied vehicle in an accessory private garage, building, or in the rear yard of a residential district is permitted, provided that no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in the trailer while it is so parked or stored.
C. A recreational vehicle of the type described in division (A) of this section and owned by a non- resident, guest or visitor may be parked or occupied by the guest or visitor on property on which a permanent dwelling unit is located for a period not to exceed 30 days while visiting the resident of the property. The recreation vehicle shall have self-
XIII-7
contained sanitary facilities or standard on-site facilities as required by the community Building Official/Sanitarian.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 18)
§ 154.912 RECREATIONAL CAMPING AREA.
Any area, whether privately or publicly owned, used on a daily, nightly, weekly, or longer basis for the accommodation of 5 or more tents, or recreational camping vehicles free of charge or for compensation. “Recreational camping area” excludes children’s camps, industrial camps, migrant labor camps, as defined in Minnesota Statutes and State Commissioner of Health Rules, U.S. Forest Service Camps, State Forest Service Camps, State Wildlife Management Areas or state-owned public access area, which are restricted in use to picnicking and boat landing, also referred to as “area” in this chapter.
A. Trailer Park Operation. No person, firm, or corporation shall develop or operate any recreational camping area without having first obtained a conditional use permit.
B. Application. The application for an approval, in addition to the requirements, shall indicate the name and address of the developer and a general description of the construction schedule and construction costs. The application shall be accompanied by 20 copies of plans, which indicate the following:
1. Location and size of camping area;
2. Location and size of all vehicle or trailer lots, dead storage areas, recreation areas, laundry drying areas, roadways, parking spaces and sites, and all setback dimensions;
3. Detailed landscaping plans and specifications;
4. Detailed grading plan with 2-foot contour intervals;
5. Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, water systems, electrical service, and gas service;
6. Plans for an overhead street lighting system shall be submitted for approval by the City Engineer;
7. The method of disposing of garbage and refuse;
8. Location, size, and character of each lot;
9. Location and size of all streets abutting the area;
10. Road construction plans and specifications;
11. Plans for any and all structures; and
12. Such other information as may be required or requested by the city.
C. Designation of Uses. The area design shall designate specific areas for primitive tent camping, recreation vehicles, and trailers.
D. Trailer Park Lots. On any area lot, the placement of recreational vehicles shall conform to all setbacks and other requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located.
XIII-7
E. Performance standards for trailer parks.
1. All water supply and sanitary facilities must conform to the current recommendations of the Minnesota Department of Health and Pollution Control Agency.
2. All areas shall have at least 20% of the land area (exclusive of internal streets) developed for recreational use (i.e., tennis courts, children’s play equipment, swimming pools, golf greens and the like) which shall be developed and maintained by the owner or operator at owner’s/operator’s expense. All areas must have an area or areas set aside for dead storage and “over-load” parking. Open air drying of laundry and clothes shall be allowed only in approved areas established and maintained exclusively for that purpose.
3. All utilities, such as sewer, water, fuel, electric, telephone, and television antennae lead- ins, shall be buried to a depth specified by the City Engineer, and there shall be no overhead wires or support poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes. All utility connections shall be approved by the city prior to connection. Plans for the disposal of surface storm water shall be approved by the City Engineer.
4. All land area shall be adequately drained and properly maintained free of dust, refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris. The proposed method of garbage, waste, and trash disposal must be approved by the Council and must meet or exceed the current Minnesota Department of Health standards.
5. All structures shall require a building permit. It is not the intent of this chapter to repeal or abrogate any part of the Building Code. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in addition to and in conjunction with the provisions of the Building Code.
6. The source of fuel for cooking, eating, or other purposes for each lot shall be approved by the Council. Periodic inspection of the entire park by the Zoning Administrator may be required.
7. No vehicle shall be allowed in a vehicle park that does not conform to the requirements of the Motor Vehicle Code of the State of Minnesota. Every structure in a vehicle park shall be developed and maintained in a safe, approved, and substantial manner.
8. A properly landscaped area shall be adequately maintained around each area. No vehicular building shall be located within 20 feet of the exterior boundary of any park or within 40 feet of any exterior, existing public road right-of-way.
9. Each area shall contain at least 30 fully developed vehicle lots. Access to parks shall be provided as required by the Zoning Administrator. The access streets shall be paved in accordance with minimum specifications required for the construction of any city street.
10. Advertising shall be limited to 1 sign not to exceed 24 square feet, with lighting, height, and location as approved by the Council.
XIII-7
11. Each area must have 1 or more central community buildings with central heating which must be maintained in a safe, clean, and sanitary condition. The buildings shall be adequately lighted during all hours of darkness and shall contain laundry washers, dryers and drying areas, in addition to public toilets and lavatory. Each area shall have a building for the use of the operator distinctly marked “office” and the marking shall be illuminated during all hours of darkness. An illuminated map of the park shall be displayed at the office.
12. An adult caretaker must be on duty at all times in the area. The operator of every area shall maintain a register in the office of the area indicating the name and address of the owner and occupants of each vehicle, license number of each recreational vehicle and automobile of each occupant, and the date of arrival and departure of each vehicle. The corners of each lot shall be clearly marked and each lot shall be numbered. The grounds of the park shall be adequately lighted from sunset to sunrise.
13. No dogs or animals shall be permitted to run at large within the area. No public address or loud speaker system will be permitted.
14. No RV camping area shall be located so that drainage from the park or camp area will endanger any water supply. All areas shall be well drained. No portion of the area shall be located in an area subject to flooding. No waste water from the trailers or other recreational vehicles shall be deposited on the surface of the ground.
15. Each lot shall abut or face a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than 16 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to the internal area road system.
16. Lots shall be designed to allow an open space of at least 50 feet between each vehicle or tent and at last 30 feet between the vehicle or tent and the front lot line butting the interior camping area road system.
17. Each lot shall have 200 square feet of off-street parking space, or as approved by the Zoning Administrator, for 2 automobiles. No parking spaces shall be closer than 10 feet to any side yard lot line.
18. Each lot, or pair of lots, shall contain adequate containers to store, collect, and dispose of refuse and garbage so as to create no health hazards, rodent damage, insect breeding, accident or hazardous fire areas, or air pollution. Each lot, or pair of lots, shall have insect-proof, water-tight, rodent-proof refuse container on the lot(s).
19. Each lot shall be no further than 400 feet from the nearest, readily available drinking water supply.
20. Each lot with an individual water system connection shall have a water supply capable of supplying 100 gallons of water per site per day.
21. All recreational vehicle areas shall be equipped with at least 1 central toilet, bathing and laundry building, which meets or exceeds the requirements of the
XIII-7
Minnesota Department of Health, except that in primitive tent camping areas, only toilet facilities shall be required as per the Minnesota Department of Health.
22. Outdoor cooking or burning shall be confined to fireplaces, pits, grills, or stoves, which shall be permanently affixed to a designated location on each lot as per the site plan. Each permanent cooking or burning facility shall be placed on the lot so as to minimize the fire hazards and smoke nuisance.
23. Incineration of refuse, garbage, or other wastes shall not be permitted within any recreational vehicle camping area.
24. All centralized refuse collection and equipment, and area maintenance equipment shall be stored in a screened and fenced service yard within the camping area.
(1997 Code, § 300.13 Sub. 19)
§ 154.913 AGRICULTURAL SALES BUSINESSES.
Agricultural sales businesses shall be allowed upon the issuance of an interim use permit in agricultural and rural areas that are guided for rural agricultural density or future sewered development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Agricultural sales businesses shall be subject to the following performance standards:
A. Activities shall be limited to those listed within the definition for Agricultural Sales Business.
B. The agricultural sales business shall be located on land owned or leased by the producer or the operator of the business, and not within or on any public right-of-ways or easements.
C. The operator must be able to demonstrate at all times to the city that there is sufficient access, parking and maneuvering space, that the location and adequacy of approaches are sufficient, that there is suitable and safe access for pedestrians, and that customer parking is away from the travel way and in close proximity to the agricultural sales business.
D. All waste materials shall be enclosed in containers provided on the site, and shall not generate any nuisance impacts on adjacent properties.
E. All sidewalks, roadways, and parking areas shall be treated as necessary to eliminate dust nuisance impacts on adjacent properties.
F. The maximum gross floor area that can be devoted to sales activities is limited to 20,000 square feet.
G. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the parking requirements for other commercial uses, as per § 154.051(C). All parking must occur on-site, be on a primary surface such as class 5 gravel or pavement: and must be set back at least 30 feet from all property lines.
H. The minimum lot size shall be 40 acres for any agricultural sales business.
I. On-site wastewater handling system shall be planned and designed by a licensed professional and approved by the city or its designated responsible authority. Usable primary and alternate well and septic sites sized for the maximum anticipated usage of
XIII-7
the property shall be identified on the property. Alternate sites shall be protected in the site plan design, and will only need to be used upon failure of a primary site.
J. Any structures constructed for the agricultural sales business shall be consistent on design and appearance with other agricultural buildings in the area.
K. Trip generation shall be limited to the yearly average daily trips calculated for the underlying zoning, with no daily trip generation to exceed twice the daily calculation rate for the underlying zoning. The base daily trip generation is established at 180 vehicle trips per day for even 40 acres.
L. The maximum impervious coverage for the buildings, parking areas and other uses devoted to the agricultural sales business shall not exceed 40,000 square feet and the remainder shall be suitably landscaped.
M. Any activities that are defined as an agricultural entertainment business shall require a separate interim use permit.
N. Any exterior storage of equipment and materials other than the display of products being sold or agricultural equipment currently in use on the property shall be prohibited, unless otherwise exempted in accordance with §§ 150.001 through § 150.003 of this code.
O. There shall be a minimum buffer of 100 feet between any sales areas or sales buildings and any adjacent residential property lines.
P. Roof top or outside building mechanical equipment must be screened from view from adjacent properties and rights-of-way with an opaque material architecturally compatible with the building(s).
Q. Trash containers must be located inside or screened in an acceptable manner.
R. The operator shall adhere to the general review criteria applicable to all interim use permit applications.
S. No activities or structures beyond those specified in the interim use permit shall be added before review by the city to determine compliance with this section.
(Ord. 08-006, passed 6-17-2008; Am. Ord. 08-031-A, passed 10-5-2010)
§ 154.914 AGRICULTURAL ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES.
Agricultural entertainment businesses shall be allowed upon the issuance of an interim use permit in agricultural and rural areas that are guided for rural agricultural density or future sewered development in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. Agricultural entertainment businesses shall be subject to the following performance standards:
A. An agricultural entertainment business shall adhere to all performance standards as outlined in § 154.913 for an agricultural sales business;
B. The property proposed to be used for agricultural entertainment must be located with direct access to a collector or arterial street as identified in the Comprehensive Plan;
C. Discharge of firearms, including blanks, shall not be allowed on the property;
XIII-7
D. The property owner must take reasonable steps to prevent trespassing on adjacent properties by employees, contractors or patrons.
(Ord. 08-031-A, passed 10-5-2010)
(Ord. 08-198, passed 2-7-2018)
§ 154.915 ENFORCEMENT.
A. Application to City Personnel. The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform any official duty imposed by this chapter shall not subject the officer or employee to a penalty imposed for violation unless a penalty is specifically provided for such failure.
B. Equitable Relief. In the event of a violation or the threatened violation of any provision of this chapter, or any provision or condition of a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the city in addition to other remedies may institute appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation or threatened violation.
(1997 Code, § 300.14) (Am. Ord. 08-006, passed 6-17-2008)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is provided shall be subject to the terms of § 10.99.
B. The violation of any provision of this chapter, except for §§ 154.120 through 154.128, or the violation of the conditions or provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 10.99.
(1997 Code, § 300.14)
 
 
 
 




 


