7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 1/444
PREFACE
The City Code of Little Falls was originally published in 1976 and has been kept current by regular
supplementation. In 1990, Sterling Codifiers began providing supplement service for the City Code.
This City Code of the City of Little Falls, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including
ordinance 14, seventh series, effective April 1, 2019. Ordinances of the City adopted after said
ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or
inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of
the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
CHARTER
OF THE
CITY OF LITTLE FALLS, MINNESOTA
CHAPTER 1
NAME, BOUNDARIES, POWERS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.01. Name And Boundaries.
The city of Little Falls in the county of Morrison, and the state of Minnesota, when this charter takes
effect, shall continue to be a municipal corporation, under the name of the city of Little Falls, herein
called the "city", with the same boundaries as now are or hereafter may be established. A current map
of said boundaries, with supporting notes and memoranda, shall be on file and maintained in the office
of the city engineer.
Section 1.02. Division Of The City Into Wards And Precincts.
The city is hereby divided into three (3) wards as equal in population as practicable. Present ward and
precinct boundaries shall continue until changed by ordinance adopted by the city council. A current
ward and precinct boundary map shall be maintained at all times in the office of the city administrator.
The city council at any time may, and within a reasonable time after the filing of the results of each
United States decennial census with the secretary of state shall, consider ward boundaries and
readjust the same to provide a division by population as nearly equal as practicable. All changes in
ward and precinct boundaries shall be by ordinance. (This section amended by ordinance no. 75,
second series, adopted June 14, 1982.)
Section 1.03. Powers Of City.
The city shall have all powers which it may now or hereafter be possible for a municipal corporation in
this state to exercise in harmony with the constitutions of this state and of the United States. It is the
intention of this charter that every power which the people of the city might lawfully confer upon
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 2/444
themselves as a municipal corporation by specific enumeration in this charter shall be deemed to have
been so conferred by the provisions of this section. This charter shall be construed liberally in favor of
the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting
in any way the generality of the power herein sought to be conferred.
Section 1.04. Charter A Public Act.
This charter shall be a public act and need not be pleaded or proved in any court.
CHAPTER 2
FORM AND ORGANIZATION OF CITY GOVERNMENT
Section 2.01. Form Of Government.
The form of government established by this charter is the "mayor-council plan".
Section 2.02. Boards, Commissions And Committees.
The council may by resolution establish, regulate and abolish such committees from within its
membership, and for such purposes as it may deem necessary or desirable. The council may by
ordinance or resolution establish, regulate and abolish, such boards and commissions from without its
membership, to advise the council with respect to any municipal function or activity, to investigate any
subject of interest to the city, or to perform quasi-judicial functions. If the purpose for which such board
or commission is established is to continue beyond the period during which the initial membership
thereof would be expected to serve, then establishment shall be by ordinance, otherwise it may be by
resolution. The library board shall, upon adoption of appropriate ordinances dealing therewith, no
longer be organized pursuant to statutes but rather in accordance with the city charter and applicable
ordinances.
Section 2.03. Elective Officers.
The mayor and aldermen shall be the elective officers of the city.
Section 2.04. The Council.
The council shall be composed of a mayor and seven (7) aldermen. Two (2) aldermen shall be elected
by and from the electors of each ward in the city and one alderman shall be elected by and from the
electors of the city at large. Aldermen shall be residents of the city and an alderman elected or
appointed to represent a ward shall be a resident of the ward from which the alderman is elected or
appointed. Provided, however, that if redistricting results in a change of ward boundaries, it shall
neither shorten or lengthen the then current term of any alderman. Provided, further, that to preserve
staggered terms where the terms of candidates from a redistricted or newly created ward would expire
at the same time, the candidate receiving the largest number of votes shall be elected for a term of
four (4) years and the candidate receiving the next largest number of votes shall be elected for a term
of two (2) years. Any determination as between redistricted or newly created wards, which shall be
under represented during transition, shall be made in a council meeting by lot. Except as otherwise
herein provided, all aldermen of the council shall hold their offices for terms of four (4) years and until
their successors are elected and qualified. The council shall be judges of the election of the mayor
and aldermen. The council shall exercise the legislative power of the city and determine all matters of
policy. (This section amended by ordinance no. 76, second series, adopted June 14, 1982.)
Section 2.05. The Mayor.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 3/444
The mayor shall be a resident of the city and elected by and from the electors at large for a term of
four (4) years. The mayor shall exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred and imposed
upon the mayor by this charter, the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. The mayor shall
be recognized as the official head of the city for all ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the
purposes of serving civil process, and the governor for the purposes of martial law. The mayor shall
study the operations of the city government and shall report to the council any neglect, dereliction of
duty, or waste, that may come to the mayor's attention, on the part of any officer or department of the
city. In time of public danger or emergency the mayor may take command of the police, maintain order
and enforce the law. The mayor shall attend council meetings and give the council such information
and make recommendations as the mayor may deem to be in the best interest of the city. The mayor
shall have authority to appoint and promote police officers subject to confirmation by the council. The
mayor shall have authority to suspend, demote, or discharge police officers without confirmation by
the council, but subject to confirmation by the council upon the written request of such suspended,
demoted, or discharged officer within ten (10) calendar days of the mayor's action.
All ordinances and resolutions before they take effect shall be approved by the mayor. If the mayor
approves, the mayor shall attach thereto or endorse thereon the mayor's approval and if the mayor
does not approve, the mayor shall return them to the council with the mayor's objections thereto by
returning them to the city administrator for presentation to the council at their next regular or special
meeting. Upon return of any ordinance or resolution by the mayor the vote by which it was passed
shall be deemed to be reconsidered and the question shall again be put before the council and it may
then be adopted by the affirmative vote of six (6) of the aldermen. If so passed, it shall then have the
same effect as if approved by the mayor. If any ordinance or resolution is not returned by the mayor to
the city administrator within five (5) days, Sundays and holidays excepted, after being presented to the
mayor, the same shall have the effect as if approved by the mayor.
It shall be the duty of the mayor to appoint all members of boards, commissions and committees
under the applicable provisions of this charter and ordinances relating thereto. All such appointments
shall be subject to confirmation by majority vote of the council. If, within thirty (30) days after creation
of a board, commission or committee, or the occurrence of a vacancy thereon, the mayor fails or
refuses to make such appointment, the council may, on its own motion, make such appointment;
provided, that in the event of the rejection by the council of any such appointment, an additional thirty
(30) day limitation period shall commence from the time of such rejection. (This section amended by
ordinance no. 54, second series, adopted December 29, 1980.)
Section 2.06. Incompatible Offices.
No member of the council or the mayor may hold any paid appointive office or paid employment for
the city other than that to which he or she was elected during his or her term in office, except that a
member of the council or the mayor may be paid, as provided by statute, for service rendered as a
member of the board of equalization. (This section amended by ordinance no. 54, second series,
adopted December 29, 1980.)
Section 2.07. Vacancies In Office.
A vacancy in the council or office of mayor, shall be deemed to exist in case of the failure of any
person elected or appointed thereto to qualify within ten (10) days following such election or
appointment, or by reason of the death, resignation, removal from office, removal from the city,
removal of an alderman from the ward from which the alderman was elected, or the conviction of a
felony of any such person after his qualification. In each such case the council shall declare such
vacancy to exist. The council may also declare a vacancy when a member thereof is absent from
council meetings for a continuous period of three (3) months or more. When a vacancy exists such
vacancy shall be filled by the council forthwith until such vacancy can be filled by election at the next
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 4/444
general city election. All elections to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term. (This section
amended by ordinance no. 54, second series, adopted December 29, 1980.)
Section 2.08. Investigation Of City Affairs.
The council and mayor, or either of them and any officer or officers formally authorized by them, or
either of them, shall have the power to make investigations into the city's affairs, to subpoena
witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books and papers. The council shall
provide for an audit of the city's accounts at least once a year by the state department in charge of
such work or by a public accountant. The council may at any time provide for an examination or audit
of the accounts of any officer or department of the city government and it may cause to be made any
survey or research study of any subject of municipal concern.
Section 2.09. City Employees, Their Wages, Salaries, Benefits And Regulations.
The council shall have complete authority with reference to employment, discharge or suspension
(except police officers) of all city employees, wages, and salaries to be paid such employees,
employee benefits, and all other matters of regulations, control and other contract provisions, subject
to any civil service laws now in effect for the city adopted in the future by the city. The council shall
also have complete authority for supervision and lines of authority of city employees unless the same
be delegated as otherwise provided herein.
Section 2.10. The City Administrator.
The council shall appoint a city administrator and delegate to the city administrator whatever
administrative powers and duties they deem necessary or proper for the administration of city affairs.
Such delegation may include, but is not limited to, supervision of city employees and department
heads. The council may at any time rescind or amend authority delegated to the city administrator. At
no time shall such delegation abridge the authority of an alderman or the mayor in fulfilling his duties
granted in this charter. The city administrator shall be responsible for keeping minutes of council
proceedings and such other records and perform such other duties as the charter or council may
require. The city administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period and may be removed by the
council at any time. The city administrator shall act as city clerk in all matters of reference to that
position. (This section amended by ordinance no. 54, second series, adopted December 29, 1980.)
Section 2.11. The City Attorney.
The council shall appoint a city attorney, and such assistants as may be necessary or advisable, to
represent the city in matters, civil and criminal, involving the city. He shall be responsible directly to the
council. Among other duties he shall furnish legal opinions and advice upon request of the mayor, city
council, any member of the city council, or city administrator, and perform such other professional
duties as the city council or city administrator may request, and act as "revisor of ordinances". (This
section amended by ordinance no. 58, second series, adopted March 23, 1981.)
CHAPTER 3
COUNCIL ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE
Section 3.01. Council Meetings.
At the first regular meeting in January following a regular municipal election, the newly elected
members of the council shall assume their duties. They shall proceed to elect by ballot from their
number a president and vice president. Thereafter, the council shall hold such regular meetings as
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 5/444
may be prescribed or allowed by ordinance. The council may also hold such special meetings by
calling the same in accordance with a duly adopted ordinance. Members of the council may waive
notice of special meetings. Action on all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by roll call vote of
the council. The council by ordinance shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of
business. A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a
smaller number may adjourn from time to time. The council may by ordinance provide a means by
which a minority may compel the attendance of absent members. (This section amended by ordinance
no. 107, second series, adopted September 12, 1983.)
Section 3.02. The President And Vice President Of The Council.
The president of the council shall preside over its meetings. He shall perform the duties of the mayor,
except the exercise of veto power, during disability, absence or vacancy in office, of the mayor. The
vice president of the council shall perform duties of the president during the disability, absence or
vacancy in office of the president.
Section 3.03. Ordinances And Resolutions.
Except as in this charter otherwise provided, all legislation shall be by ordinance. The council may by
ordinance provide that payment of liabilities, making and assessing of local improvements, issuance of
bonds, and other matters relating to a specific municipal act and not of general application, be
accomplished by resolution. The affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the council shall be
required for the adoption of ordinances and resolutions except as otherwise provided in this charter.
(This section amended by ordinance no. 107, second series, adopted September 12, 1983.)
Section 3.04. Procedure In Ordinances.
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be the words: "THE CITY OF LITTLE FALLS ORDAINS".
Every ordinance shall be introduced in writing. No ordinance, except an emergency ordinance, shall
be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced or within three (3) days thereafter without the
unanimous consent of the entire council. Any person may obtain, free of charge, a copy of an
ordinance which has been introduced by making a request therefor at the office of the city
administrator. Provided, that such free distribution shall not apply to an ordinance code.
Section 3.05. Emergency Ordinances.
An emergency ordinance is an ordinance necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
health, safety or welfare in which the emergency is defined and declared in preamble thereto. No
prosecution shall be based upon provisions of an emergency ordinance until twenty four (24) hours
after the ordinance has been filed with the city administrator and posted in three (3) conspicuous
places or until the ordinance has been published once in the official newspaper, unless the person
charged with violation had actual notice of the adoption of the ordinance prior to the act or omission of
which complaint is made. The affirmative vote of a majority of the council present and voting thereon
shall be required for the adoption of an emergency ordinance.
Section 3.06. Amendment And Repeal Of Ordinances.
Every ordinance purporting to amend an ordinance shall set forth therein the section or sections of the
original ordinance in the amended form of such section or sections. Every ordinance for the repeal of
an ordinance shall refer to the ordinance to be repealed by its number and caption. Repeal of codified
ordinances may be by reference to the chapter, section, subdivision, subparagraph or item
designation only. Amendment of codified ordinances may be by reference to the chapter, section,
subdivision, subparagraph or item designation and stating the amended form thereof.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 6/444
Section 3.07. Signing And Publication Of Ordinances And Resolutions.
Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the council shall be signed by the council president, and
attested to by the city administrator and filed and preserved by him. In the absence of the council
president, the council vice president shall sign as acting for him. Every ordinance shall be published
once in the official newspaper. Provided, that if notice of the adoption of an emergency ordinance is
given by posting, then publication shall not be required.
Section 3.08. When Ordinances And Resolutions Take Effect.
A resolution and an emergency ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its adoption or at such
later date as is fixed therein. Every other ordinance shall take effect seven (7) days after publication or
at such later date as is fixed therein. Every ordinance and resolution adopted by the voters of the city
shall take effect immediately upon its adoption or at such later time as is fixed therein.
CHAPTER 4
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Section 4.01. The Regular Municipal Election.
A regular municipal election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of
each even numbered year at such place or places as the council may designate. The city
administrator shall give at least two (2) weeks previous notice of the time and place of holding such an
election and of the officers to be elected and proposals to be submitted, if any, by posting in at least
one public place in each voting precinct and by publication at least once in the official newspaper.
Failure to give such notice shall not invalidate such election.
Section 4.02. Special Elections.
The council may by resolution order a special election and provide all means for holding it. At least
two (2) weeks published notice of a special election shall be given in the official newspaper and by
posting such notice in at least one public place in each voting precinct. The procedure at such election
shall conform as nearly as possible to that prescribed for other municipal elections.
Section 4.03. Nominations For Office.
At any time not more than eight (8) weeks preceding any municipal election, but no less than four (4)
weeks prior to such election, any eligible person may become a candidate for any office elective under
the provisions of this charter either by filing an affidavit with the city administrator, or by having an
application in his behalf signed by at least five (5) qualified voters and containing his endorsed
acceptance thereon. Such affidavit or application shall be on a form furnished by the city and stating
the full name and address of the candidate and the office for which he is a candidate, together with the
ward which he seeks to represent unless the office is one for which election is at large. (This section
amended by ordinance no. 55, second series, adopted January 19, 1981.)
Section 4.04. Procedure At Elections.
Subject to the provisions of the charter and applicable state laws, the council may by ordinance further
regulate the conduct of municipal elections. Except as otherwise provided in this charter or in
ordinances adopted pursuant thereto, the general laws of the state of Minnesota pertaining to
elections shall apply to municipal elections.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 7/444
Section 4.05. Withdrawal.
Any candidate may withdraw not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the day following the last
day for filing, by filing a written notice of withdrawal, signed and sworn to by him, with the city
administrator.
Section 4.06. Canvass Of Elections.
The council shall meet and canvass the election returns within two (2) days, after any regular or
special election, make full declaration of the results as soon as possible, and file a statement thereof
with the city administrator. Such statement shall include the following: a) the total number of ballots
cast; b) the total number of good ballots cast; c) the total number of spoiled or defective ballots cast;
d) the vote for each candidate with an indication of those who were elected; e) the votes on any
question submitted, if any; f) a true copy of the ballots used; g) the names of the judges and clerks of
the election; and h) such other information as may seem pertinent. All successful candidates shall
forthwith be notified in writing by the city administrator of the election. (This section was amended by
Minnesota statutes section 205.185.)
CHAPTER 5
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Section 5.01. Powers Reserved By The People.
The people of Little Falls reserve to themselves the power, in accordance with the provisions of this
charter to initiate and adopt any ordinance, to require such an ordinance when adopted by the council
to be referred to the electors for approval or disapproval, and to recall elected public officials. These
powers shall be called the initiative, the referendum, and the recall, respectively.
Section 5.02. Expenditures.
No member of any initiative, referendum, or recall committee, no circulator of a signature paper, and
no signer of any such paper, or any other person, shall accept or offer any reward, pecuniary or
otherwise, for service rendered in connection only with the circulation thereof, but this shall not
prevent the committee from paying for legal advice and from incurring an expense not to exceed such
sum as may be provided by ordinance for stationery, copying, printing, and notaries' fees. Any
violation of the provisions of this section is a misdemeanor.
Section 5.03. Further Regulations.
The council may provide by ordinance such further regulations for the initiative, referendum, and
recall, not inconsistent with this charter, as it deems necessary.
Section 5.04. Initiation Of Ordinances.
Any five (5) electors may form themselves into a committee for the initiation of any ordinance. Before
circulating any petition they shall file a certified copy of their proposed ordinance with the city
administrator together with their names and addresses as members of such committee. A copy of this
certificate shall be a part of each signature paper and no signature paper shall be put into circulation
previous to such certification.
Section 5.05. Form Of Petition And Signature Papers.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 8/444
The petition for the adoption of any ordinance shall consist of the ordinance, together with all the
signature papers and affidavits thereto attached. Such petition shall not be complete unless signed by
a number of registered voters of the city equal to at least twenty percent (20%) of the total number of
voters registered on the date of the last preceding regular municipal election. All the signatures need
not be on one signature paper, but the circulator of every such paper shall make an affidavit that such
signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be.
Each signature shall be in substantially the following form:
INITIATIVE PETITION
proposing an ordinance to . . . . . . . (stating the purpose of the ordinance), a copy of which ordinance
is hereto attached. This ordinance is sponsored by the following committee of electors:
NameAddress
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
The undersigned electors, understanding the terms and the nature of the ordinance hereto attached,
petition the council for its adoption, or in lieu thereof, for its submission to the electors for their
approval.
NameAddress
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
At the end of the list of signatures shall be appended the affidavit of the circular mentioned above.
(This section was amended by Minnesota statutes section 205.10.)
Section 5.06. Filing Of Petitions And Action Thereon.
All the signature papers shall be filed in the office of the city administrator as one instrument. Within
five (5) days after the filing of the petition, the city administrator shall ascertain by examination the
number of electors whose signatures are appended thereto and whether this number is at least equal
to twenty percent (20%) of the total number of voters registered on the date of the last preceding
regular municipal election. If he finds the petition insufficient or irregular, he shall at once notify in
writing five (5) of the committee of sponsors of that fact, certifying the reasons for this finding. The
committee shall then be given thirty (30) days in which to file additional signature papers and to
correct the petition in all other particulars. If at the end of that period the petition is found to be still
insufficient or irregular, the city administrator shall file it in his office and shall notify, in writing, each
member of the committee of that fact. The final finding of the insufficiency or irregularity of a petition
shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose, nor shall it prevent the council
from referring the ordinance to the electors at the next regular or any special election at its option. All
notifications of sponsors shall be by registered or certified mail at the sponsors last known address.
(This section amended by ordinance 55, second series, adopted January 19, 1981; amd. by
Minnesota statutes section 205.10.)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 9/444
Section 5.07. Action Of Council On Petition.
When the petition is found to be sufficient, the city administrator shall so certify the council at its next
meeting, stating the number of petitioners and the percentage of the total number of voters which they
constitute, and the council shall at once read the ordinance and refer it to an appropriate committee,
which may be a committee of the whole. The committee or council shall thereupon provide for public
hearings upon the ordinance, after the holding of which the ordinance shall be finally acted upon by
the council not later than sixty five (65) days after the date upon which it was submitted to the council
by the city administrator. If the council fails to adopt the proposed ordinance, or adopts it in a form
different from that set forth in the petition and unsatisfactory to the petitioners, the proposed ordinance
shall be submitted to the council to the vote of the electors at the next regular municipal election; but if
the number of signers of the petition is at least equal to ten percent (10%) of the total number of voters
registered on the date of the last preceding regular municipal election, the council shall call a special
election upon the ordinance. Such special election shall be held not less than thirty (30) or more than
forty five (45) days from the date of final action on the ordinance by the council or after the expiration
of sixty five (65) days from the date of submission to the council when there has been no final action;
but if a regular election is to occur within three (3) months, the council may submit the ordinance at
that election. If the council passes the proposed ordinance with amendments and at least four-fifths
(4/5) of the committee of petitioners do not express their dissatisfaction with such amended form by a
statement filed with the city administrator within ten (10) days of the passage thereof by the council,
the ordinance need not be submitted to the electors.
Section 5.08. Initiative Ballots.
The ballots used when voting upon any such proposed ordinance shall state the substance of the
ordinance and shall give the voter the opportunity to vote either "yes" or "no" on the question of
adoption. If a majority of the electors voting on any such ordinance vote in favor of it, it shall thereupon
become an ordinance of the city. Any number of proposed ordinances may be voted upon at the same
election but the voter shall be allowed to vote for or against each separately. In case of inconsistency
between two (2) initiated ordinances approved at one election, the one approved by the higher
percentage of electors voting on the question shall prevail to the extent of the inconsistency.
Section 5.09. Initiation Of Charter Amendments.
Nothing in this charter shall be construed as in any way affecting the right of the electors under the
constitution and statutes of Minnesota to propose amendments to this charter.
Section 5.10. The Referendum.
If prior to the date when an ordinance takes effect a petition signed by registered voters of the city
equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of voters registered on the date of
the last preceding regular municipal elections, is filed with the city administrator requesting that any
such ordinance be repealed or be submitted to a vote of the electors, the ordinance shall thereby be
prevented from going into operation. The council shall thereupon reconsider the ordinance at its next
regular meeting, and either repeal it or by roll call vote reaffirm its adherence to the ordinance as
adopted. In the latter case the council shall immediately order a special election to be held thereupon,
or submit the ordinance at the next regular municipal election, pending which the ordinance shall
remain suspended. If a majority of the electors voting thereon is opposed to the ordinance, it shall not
become effective; but if a majority of the electors voting thereon favors the ordinance, it shall go into
effect immediately or on the date therein specified. (This section amended by ordinance no. 55,
second series, adopted January 19, 1981.)
Section 5.11. Referendum Petitions.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 10/444
The requirements laid down in section 5.04 and 5.05 above as to the formation of committees for the
initiation of ordinances and as to the form of petitions and signature papers shall apply to the
referendum as far as possible, but with such verbal changes as may be necessary. A referendum
petition shall read as follows:
REFERENDUM PETITION
proposing the repeal of an ordinance to (stating the purpose of the ordinance) a copy of which
ordinance is hereto attached. The proposed repeal is sponsored by the following committee of
electors.
NameAddress
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
The undersigned petitioners, understanding the nature of the ordinance hereto attached and believing
it to be detrimental to the welfare of the city, petition the council for its submission to a vote of the
electors for their approval or disapproval.
NameAddress
1.
2.
3.
Section 5.12. Referendum Ballots.
The ballots used in any referendum election shall conform to the rules laid down in section 5.08 of this
charter for initiative ballots.
Section 5.13. The Recall.
Any five (5) electors may form themselves into a committee for the purpose of bringing about the
recall of any elected officer of the city. The committee shall certify to the city administrator the name of
the officer whose removal is sought, a statement of the grounds for removal in not more than two
hundred fifty (250) words, and their intention to bring about his recall. A copy of this certificate shall be
a part of each signature paper and no signature paper shall be put into circulation previous to such
certification.
Section 5.14. Recall Petitions.
The petition for the recall of any official shall consist of a certificate identical with that filed with the city
administrator together with all the signature papers and affidavits thereto attached. Such petition shall
not be complete unless signed by registered voters of the city equal to at least ten percent (10%) of
the total number of voters registered on the date of the preceding regular municipal election. All the
signatures need not be on one signature paper, but the circulator of every paper shall make an
affidavit that each signature appended to the paper is the genuine signature of the person whose
name it purports to be. Each signature paper shall be in substantially the following form:
RECALL PETITION
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 11/444
proposing the recall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . from his office as . . . . . . . . . . . . which recall is sought for the
reasons set forth in the attached certificate. This movement is sponsored by the following committee
of electors:
NameAddress
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
The undersigned electors, understanding the nature of the charges against the officer herein sought to
be recalled, desire the holding of a recall election for that purpose.
NameAddress
1.
2.
3.
At the end of the list of signatures shall be appended the affidavit of the circulator.
Section 5.15. Filing Of Petition.
Within thirty (30) days after the filing of the original certificate, the committee shall file the completed
petition in the office of the city administrator. The city administrator shall examine the petition within
the next five (5) days, and if he finds it irregular in any way, or finds that the number of signers is less
than a number of voters at least equal to ten percent (10%) of the total number of voters registered on
the date of the last preceding regular municipal election, he shall so notify in writing by registered or
certified mail at their last known address five (5) members of the committee. The committee shall then
be given ten (10) days in which to file additional signature papers and to correct the petition in all other
respects, but they may not change the statement of the grounds upon which the recall is sought. If at
the end of that time the city administrator finds the petition still insufficient or irregular, he shall notify,
in writing, all members of the committee to that effect and shall file the petition in his office. No further
action shall be taken thereon. (This section amended by ordinance no. 58, second series, adopted
March 23, 1981.)
Section 5.16. Recall Election.
If the petition or amended petition is found sufficient, the city administrator shall transmit it to the
council without delay, and shall notify in writing the person sought to be recalled of the sufficiency of
the petition and of the pending action. The council shall at its next meeting, by resolution, provide for
the holding of a special recall election not less than thirty (30) nor more than forty five (45) days after
such meeting, but if any other election is to occur within sixty (60) days after such meeting the council
may in its discretion provide for the holding of the recall election at that time.
Section 5.17. Procedure At Recall Election.
The city administrator shall include with the published and posted notice of the election the statement
of the grounds for the recall and also, in not more than five hundred (500) words, the answer of the
officer concerned in justifications of his course in office. Candidates to succeed the officer to be
recalled shall be nominated in the usual way, and the election shall be conducted as far as possible, in
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 12/444
accordance with the usual procedure in municipal elections.
Section 5.18. Form Of Recall Ballot.
Unless the officer whose removal is sought resigns within ten (10) days after the receipt by the council
of the completed recall petition, the form of the ballot at such election shall be as near as may be:
"Shall . . . . . . . . be recalled?" the name of the officer whose recall is sought being inserted in the
blank, and the electors shall be permitted to vote separately "yes" or "no" upon this question. The
ballot shall also contain the names of the candidates to be voted upon to fill the vacancy, in case the
recall is successful, under the caption: "Candidates to fill the place of . . . . . . . . . . if recalled"; but the
officer whose recall is sought shall not himself be a candidate upon such ballot. If a majority of those
voting on the question of recall vote in favor of recall, the official shall be thereby removed from office,
and the candidate who received the highest number of votes for his place shall be elected thereto for
the remainder of the unexpired term. If the officer sought to be recalled resigns within ten (10) days
after the receipt by the council of the completed recall petition, the form of ballot at the election shall
be the same, as nearly as possible, as the form in use at a regular municipal election.
Section 5.19. Recall Of Aldermen, Election By Wards.
When the officer sought to be recalled is a ward alderman, only registered voters who are residents in
his ward shall be eligible to sign the recall petition and vote at the recall election and the required
number be at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of voters registered in the ward on the date
of the preceding regular municipal election.
CHAPTER 6
ADMINISTRATION OF CITY AFFAIRS
Section 6.01. The Council.
Subject to delegation as herein otherwise provided, the council shall be the chief administrative body
of the city. Its administrative powers may be enforced by the administrative code enacted in the form
of an ordinance, or administrative chapter of codified ordinances.
Section 6.02. Departments Of Administration.
The council may create such departments, divisions, and bureaus for the administration of city affairs
as it may deem necessary or proper, and from time to time alter their powers and organization. The
administrative code, or administrative chapter of a codification, shall create, limit, and regulate all
departments, divisions and bureaus.
Section 6.03. Contracts: How Let.
In all cases of work to be done by contract, or of the purchase of chattels of any kind, the same shall
be let on bids where the amount exceeds one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), unless an
emergency ordinance as to specific items or an ordinance of general application shall be adopted by
the council, but in no event shall such ordinance permit letting such contract or making such purchase
in an amount exceeding the pertinent state statute with reference thereto. The city shall advertise for
bids in such manner as is designated by the council. The contract shall be let only by the council to
the lowest responsible bidder. The "lowest responsible bidder" shall be interpreted as giving the
council the right to accept any bid which it determines is most advantageous to the city. The council
may, however, reject any and all bids. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the council from
contracting for the doing of the work with patented processes, or from the purchasing of patented
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 13/444
appliances. Subject to the provisions of this charter, the council may by ordinance adopt further
regulations for the making of bids and the letting of contracts. All contracts and instruments of any kind
to which the city is a party shall be signed by the council president and the city administrator on behalf
of the city and shall be executed in the name of the city.
CHAPTER 7
TAXATION AND FINANCES
Section 7.01. Council To Control Finances.
The council shall have the full authority over the financial affairs of the city, and shall provide for the
collection of all revenues and other assets, the auditing and settlement of accounts, and the
safekeeping and disbursement of public monies, and in the exercise of a sound discretion shall make
appropriations for the payment of all obligations and expenses.
Section 7.02. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city shall be the calendar year.
Section 7.03. System Of Taxation.
Subject to the state constitution, and except as forbidden by it or by state legislation, the council shall
have full power to provide by ordinance for a system of local taxation. In the taxation of real and
personal property as such, the city shall conform as fully as possible to the general state law as to the
assessment of such taxes.
Section 7.04. Board Of Equalization.
The mayor, the president of the council and the city administrator shall sit as a board of equalization to
equalize assessments of property for taxation purposes according to law. Provided, however, that if
the mayor and the president of the council shall be one and the same person, then the vice president
of the council shall be the third member of the board of equalization.
Section 7.05. Preparation Of Annual Budget.
The committee responsible for finances and the city administrator shall prepare the estimates for the
annual budget. The budget shall be by funds and shall include all the funds of the city. The estimates
of expenditures for each fund budgeted shall be arranged for each department or division of the city in
accordance with approved and sound accounting procedures and practices. The estimates shall be
submitted to the council at its first regular meeting in September and shall be made public and
sufficient copies kept on file. (This section amended by ordinance no. 58, second series, adopted
March 23, 1981.)
Section 7.06. Adoption Of The Budget.
The budget shall be the principal item of business at the first regular monthly meeting of the council in
September and the council shall hold adjourned meetings from time to time until all the estimates have
been considered. The budget estimates may be read in full, or copies thereof distributed, and the city
administrator shall explain the various items thereof as fully as may be deemed necessary by the
council. The annual budget finally agreed upon shall set forth in detail the complete financial plan of
the city for the ensuing fiscal year for the funds budgeted. It shall indicate the sums to be raised and
from what sources and the sums to be spent and for what purposes according to section 7.05. The
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 14/444
total sum appropriated shall not exceed the total estimated revenue. The council shall adopt the
budget not later than the first week of October by a resolution which shall set forth the total for each
budgeted fund and each department with such segregation as to objects and purposes of
expenditures as the council deems necessary for purposes of budget control. The council shall also
adopt a resolution levying whatever taxes it considers necessary within statutory limits for the ensuing
year for each fund. The tax levy resolution shall be certified to the county auditor in accordance with
law. (This section amended by ordinance no. 58, second series, adopted March 23, 1981.)
Section 7.07. Enforcement Of The Budget.
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to enforce strictly the provisions of the budget. He shall not
approve any order upon the city treasury for any expenditure unless an appropriation has been made
in the budget resolution, nor for any expenditure covered by the budget resolution unless there is a
sufficient unexpended balance left after deducting the total past expenditures and the sum of all
outstanding encumbrances. No officer or employee of the city shall place any order or make any
purchase except for the purpose and to the amount authorized in the budget resolution. Any obligation
incurred by any person in the employ of the city for any purpose not authorized in the budget
resolution or for any amount in excess of the amount therein authorized shall be a personal obligation
upon the person incurring the expenditure.
Section 7.08. Alterations In The Budget.
After the budget resolution has been adopted, the council shall have no power to increase the
amounts fixed in the budget resolution, by the insertion of new items or otherwise, beyond the
estimated revenues, unless the actual receipts exceed the estimates and then not beyond the actual
receipts. The council may at any time, by resolution of a majority of its members, reduce the sums
appropriated for any purpose by the budget resolution, or authorize the transfer of sums from
unencumbered balances of appropriations in the budget resolution to other purposes.
Section 7.09. Emergency Appropriation In Budget.
The council may include an emergency appropriation as a part of the budget but not to exceed ten
percent (10%) of the total budget. A transfer from the emergency appropriation to any other
appropriation shall be made only by an affirmative vote of a majority of all members of the council and
shall be used only for the purposes designated by the council.
Section 7.10. Disbursements, How Made.
No disbursements of city funds shall be made except by check signed by the council president and the
city administrator and specifying the purpose for which the disbursement is made and the fund from
which it is drawn. No such check shall be issued until there is money to the credit of the fund from
which it is to be paid sufficient to pay it, together with all outstanding orders upon the fund. Provided,
that a negative balance may be shown where there are other credits or receivables at the time the
order is drawn sufficient to cover all orders. No such check shall be issued until the claim to which it
relates has been supported by an itemized bill, payroll or time sheet approved and signed by the
responsible city officer who vouches for its correctness and reasonableness. The city administrator
shall note on each contract requiring the payment of the money by the city the particular fund out of
which it is to be paid. The council may by ordinance make further regulations for the safekeeping and
disbursement of the funds of the city. Such ordinance may authorize the use of facsimile signatures by
the council president and the city administrator when executing disbursement checks as hereinbefore
described and such ordinance may also provide, in lieu of the verified account as hereinbefore
described, for printing on the reverse side of the check issued by the city, the following words: "The
undersigned payee endorsing this check, declares that the same is received in payment of a just and
correct claim against the city of Little Falls, Minnesota, and that no part of it has heretofore been paid",
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 15/444
or such other language as may be authorized by statute for use thereon.
Section 7.11. Funds To Be Kept.
The city treasury shall be classified as to funds and shall provide for a general fund for the payment of
such expenses of the city as the council may deem proper, and such other funds as may be required
by statute, ordinance or resolution. The council shall have full power by ordinance or resolution to
make interfund loans except from trust and agency funds or as otherwise prohibited by law, as may be
deemed necessary and appropriate from time to time. The council shall have full authority by
ordinance or resolution to make permanent transfer between all funds which may be created, provided
that such transfers are not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter or state statute.
Section 7.12. Accounts And Reports.
The city administrator shall be the chief accounting officer of the city and of every branch thereof, and
the council shall prescribe and enforce proper accounting methods, forms, blanks, and other devices
consistent with the law, this charter, and the ordinances adopted in accord therewith. The council may
require monthly or quarterly statements showing the amount of money in the city treasury, the status
of all funds, the amount spent chargeable against each of the annual budget allowances and the
balance left in each, and such other information about the finances of the city as the council may
require. Once each year, on or before the last day of March, the city administrator shall submit a report
to the council covering the entire financial operations of the city for the past year. This report shall
show: the actual receipts and expenditures, omitting duplications and stating the cash balance at the
beginning of the last fiscal year and at the close; the total outlays for operation and maintenance, and
the total capital outlays; the condition of each of the funds; the total receipts by sources and the total
expenditures by general purposes; the total outstanding bonds and debts of the city, when due, the
amount of new bonds issued and the amount redeemed, and the interest rate of each; the condition of
all the annual budget allowances; a summary of all inventory owned by the city; and such further
information as the city administrator deems advisable or the council requires.
Section 7.13. City Indebtedness.
Except as provided in sections 7.14 and 7.15, no obligations shall be issued to pay current expenses
but the council may issue and sell obligations for any other municipal purpose in accordance with law
and within the limits prescribed by law. Except in the case of obligations for which an election is not
required by this charter or by state law, no such obligations shall be issued and sold without the
approval of a majority of the electors of the city voting thereon at a general or special election.
Section 7.14. Tax Anticipation Certificates.
At any time after January 1st following the making of an annual tax levy, the council may issue
certificates of indebtedness in anticipation of collection of taxes levied for any fund and not yet
collected. The total amount of certificates issued against any fund for any year with interest thereon
until maturity shall not exceed ninety percent (90%) of the total current taxes for the fund uncollected
at the time of issuance plus the cash on hand in the fund. Such certificates shall be issued on such
terms and conditions as the council may determine, but they shall become due and payable not later
than the 1st day of April of the year following their issuance. The proceeds of the tax levied for the
fund against which tax anticipation certificates are issued and the full faith and credit of the city shall
be irrevocably pledged for the redemption of the certificates in the order of their issuance against the
fund.
Section 7.15. Emergency Debt Certificates.
If any calamity or other public emergency should subject the city to the necessity of making
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 16/444
extraordinary expenditures, the council may by ordinance issue and sell on such terms and in such
manner as the council determines, emergency debt certificates to run not to exceed three (3) years. A
tax sufficient to pay principal and interest on such certificates with the margin required by law shall be
levied as required by law. The ordinance authorizing an issue of such emergency debt certificates
shall state the nature of the emergency and be approved by a majority vote of the members of the
council. It may be passed as an emergency ordinance.
Section 7.16. Investment Of Surplus Funds.
The city administrator may invest the surplus of any funds, in any securities in which funds of the state
of Minnesota may be invested, and in obligations of the city of Little Falls. The council shall formulate
investment policies to be followed by the city administrator in the investment of city funds. (This
section added by ordinance no. 69, second series, adopted December 21, 1981.)
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
Section 8.01. Power To Make Improvements And Levy Assessments.
The city shall have the power to make any and every type of public improvement not forbidden by the
laws of this state and to levy special assessments to pay all or any part of the cost of such
improvements as are of a local character. The amounts assessed to benefited property to pay for such
local improvements may equal the cost of the improvement, including all costs and expenses
connected therewith, with interest, until paid, but shall in no case exceed the benefits to the property.
Section 8.02. Assessments For Services.
The council may provide by ordinance, that the cost of sprinkling, snow or rubbish removal, or of any
other service to streets, sidewalks, or other public property, or the costs of any services to property,
including utility services, undertaken by the city may be assessed against the property benefited and
collected as prescribed by ordinance.
Section 8.03. Local Improvements Regulations.
After this charter takes effect local improvements commenced prior thereto shall be completed and
assessments may be levied and securities issued for the financing thereof as prescribed by the law (or
charter provisions) applicable thereto. The council may prepare and adopt a comprehensive local
improvement ordinance prescribing the procedure which shall be followed in making all local
improvements and levying assessments therefor. The council may elect to use the state law or the
local improvement ordinance for the purpose of providing local improvements and assessments
therefor.
Section 8.04. Public Works: How Performed.
Public works, including all local improvements, may be constructed, extended, repaired, and
maintained either directly by city employee, by day labor, or by contract. The city shall require
contractors and all persons furnishing labor and materials to give bonds for the protection of the city
pursuant to the laws of the state.
CHAPTER 9
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 17/444
EMINENT DOMAIN
Section 9.01. Power To Acquire Property.
The city may acquire, by purchase, gift, devise, or condemnation, any property, corporeal or
incorporeal, either within or without its corporate boundaries, which may be needed by the city for any
public use or purpose. Easements for slopes, fills, sewers, building lines, poles, wires, pipes, and
conduits for water, gas heat, power, and other public utilities may be acquired by gift, devise, purchase
or condemnation in the manner provided by law.
Section 9.02. Proceedings In Acquired Property.
The necessity for the taking of any property by the city shall be determined by the council and shall be
declared by a resolution which shall describe such property as nearly as may be and state the use to
which it is to be devoted. In acquiring property by exercising the power of eminent domain, the city
shall proceed according to the laws of this state, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Section 9.03. Payment Of Award.
When an award of damages is confirmed in any proceeding for the taking of property for the public
use by right of eminent domain, or whenever the court renders final judgment in any appeal from any
such award and the time for abandoning such proceedings by the city has expired, the city shall, as
provided by statute, pay the amount of the award or judgment of the court, as the case may be; and if
not so paid, judgment therefor may be had against the city.
Section 9.04. City Abandon Proceedings.
The city may, by resolution of the council at any stage of the condemnation proceedings or at any time
within thirty (30) days after final determination thereof, abandon such proceedings as to all or any part
of the property sought to be acquired. The city shall pay all reasonable costs and expenses thereof,
including fees of counsel, as required by state or federal law.
Section 9.05. City May Take Entire Plant.
If the city condemns a public utility which is operated at the time of the commencement of the
condemnation proceedings as one property or as one system, it shall not be necessary in the
condemnation proceedings or any of the proceedings of the council, to describe or treat separately the
different kinds of property composing such system but all of the property, lands, articles, franchises
and rights which comprise such system may, unless otherwise ordered by the court, be treated
together as one property and an award for the whole property in one lump sum may be made by the
commissioners or other body assessing the damages on condemnation. This does not prevent the
city, when the plant and property are separable into distinct parts, from acquiring only such part or
parts thereof as may be necessary in the public interest.
CHAPTER 10
FRANCHISES
Section 10.01. Franchises Required.
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person, firm, or corporation shall place or maintain any
permanent or semipermanent fixtures in, over, upon, or under any street or public place for the
purpose of operating a public utility or for any other purpose, without a franchise therefor from the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 18/444
A franchise shall be granted only by ordinance, which shall not be an emergency ordinance. Every
ordinance granting a franchise shall contain all the terms and conditions of the franchise. The grantee
shall bear the costs of publication of the franchise ordinance and shall make a sufficient deposit with
the city administrator to guarantee publication cost before the ordinance is passed.
Section 10.02. Term.
No exclusive or perpetual franchise shall ever be granted. No franchise for a term exceeding twenty
(20) years shall be effective until approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon.
Section 10.03. Public Hearing.
Before any franchise ordinance is adopted or any rates, fares, or prices to be charged by a public
utility are fixed by the council, the council shall hold a public hearing on the matter. Notice of such
hearing shall be published at least once in the official newspaper not less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of the hearing.
Section 10.04. Power Of Regulation Reserved.
Subject to any applicable law the council may by ordinance reasonably regulate and control the
exercise of any franchise, including the maximum rates, fares or prices to be charged by the grantee.
No franchise value shall be included in the valuation of the grantee's property in regulating utility rates,
fares, or prices under any applicable law, ordinance, or regulation or in proceedings for municipal
acquisition of the grantee's property by purchase or eminent domain.
Section 10.05. Renewals Or Extensions.
Every extension, renewal or modification of any existing franchise or of any franchise granted
hereafter shall be subject to the same limitations and shall be granted in the same manner as a new
franchise.
CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC OWNERSHIP AND OPERATION OF UTILITIES.
Section 11.01. Acquisition And Operation Of Utilities.
The city may own and operate any gas, water, heat, power, light, telephone or other public utility for
supplying its own needs for utility service, or for supplying utility service to private customers or both.
Subject to applicable law, it may construct all facilities reasonably needed for that purpose and may
acquire any existing utility properties so needed; but no proceedings to acquire such public utility shall
be consummated unless the city has the money in the treasury to pay for acquisition or has made
provision for paying for the property proposed to be acquired. The operation of all public utilities
owned by the city shall be under the supervision of the council.
Section 11.02. Rates And Finances.
Upon recommendations made by the city administrator or upon its own motion, the council may fix
rates, fares, and prices for municipal utilities, but such shall be just and reasonable. In like manner the
council may prescribe the time and manner in which payments for all such service shall be made, and
may make such other regulations as may be necessary, and prescribe penalties for violation of such
regulations.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 19/444
Section 11.03. Purchase In Bulk.
The council may, in lieu of providing for the local production of gas, electricity, water and other utilities
purchase the same in bulk and resell them to consumers at such rates as it may fix.
Section 11.04. Lease Of Plant.
Subject to applicable law, the council may, if the public interests will be served thereby, contract with
any person, copartnership or corporation for the operation of any utility owned by the city, upon such
rentals and conditions as it may deem necessary; but such contract shall be embodied in and let only
by an ordinance approved by a majority of the council and subject to approval by popular referendum.
Such ordinance shall not be an emergency ordinance. In no case shall such contract be for a longer
term than ten (10) years. (This section amended by ordinance no. 58, second series, adopted March
23, 1981.)
Section 11.05. Public Utility: How Sold.
No public utility owned by the city shall be sold or otherwise disposed of by the city unless the full
terms of the proposition of sale or other disposition are approved by a majority of the registered
electors voting thereon.
CHAPTER 12
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITORY PROVISIONS
Section 12.01. Official Publications.
The council shall annually designate a legal newspaper of general circulation in the city as its official
newspaper in which shall be published ordinances and other matters required by law to be so
published as well as such other matters as the council may deem it in the public interest to have
published in this manner.
Section 12.02. Oath Of Office.
Every officer of the city, board and commission member, shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, take and subscribe an oath of office, in substantially the following form: "I do solemnly swear (or
affirm) to support the constitution of the United States and of this state and to discharge faithfully the
duties devolving upon me as (mayor, alderman, city administrator, etc.) of the city of Little Falls to the
best of my judgment and ability".
Section 12.03. Official Bonds.
The city administrator, and such other officers or employees of the city as may be provided for by
ordinance, shall each before entering upon the duties of his respective office or employment give a
corporate surety bond to the city in such form and in such amount as may be fixed by the council as
security for the faithful performance of his official duties and the safekeeping of public funds. Such
bonds may be either individually or blanket bonds in the discretion of the council. They shall be
approved by the council, and approved as to form by the city attorney, and filed with the city
administrator. The provisions of the laws of the state relating to official bonds not inconsistent with this
charter shall be complied with. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the city.
Section 12.04. Sale Of Real Property.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 20/444
No real property of the city shall be disposed of except by ordinance. The proceeds of any sale of
such property shall be used as far as possible to retire any outstanding indebtedness incurred by the
city in the purchase, construction, or improvement of this or other property used for the same public
purpose. If there is no such outstanding indebtedness, the council may by ordinance or resolution
designate some other public use for the proceeds.
Section 12.05. Vacation Of Streets.
No streets, alley or other public place within the city shall be vacated except by resolution adopted by
the council after a public hearing before the council after two (2) published notices of the time and
place of such hearing at least fourteen (14) days prior thereto. A notice of completion of such
proceedings shall be filed with the proper county officer in accordance with law. (This section was
amended by Minnesota statutes section 440.13.)
Section 12.06. City To Succeed To Rights And Obligations.
The city shall succeed to all the property, rights and privileges, and shall be subject to all the legal
obligations of the city under the former charter.
Section 12.07. Effective Date Of This Charter And Ordinances To Make Charter Effective.
This charter shall take effect March 1, 1974. Recognizing that certain ordinances must be adopted to
effectuate the provisions of this charter, such ordinances shall be valid even though enacted prior to
the effective date of this charter.
Section 12.08. Statutes Not Affected By Charter.
All general laws and statutes of the state applicable to all cities operating under home rule charters, or
applicable to cities of the same class as the city of Little Falls operating under home rule charters, and
not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, shall apply to the city of Little Falls, and shall be
construed as supplementary to the provisions of this charter.
Section 12.09. Existing Ordinances Continued.
All ordinances and regulations of the city in force when this charter takes effect, and not inconsistent
with the provisions thereof, are hereby continued in full force and effect until amended or repealed.
Section 12.10. Pending Condemnation And Assessments.
Any condemnation or assessment proceeding in progress when this charter takes effect shall be
continued and completed under the laws under which such proceedings were begun. All assessments
made by the city prior to the time when this charter takes effect shall be collected and the lien thereof
enforced in the same manner as if this charter had not been adopted.
Section 12.11. Terms Of Present Officers.
The terms of the mayor and aldermen, in office at the time of adoption of this charter, are hereby
extended from the time they would expire to the next general municipal election in order to effect the
change in election date.
Section 12.12. Utility Rates.
All municipal utility rates shall be under the direct supervision and control of the council. Provided, that
a hearing shall be held upon such notice as the council shall require by ordinance, after receipt of a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 21/444
request from the board or commission having charge of public utilities requesting the change in rates.
The council on its own motion may also call such hearing. (This section was amended by Minnesota
statutes chapter 216B.)
Section 12.13. Designating Depositories.
The council shall annually designate depositories for city funds.
Section 12.14. Sale Of Chattels.
The council may, by ordinance, provide a means for declaring chattels which come into the
possession of the city, by any means whatsoever, to be surplus property, and providing for the
classification and sale thereof upon such notice as the council considers reasonable. Such ordinance
may also provide for a disposition of any receipts from any such sale.
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, DEFINITIONS AND PENALTY
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, DEFINITIONS AND PENALTY
1.01: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all the chapters, sections, subsections,
paragraphs and provisions in the city code, and the city code shall apply to all persons and property
within the city of Little Falls, Minnesota, and within such adjacent area as may be stated in specific
provisions. (1976 Code)
1.02: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following
words, terms and phrases, for the purposes of every chapter, section, subsection, paragraph and
provision of this city code, shall have the following meanings and inclusions:
CITY: The city of Little Falls, Minnesota, acting by or through its duly authorized representative.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR: The person duly appointed by the city council and acting in such capacity.
CONVICTION: Either of the following accepted and recorded by the court:
A. A plea of guilty; or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 22/444
B. A verdict of guilty by jury or a finding of guilty by the court.
COUNCIL AND CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Little Falls, Minnesota.
CRIME: Conduct which is prohibited by ordinance and for which the actor may be sentenced to
imprisonment, or fine, or both.
EX OFFICIO MEMBER: A person who is not counted for the purpose of determining a quorum, and
has no right to vote, but shall have the right, within his discretion, to speak to any question coming
before the board, commission or other deliberative body of which he is such member.
INTERSECTION: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb line or,
if no curb, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways or streets which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining
at any other angle may come in conflict; provided, however, that for traffic purposes, no alley or the
lateral lines thereof projected, shall be a part of an intersection.
MAY: "May" is permissive.
MISDEMEANOR, PETTY MISDEMEANOR: A. "Misdemeanor" means a crime punishable as a
misdemeanor as provided in Minnesota statutes chapter 609.
B. "Petty misdemeanor" means a petty offense which is prohibited by ordinance, which does not
constitute a crime, and which is punishable as a petty misdemeanor as provided in Minnesota
statutes chapter 609.
ORDINANCE: An ordinance duly adopted by the city council of Little Falls, Minnesota.
PERSON: Includes all firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and natural persons.
POLICE OFFICER AND PEACE OFFICER: Every officer, including special police, authorized to direct
or regulate traffic, keep the peace, and appointed or employed for the purpose of law enforcement.
PREMISES: Any lot, piece or parcel of land within a continuous boundary whether publicly or privately
owned, occupied or possessed.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All property not included within the definition of public property or public place.
PUBLIC PROPERTY AND PUBLIC PLACE: Any place, property or premises dedicated to public use,
owned by the city, occupied by the city as a lessee, or occupied by the city as a street by reason of an
easement, including, but not limited to, streets, parks or parking lots so owned or occupied.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the
event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway", as used herein, shall
refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
SHALL: "Shall" is mandatory.
STREET: The entire area dedicated to public use, or contained in an easement or other conveyance
or grant to the city, and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, boulevards, sidewalks, alleys
and other public property between lateral property lines in which a roadway lies.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 23/444
VIOLATE: The term "violate" includes failure to comply with.
WRITTEN AND IN WRITING: Any mode of representing words and letters in the English language.
(1976 Code; amd. Ord. 122, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984; 1992 Code)
1.03: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR OR PETTY MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this city code when he
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
or as for a petty misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions herein, as set forth in
the specific chapter in which the section, subsection, paragraph or provision violated appears. Upon
conviction for a crime, the actor may be convicted of either the crime charged if it is a misdemeanor, or
a petty misdemeanor as an included offense necessarily proved if the misdemeanor charge were
proved. (1976 Code)
1.04: OTHERWISE UNLAWFUL:
The city code does not authorize an act or omission otherwise prohibited by law. (1976 Code)
1.05: SEVERABILITY:
Every chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision of the city code shall be, and is hereby
declared, severable from every other such chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision, and if
any part of portion of any of them shall be held invalid, it shall not affect or invalidate any other
chapter, section, subsection, paragraph or provision. (1976 Code)
1.06: PAYMENT INTO CITY TREASURY OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided by law, all fines, forfeitures and penalties recovered for the violation of any
ordinance of the city shall be paid to the city treasurer by the court or officer thereof receiving such
monies. Payment shall be made in the manner and at the time provided by law. (1976 Code)
1.07: MEANINGS:
As used in this city code, words of the male gender shall include the female and neuter, and the
singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular. (1976 Code)
1.08: CITATION:
This condition of the ordinances of the city of Little Falls shall henceforth be known as the city code
and cited thus: "CITY CODE, Sec. ". (1976 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 24/444
1.09: REFERENCES TO STATE LAW:
All references to state law shall include revisions, amendments or successor statutes to the statute
cited. (1992 Code)
1.10 - 1.98: RESERVED:
1.99: PENALTIES FOR EACH OFFENSE:
When a penalty or forfeiture is provided for the violation of a chapter, section, subsection, paragraph
or provision of this city code, such penalty or forfeiture shall be construed to be for each such
violation. (1976 Code)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL GOVERNMENT
2.00: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
Pursuant to authority granted in chapter 6 of the city charter, this chapter of the city code is enacted so
as to set down for enforcement the administrative powers of the city by and through its chief
administrative body, the city council. (Ord. 77, 6th Series, eff. 10-19-2015)
2.01: CITY COUNCIL:
A. Ward Boundaries: Three (3) wards have been established with the following boundaries:
1. First Ward: The first ward shall consist of all the area within the city limits of the city of Little Falls
lying easterly of the easterly shoreline of the Mississippi River and lying southerly of the
following described line; commencing at a point where the easterly shoreline of the Mississippi
River intersects the centerline of Trunk Highway 27; thence easterly along the centerline of
Trunk Highway 27 to the easterly city limits of the city of Little Falls.
2. Second Ward: The second ward shall consist of the area within the city limits of the city of Little
Falls lying easterly of the easterly shoreline of the Mississippi River and lying northerly of the
following described line; commencing at a point where the easterly shoreline of the Mississippi
River intersects the centerline of Trunk Highway 27; thence easterly along the centerline of
Trunk Highway 27 to the easterly city limits of the city of Little Falls.
3. Third Ward: The third ward shall consist of all of the area within the city limits of the city of Little
Falls lying westerly of the easterly shoreline of the Mississippi River.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 25/444
B. City Council Meetings: Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the first and third
Mondays of each month at seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. in the council chambers of the city hall
in the city. Special meetings of the city council may be called by the mayor or president of the city
council, or any three (3) members of the council, upon notice provided to the public and all
members at least three (3) days before the date of the meeting. Such notice shall be in writing and
delivered personally to each member or left at their usual place of residence with some responsible
person. If at any meeting of the city council it is found that no quorum is present, said meeting may
be adjourned from time to time until a quorum is obtained. Any city council meeting may be
adjourned from time to time upon a majority vote of the members present. No more than two (2)
city council members shall be present in the washroom or break room simultaneously during a city
council meeting.
C. City Council Procedures At Meetings: The city administrator shall, prior to each regular meeting,
prepare the following items: 1) an agenda for the forthcoming meeting; 2) a compiled list of all
claimants who have filed verified accounts claiming payment for goods or services rendered to the
city, such list to be called "council report" and shall include the fund, department, vendor name,
description and amount; and 3) a copy of all minutes, reports and other pertinent matters to be
considered. The city administrator shall forthwith cause to be mailed or otherwise delivered to each
city council member copies of all said documents. All city council meetings as to procedural
matters, if not set forth in the charter, this code or city policy, shall be conducted using "Robert's
Rules Of Order (Revised)", as a basic guide.
D. City Council Reorganization: At its first regular meeting in January, the city council shall, in the
order herein stated and prior to commencing its regular order of business, reorganize by: 1) having
all new officers and officials take and subscribe their oath of office; 2) seat all new members of the
city council; 3) elect a council president and vice president; 4) perform such other organizational
acts or functions as may be permitted or required.
E. Interim Emergency Succession: Due to the possibility of attack or a natural disaster requiring a
declaration of a state of emergency, it is found urgent and necessary to ensure the continuity of
duly elected and lawful leadership of the city to provide for the continuity of the government and
the emergency interim succession of key governmental officials by providing a method for
temporary emergency appointments to their offices.
In the event of an attack upon or a natural disaster affecting the vicinity of the city, the mayor, city
council and city administrator shall be forthwith notified, by any one of said persons and by any
means available, to gather at city hall. In the event that safety or convenience dictates, an
alternative place of meeting may be designated. Those gathered shall proceed as follows:
1. By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall elect a chairperson
and secretary to preside and keep minutes, respectively.
2. They shall review and record the specific facts relating to the attack or natural disaster and
injuries to persons or damage to property already done or the imminence thereof.
3. They may, based on such facts, declare a state of emergency.
4. By majority vote of those persons present, regardless of number, they shall fill all positions of the
city council (including the office of mayor) of those persons upon whom notice could not be
served or who are unable to be present.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 26/444
5. Such interim successors shall serve until such time as the duly elected official is again available
to and returns to their position, or the state of emergency has passed and a successor is
designated and qualified as required by law, whichever shall occur first.
6. The interim emergency city council shall exercise the powers and duties of their offices, and
appoint other key government officials to serve during the emergency.
F. Salaries Of Mayor, President Of The City Council And Council Members: Pursuant to Minnesota
statute 415.11, and notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law, charter or
ordinance, the city council may by ordinance fix their own salaries as members of the city council,
and the salary of the chief elected executive officer of the city of Little Falls, in such amount as they
deem reasonable. No change in salary shall take effect until after the next succeeding municipal
election. Notwithstanding Minnesota statute 415.11, subdivision 2, or a charter provision to the
contrary, the city council may enact an ordinance to take effect before the next succeeding
municipal election that reduces the salaries of the members of the city council. The ordinance shall
be in effect for twelve (12) months, unless another period of time is specified in the ordinance, after
which the salary of the members reverts to the salary immediately before the ordinance was
enacted.
The salary of the mayor shall be nine hundred dollars ($900.00) per month, payable monthly. The
salary of each council member shall be eight hundred dollars ($800.00) per month, payable
monthly; provided, however, the salary of the president of the city council shall be nine hundred
dollars ($900.00) per month, payable monthly.
The city will not provide the mayor or city council members with health insurance. The city will
comply with the consolidated omnibus budget reconciliation act (COBRA), as applicable.
In addition to the above, and as authorized by Minnesota statute 353D, the city shall contribute to
the defined contribution plan (DCP), administered by the state of Minnesota Public Employee
Retirement Association, for the mayor and city council members who choose to enroll and
contribute five percent (5%) of their respective salaries to said DCP plan. (Ord. 77, 6th Series, eff.
10-19-2015)
2.02: AUTHORITIES, BOARDS, BUREAUS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES:
All authority, board, bureau, commission, and committee appointments authorized by ordinance or
resolution shall be made by the mayor and such appointment confirmed by the city council at a
meeting in January of each year, and shall be a resident of the city of Little Falls. The term of each
appointee shall be established and stated at the time of their appointment, and terms of present
authority, board, bureau, commission, and committee members may be reestablished and changed so
as to give effect to this section. Except as otherwise provided by the ordinance or resolution
establishing a particular authority, board, bureau, commission, or committee, new appointees shall
assume office on February 1, January 31 being the date of expiration of terms. All vacancies shall be
filled in the same manner as for an expired term, but the appointment shall be only for the unexpired
term. All appointed authority, board, bureau, commission, and committee members shall serve without
remuneration, but may be reimbursed for out of pocket expenses incurred in performance of their
duties when such expenses have been authorized by the city council before they were incurred. The
chairperson and secretary shall be chosen from and by the membership at its first regular meeting in
February or as soon after as they meet each year to serve for the ensuing year. Any member may be
removed by the city council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office and their position
filled as any other vacancy. Each authority, board, bureau, commission and committee shall hold its
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 27/444
regular meetings at the time established and approved by each group. The mayor and city
administrator shall be ex officio members of all authorities, boards, bureaus, commissions, and
committees; provided, that if they are unable to attend a meeting or act in the capacity of such
membership, they may be represented by their assistants or some persons duly authorized by them.
All appointees to authorities, boards, bureaus, commissions, and committees shall hold office until
their successor is appointed and qualified.
A. Airport Commission (Joint): Pursuant to the joint powers agreement of January 6, 1965, entered
into by the city of Little Falls and the county of Morrison, a joint airport commission is hereby
established, composed of six (6) members, three (3) members appointed by the city council and
three (3) members appointed by the county commissioners, with city members serving three (3)
year staggered terms. The joint airport commission shall be governed by the terms of the joint
powers agreement entered into between the city of Little Falls and county of Morrison on January
6, 1965, and any amendments of said agreement.
B. Airport Zoning Board (Joint): A joint airport zoning board, pursuant to laws 1945, chapter 303,
section 26, and acts amendatory thereof is hereby established. The board shall consist of five (5)
members, as follows: two (2) members to be appointed by the city council, two (2) members to be
appointed by the Morrison County commissioners, and one member who shall act as chairperson,
elected by a majority of the other four (4) members. The board shall be appointed as needed.
The joint airport zoning board shall adopt, administer and enforce airport zoning regulations for the
airport hazard areas in the vicinity of the Little Falls/Morrison County Airport as provided in laws
1945, chapter 303, sections 24 and 36, and acts amendatory thereof.
If airport zoning regulations proposed by the joint airport zoning board designates an administrative
agency of the city or county as the administrative agency to administer and enforce such
regulations, such designation shall be submitted to the city council and the county commissioners
for approval, which shall be granted by resolution adopted by each body.
C. Architectural Review Board: An architectural review board is hereby established consisting of three
(3) voting members serving three (3) year staggered terms. One member of the board shall be a
member of the planning commission, one member shall be a member of the economic
development authority, and one member shall be qualified by experience and training to pass upon
matters that pertain to building construction and who are not employees of the city, notwithstanding
any member may be a qualified resident. The city building official shall be an ex officio nonvoting
member.
The purpose of the architectural review board shall be to establish criteria for architectural design
and exterior treatment of property and buildings on properties purchased from the city and
individuals/corporations receiving public funding, to ensure that high standards of development are
created that are compatible with neighboring development and contribute to a community image of
permanence, stability and visual aesthetic, while preventing impermanent construction and use of
materials that are unsightly, rapidly deteriorate, contribute to depreciation of neighborhood property
values or cause urban blight. The standards are further intended to ensure coordination design of
building facades, additions and accessory structures in order to prevent visual disharmony and to
reduce visual monotony through ordinance variation of building materials, heights, offsets, changes
in building plane and the like. Building design and construction standards must be used to create a
structure with equally attractive sides. Primary emphasis shall be on the most visible side of the
building. All buildings governed by Little Falls heritage preservation commission are exempt from
this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 28/444
D. Building Code Board Of Appeals:
1. Establishment And Composition: A building code board of appeals is hereby established
consisting of five (5) members who shall be appointed as needed. Members shall be individuals
qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and
who are not employees of the city. The building official shall be an ex officio nonvoting member
and shall act as secretary to the building code board of appeals. The building code board of
appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of the
code, nor shall the board be empowered to waive the requirements of the building code. The
building code board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the
state building code, as adopted by chapter 5 of this city code, and in the uniform Housing Code,
as adopted by chapter 5 of this City Code, subject to judicial review as provided by law. The
Building Code Board of Appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and
shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the
building official within fifteen (15) days of the date of its decision.
2. Time Of Filing: All petitions and appeals shall be filed within thirty (30) days after written notice
of the decision or determination appealed from, by service of such petition or written notice of
appeal upon the City Administrator.
3. Form And Content: All petitions and appeals shall be filed by the aggrieved person and shall
summarize the facts and circumstances giving rise to the petition or appeal.
4. Hearing And Procedure:
a. Upon receipt of any petition or appeal, the City Administrator shall forthwith forward a copy
thereof to the Building Code Board of Appeals, any administrative officer involved in the
enforcement thereof and the City Attorney, showing the date of receipt thereof.
b. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the petition or notice of appeal by the City Administrator,
a hearing shall be called before the Building Code Board of Appeals, and notice thereof shall
be given in writing to all petitioners, appellants and such other persons as may be determined
to have an interest or property right in any decision made pursuant thereto, and such
members of commissions or administrative officers as may be appropriate. Such notice shall
be mailed at least twenty (20) days prior to the date set for hearing. Notice shall also be given
to the public by publication thereof once in a legal newspaper at least fourteen (14) days prior
to the date set for hearing.
c. At any such hearing, all persons desiring to be heard shall have such opportunity. (Ord. 77,
6th Series, eff. 10-19-2015)
E. Economic Development Authority: An economic development authority, to be known as the
economic development authority of the City of Little Falls, is hereby established, composed of five
(5) Commissioners, two (2) of whom shall be members of the City Council. Commissioners shall
serve six (6) year terms. Council representatives' terms shall expire concurrent with the expiration
of their position on the City Council.
The economic development authority of the City shall have all of the powers, rights, duties and
obligations as set forth in Minnesota Statutes 469.090 through 469.108, and any other law as is
hereby established in and for the City. Notwithstanding these provisions, provisions of Minnesota
Statutes, or any other law as is hereby established, the economic development authority of the City
shall have no authority to sell bonds, issue debt or levy taxes without the expressed prior approval
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 29/444
of the City Council.
The economic development authority shall meet as needed. Meetings shall be called by its
Chairperson or two (2) voting members, upon notice provided to the public and all members at
least three (3) days before the date of the meeting. The economic development authority may
adopt bylaws and such additional rules, regulations and procedures as it may deem necessary. All
bylaws, rules, regulations and procedures, and any changes therein, shall be approved by a
majority vote of the City Council.
Nothing shall prevent the City Council from modifying this enabling section to impose limits on the
powers of the authority, or for providing for other matters as authorized by Minnesota Statutes
section 469.090 through 469.108 or any other law.
F. Energy And Environmental Committee: An Energy and Environmental Committee composed of
seven (7) members serving three (3) year staggered terms is hereby established. The committee
shall serve as an advisory body to the City Council in matters of policies, educational programs
and procedures to conserve energy consumption and enhance and improve the environment for
the residents of the City of Little Falls. The committee shall perform all duties assigned to it by the
City Council.
G. Heritage Preservation Commission: A Heritage Preservation Commission composed of seven (7)
members, one of which must represent the Morrison County Historical Society appointed by their
board of directors, serving three (3) year staggered terms; together with a representative from the
Little Falls Area Chamber of Commerce, the Little Falls convention and visitors bureau, and one
property owner in a local or national historic district, who are all ex officio nonvoting members.
Members shall be persons who have demonstrated an interest in historical, cultural or architectural
development. The commission shall have the responsibility of recommending to the city council the
adoption of ordinances designating areas, places, buildings, structures, works of art or other
objects having special historical, cultural or architectural interest for the community as heritage
preservation landmarks or districts.
1. Declaration Of Public Policy And Purpose: The city council hereby declares as a matter of public
policy that the preservation, protection, perpetuation and use of areas, places, buildings,
structures, lands, districts and other objects having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic
interest or value, is a public necessity, and is required in the interest of public health, prosperity,
safety, and welfare of the people of the city. The purposes of this subsection are to:
a. Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving sites and structures which reflect elements of
the city cultural, social, economic, political, engineering or architectural history.
b. Protect and enhance the city's attractions to residents, tourists and visitors and services as a
support and stimulus to business and industry.
c. Enhance the economic viability of heritage preservation landmarks and districts through the
protection and promotion of their unique character.
d. Enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity and interest of the city.
e. Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past.
f. Promote the use and preservation of historic landmarks and districts for the educational and
general welfare of the people of the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 30/444
2. Definitions:
HERITAGE PRESERVATION DISTRICT: A contiguous collection or group of lands, parcels,
sites, structures, buildings or objects that is determined to be historically, culturally or
architecturally significant as a whole and has been locally designated as a heritage preservation
district pursuant to this subsection.
HERITAGE PRESERVATION GUIDELINES: The established criteria by which any proposed
changes, including architectural or site modifications, shall be judged.
HERITAGE PRESERVATION LANDMARK: Any individual property, parcel, place, building,
structure, work of art or other object that has been determined to be historically, culturally or
architecturally significant and has been locally designated as a heritage preservation landmark
pursuant to this subsection.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES: The nation's official list of properties worthy of
preservation designated by the United States department of the interior, national park service.
Nominations of properties within Minnesota to this list are made through the auspices of the
state historic preservation officer of the Minnesota Historical Society.
3. Powers And Duties: The heritage preservation commission shall make recommendations to the
city council on the designation of the heritage preservation landmarks and districts as hereinafter
provided.
a. Report: Prior to recommending a landmark or district to the city council for designation,
amending a designated landmark or district, or nominating a landmark or district to the
national register of historic places, an investigation and report on the historical, cultural, and
architectural significance of the buildings, structures, sites or objects proposed for designation,
shall be made. Such report shall also attempt to determine the economic status of the property
or properties by providing such information as assessed value, recent real estate transactions
and other data.
b. Criteria For Designation: The commission shall recommend heritage preservation landmarks
and districts only when the property or properties are found to meet at least one of the
following criteria:
(1) It has character, interest or value as a part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the city, state or the United States.
(2) Its location was a site of a significant historical event.
(3) It is identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture or
development of the city, state or the United States.
(4) It embodies a distinguishing characteristic of an architectural type.
(5) It is identified as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has
influenced the development of the city, state or United States.
(6) Its unique location or singular physical characteristics represent an established and familiar
visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the city as a whole.
(7) It embodies elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or craftsmanship which
represents significant architectural innovation.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 31/444
(8) Its unique location or singular physical characteristics represent an established and familiar
visual feature of a neighborhood, community, or the city as a whole.
c. Planning Commission Review: The commission shall receive the comments of the city's
planning commission regarding any proposed heritage preservation district or landmark prior
to forwarding its recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall consider
any such designation's potential effects on the surrounding neighborhood, economics,
environment and other planning considerations. Said comments shall become part of the
official record and be submitted as part of the commission's report to the city council.
d. Communication With State Historical Society: A copy of the commission's report on any
proposed designation for heritage preservation landmark or district, including boundaries, shall
be sent to the state historic preservation officer for review and comment in accordance with
Minnesota statutes. Any comments made by the state historic preservation officer regarding a
proposed designation must be received and forwarded to the city council prior to final
designation.
e. Heritage Preservation Commission Hearings: Prior to the commission recommending to the
city council any heritage preservation landmark or district, the commission shall hold a public
hearing and seek the recommendation of all concerned citizens.
f. Communication With City Council: If the commission recommends to the city council that a
landmark or district be designated for heritage preservation, the commission shall transmit to
the city council a complete report on the recommended heritage preservation landmark or
district. Such communication shall include the initial investigative report, comments made by
the planning commission, required comments by the state historic preservation officer and the
proposed heritage preservation guidelines.
g. City Council Designation: The city council may, by ordinance, designate a heritage
preservation landmark or district. Prior to such designation, the city council shall hold a public
hearing.
h. Survey Of Eligible Areas: The commission shall conduct a continuing survey of all areas,
places, buildings, structures or similar objects in the city which the commission, on the basis of
information available or presented to it, has reason to believe are or will be eligible for
designation as heritage preservation landmarks or districts.
i. Citizen Education: The commission shall work for the continuing education of the citizens of
the city with respect to the historic and architectural heritage of the city. It shall keep current
and public an official list of the designated heritage preservation landmarks and districts, and
shall maintain a map of all properties and areas designated by the city council as heritage
preservation districts or landmarks, which shall be kept at city hall and be available to the
public.
j. Acquisition Of Properties: The commission may recommend to the city council, after review
and comment by the planning commission, that certain properties eligible for designation as
heritage preservation landmarks or districts be acquired by gift, by negotiation or other legal
means.
k. Application For Grant Funds: The commission shall assist in the preparation of applications for
grant funds to be made to the City for the purpose of heritage preservation.
l. Heritage Preservation Guidelines: Upon final designation of a heritage preservation landmark
or district by the City Council, the commission shall adopt heritage preservation guidelines
specific to the landmark or district. Such guidelines shall detail allowable architectural and/or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 32/444
site modifications, essential features to be retained and any other criteria by which future
proposals for modifications shall be judged. These guidelines are intended to provide
assurance to owners of properties within heritage preservation landmarks or districts that any
permit review process, per this subsection, will be based on clear and objective standards
rather than the taste of individual commission members, and shall be in conformance with the
Secretary of Interior's standards for historic preservation projects.
m. Nomination To National Register: The commission may nominate a heritage preservation
landmark or district to the National Register of Historic Places, but only with the consent of the
City Council.
n. Annual Report: The commission shall make an annual report to the City Council and the State
Historic Preservation Officer each year.
4. Review Of Construction And Demolition Activity:
a. Type Of Activity: The commission shall review and make recommendations of construction
and demolition activities so as to encourage the preservation of historical buildings and/or
landmarks within any heritage preservation landmark or district. In addition, the commission
shall review and approve or disapprove the issuance of City permits to do any of the following
in a heritage preservation landmark or district in the City:
(1) Remodel, repair or alter in any manner which will change the exterior appearance.
(2) New construction, including parking facilities.
(3) Move a building.
(4) Change the nature or appearance of a designated heritage preservation landmark or
district.
(5) Demolition.
b. Permit Application And Plans: Every application for any type of permit, per subsection G4a of
this section, for any property designated as a heritage preservation landmark or district, shall
be accompanied by detailed plans for the proposed work to be done. A copy of the application
and plans submitted therewith shall be immediately referred to the commission by the building
official. Building permits shall not be issued in regard to an application until written
recommendation is received from the commission, subject, however, to subsections G4c, G4e
and G4f of this section.
c. Commission Review:
(1) The commission, upon receipt of the application for a permit and plans, shall determine if
the work to be performed would adversely affect the heritage preservation landmark or
district based upon the adopted heritage preservation guidelines per subsection G3l of this
section. If the commission determines that the work to be performed pursuant to the permit
complies with the adopted heritage preservation guidelines, the application shall be
approved.
(2) If the application is not approved, the owner may petition the commission to conduct a
public hearing for the purpose of determining whether the work to be performed adversely
impacts the heritage preservation landmark or district. The commission shall review the
permit and such plans as were submitted therewith and, after receiving comments from
concerned citizens, shall render its decision thereof as a written order to the City
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 33/444
Administrator and the building official. In case of a denial, the commission shall furnish the
applicant with a copy of the commission's decision, together with a copy of any
recommendations for changes necessary to be made before the commission will reconsider
the applicant's permit application.
d. Findings: All decisions of the commission with respect to this subsection shall be based on
explicit findings which are in accordance with the adopted heritage preservation guidelines for
heritage preservation landmarks or districts or the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for
Historic Preservation Projects".
e. Appeals To City Council: The commission, in any written order denying a permit application,
shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal to the City Council. The permit applicant or any
party aggrieved by the decision of the commission shall, within ten (10) days of the date of the
commission's written order and decision, have a right to appeal such order and decision to the
City Council. Such appeal shall be addressed to the City Council and submitted to the City
Administrator, with a statement of the reasons setting forth the grounds for appeal. The City
Administrator shall transmit copies of such appeals to the City Council and the Heritage
Preservation Commission. The City Council may modify or overrule the commission's
decision, but only if the project is found to be consistent with the United States Secretary of
Interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects", or adopted heritage preservation
guidelines.
f. Limitations: If, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the permit application by the commission, it
has neither approved nor denied the building permit application, the plans and permit
application shall be deemed to have been approved by the commission; and if all other
requirements of the City have been met, the City Administrator shall authorize a permit for the
proposed work. In the event that the commission disapproves the application in accordance
with this subsection, and the City Council upholds the disapproval, the City building official
shall, sixty (60) days after final action by the City Council, issue a building permit if the
application is in compliance with all other requirements of this Code, except for this
subsection. The City building official shall notify the City Council and the commission of this
action pursuant to this subsection.
g. Emergency Repair: In emergency situations, where immediate repair is needed to protect the
safety of the public or structure and its inhabitants, the City Administrator may, without
commission action, approve the repair of only those items needed to correct the safety
emergency. In the case of a permit issued pursuant to this subsection, the City Administrator
shall require that such repairs to be made in conformance with the United States Secretary of
Interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" or adopted heritage preservation
guidelines, to the extent possible, and a copy of the permit issued shall be given to the
building official. In addition, the City Administrator shall immediately notify the Heritage
Preservation Commission of the action, and specify the facts and conditions constituting the
emergency situation.
h. Building Code Enforcement: One purpose of this subsection is to encourage the sensitive
rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization and/or preservation of historic buildings throughout the
City. These rehabilitation and preservation efforts should provide for the upgrading and
maintenance of the safety features of the building or structure to provide a practical level of
safety to the public and surrounding properties. While ensuring this increased level of public
safety, the enforcement authorities are encouraged to be open to acceptable alternative
solutions and alternative compliance concepts, where practical, that will permit the continued
use of the existing buildings and structures without creating overly restrictive financial burdens
on owners or occupants. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of the building or structure required by this
Code.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 34/444
5. Filing Of Documents: The Office of the City Administrator shall keep at least one copy of all
studies, reports, recommendations, decisions, and heritage preservation guidelines developed
by the commission and City Council. In addition, the City Administrator shall make available an
official list of all locally designated heritage preservation landmarks and districts to the building
official and the Minnesota State Historic Preservation Officer and the public.
6. Recording Of Heritage Preservation Sites: The City Administrator shall record or file with the
Morrison County Recorder the legal description of all properties designated as heritage
preservation landmarks or districts by the City.
H. Housing And Redevelopment Authority: A housing and redevelopment authority composed of five
(5) members serving five (5) year staggered terms is hereby established. The Director of the
housing and redevelopment authority shall also be an ex officio member. The authority's duties
shall address the housing needs of low income and disabled residents of the City; redevelop
plighted areas of the City; promote industrial and business development of the City; and shall
undertake such matters of redevelopment as the City Council may request.
I. Library Board: A Library Board composed of five (5) members serving three (3) year staggered
terms is hereby established. The board's duties and responsibilities are to advise and make
recommendations to the City Council on matters relating to the library. The board shall perform all
duties assigned to it from time to time by the City Council.
J. Park, Recreation And Tree Board: A Park, Recreation and Tree Board composed of five (5)
members serving three (3) year staggered terms is hereby established. The board's duties include
advising the City Council on park and recreation issues. The board shall perform all duties
assigned by the City Council.
K. Planning Commission: A Planning Commission composed of seven (7) members serving three (3)
year staggered terms is hereby established. The Planning Commission shall also serve as the
Board of Zoning Appeals as required in chapter 11 of this Code. The Zoning Official, Public Works
Director/Engineer and City Attorney will be ex officio nonvoting members. The commission's duties
include serving as an advisory body to the City Council in matters of directing the future physical
development of the City. The commission shall, upon request of the City Council, make studies,
investigations and recommendations to the City Council regarding the Comprehensive Plan;
zoning ordinances; conditional use permits; interim use permits; subdivision regulations; zoning
variances; official map; appeals to denials of zoning, land use or building permits based on the
official map. (Ord. 77, 6th Series, eff. 10-19-2015; amd. Ord. 6, 7th Series, eff. 2-20-2018)
2.03: DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY:
All departments of the City are under the overall control of the City Council. Heads of all departments
are responsible to the City Council and subject to its supervision and direction, except as otherwise
provided herein. All department heads and employees shall be appointed by the City Council. All
appointments shall be for an indeterminate term and subject to any applicable laws. All wages and
salaries shall be fixed and determined by the City Council.
All appointments (except department heads and except members of the Police and Fire Departments),
supervision and control for in this section may be delegated to the City Administrator and exercised by
this person, subject to City Council scrutiny, direction and review on appeal as provided for herein.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 35/444
Such delegation of authority may be revoked or revised by the City Council at any time and with or
without cause.
All department heads and employees while engaged in inspections within the scope of their
employment shall display credentials supplied by the City.
A. Building Department: A Building Department is hereby established. The Building Department shall
be under the supervision of the building official (administrative authority) designated or appointed
by the City Council to carry out the duties and responsibilities delegated to the building official in
chapter 5, "Construction Licensing, Permits And Regulations", of this Code, and to enforce the
provisions of the Minnesota State Building Code (SBC) and for such purpose shall have the
powers of a police officer. The City Council may appoint such other officers, inspectors and
assistants and such other employees as may be necessary, from time to time. Certain of such
employees may be designated deputy building officials for the purpose of carrying out the functions
of the Building Department and with the same powers and authority as the building official.
The building official shall submit monthly reports to the City Council covering the work of the
department. This person shall also include a summary of any recommendations and desirable
amendments to chapter 5 of this Code, permits and regulations. The building official shall keep
accurate account of names and addresses together with the location of the building or premises
which the department worked with.
B. Emergency Management:
1. Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of unprecedented size and
destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado, blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes,
or from sabotage, hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to ensure that preparations of this City will be adequate to deal with those disasters,
and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect the public peace, health and
safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the people of this City, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:
a. To establish a local emergency management organization to perform emergency
management functions. It is critical to have in place a command structure, with preestablished
personnel and well defined responsibilities, as well as a common communications system.
b. To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies and disasters.
c. To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the City and other political subdivisions of
this State and other states with respect to carrying out of emergency preparedness functions.
d. To comply with the provisions of Minnesota Statute 12.25, as amended from time to time, to
establish a local organization for emergency management and appoint, by the Mayor, a
coordinator who is responsible for its organization, administration and operations, subject to
the direction of the City Council.
2. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
DISASTER: A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and
safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss
to property, and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are
unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 36/444
EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for immediate action.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT: The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency
functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent,
minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado,
and other acts of nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services,
emergency medical services, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological and
chemical, evacuation, congregate care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions
related to civil protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental for carrying out
the foregoing functions. Emergency management includes those activities sometimes referred to
as "civil defense" functions.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR: The appointed official who is responsible for
the organization, administration and operation, subject to the direction and control of the city
council, of emergency management for the city of Little Falls.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES: The total personnel resources engaged in city level
emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions of this subsection or any
rule or order thereunder; which may include personnel from city departments, Morrison County
personnel, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and agencies.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN: Pursuant to Minnesota statute 12.25, subdivisions 3 and
5, as amended from time to time, the city of Little Falls adopted the Morrison County emergency
operations plan. This plan provides that each local and county organization for emergency
management shall perform emergency management functions within the territorial limits of the
political subdivision within which it is organized and, in addition, shall conduct these functions
outside of its territorial limits as may be required by and pursuant to Minnesota statutes 12.23,
12.27 and 12.32 or any other applicable law. The plan further determines the boundaries of the
geographic areas of their respective emergency management responsibilities or providing for a
common emergency management organization.
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS): The national incident management
system (NIMS) was developed to help emergency responders from different jurisdictions and
disciplines work together, in a cohesive and effective manner, when responding to large scale
disasters that cross local jurisdictional lines. In addition, NIMS was designed to be both flexible
and scalable, allowing it to be useful for local response as well.
3. The declaration of a local emergency by the mayor activates the city's emergency organization
structure. Once declared, the city's emergency management coordinator will contact the
Morrison County emergency management coordinator. If additional resources are needed, the
Morrison County emergency management coordinator will contact the Minnesota department of
public safety, homeland security and emergency management division, which will assign a
person to coordinate the city's needs and available resources. Assistance from the federal
emergency management agency may also become available if requested by the governor and/or
homeland security and emergency management division.
4. Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare for an emergency for which
adequate regulations have not been adopted by the governor or the city council, the city council
may by resolution promulgate regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or
regulation, respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies; the
repair, maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health, fire and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 37/444
safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters
which are required to protect public safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.
5. Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing; shall be dated; shall refer to the
particular emergency to which it pertains, if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the city
administrator. A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection at the city
administrator's office, shall be conspicuously posted at the front of city hall or other headquarters
of the city or at other places in the affected area as the city council shall designate in the
resolution. By resolution, the city council may modify or rescind a regulation.
6. The city council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any time. If not sooner rescinded,
every regulation shall expire thirty (30) days after its effective date or at the end of the
emergency to which it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the city council shall be suspended
during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.
7. During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions of Minnesota statute 12.37, as it
may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding any statutory or charter provision to the
contrary, empowered, through its city council, acting within or without the corporate city limits, to
enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the
health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of
a disaster. The city may exercise these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster
without compliance with the time consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law
pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment agreements, purchase of
supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies, and the appropriation and expenditure of
public funds, including, but not limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids and requirement for bids.
8. All functions and activities relating to emergency management as described in this subsection
and as established by Minnesota statutes are hereby declared to be governmental functions for
the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city nor agents and
representatives, if in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any
order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, shall be liable
for any damage sustained to person or property as the result of said activity.
9. The city shall provide NIMS training for emergency personnel (i.e., police and fire) and any other
personnel and elected officials as required.
10. The city will follow the NIMS template for organizational and command structure.
11. The city will use a NIMS compliant communications and information management system,
which is a common operational platform that uses plain language for emergency operations.
12. Emergency management shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be
employed directly or indirectly for political purposes.
C. Fire Department: A fire department is hereby established, the head of this department shall be
known as the fire chief, who shall be appointed by the city council. The size and composition,
including, but not limited to, a determination as to permanent and volunteer/paid on call members,
shall be established by the city council, which may be changed from time to time by a subsequent
decision. The fire chief, and all members of the fire department, including volunteers/paid on call,
shall have the powers and authority of firefighters generally, and shall perform such duties as are
legally required by the city council or by law. It is the duty of the chief of the fire department to
provide to the city administrator monthly reports as to all fires occurring during the previous month
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 38/444
stating the estimated damages; such reports shall also state the other activities of the department.
The chief of the fire department shall also make and file such other reports as may be requested
by the city council.
D. Police Department: A police department is hereby established, the head of this department shall be
known as the chief of police, and the number of additional members and employees of the police
department shall be determined by the city council which may be changed from time to time by
subsequent decision. The chief of police and all members of the police department, including
special police, shall have the powers and authority of police officers generally and shall perform
such duties as are legally required of them by the city council or by law. The chief of police shall
supervise and direct the activities of the police department and shall have custody of all property
used and maintained for the purposes of said department. It is the duty of the chief of police to
provide to the city administrator monthly reports as to all arrests made by and other activities of the
department during the previous month. The chief of police shall also make and file such other
reports as may be required by the mayor and city council.
E. Public Works Department: A public works department is hereby established, the head of this
department shall be known as the public works director/engineer, and the number of additional
employees shall be determined by the city council. The public works director/engineer shall
supervise and direct the maintenance of the streets, parks, grounds and maintenance, water and
wastewater plants, and such other departments or duties as may be established or assigned by
the city council. The public works director/engineer shall also coordinate the activities of the
building department. (Ord. 77, 6th Series, eff. 10-19-2015)
2.04: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Accounts, Claims Or Demands: All accounts, claims and demands shall be processed and paid
pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 471.425, as amended from time to time.
B. Authorizing, Ratifying And Confirming Resolutions Providing For Payment Of Liabilities And Making
Local Improvements: Pursuant to provision of section 3.03 of the city charter, the city council may
by resolution provide for the payment of liabilities, the making and assessing of local
improvements, issuance of bonds, and other matters relating to a specific municipal act and not of
general application. Any resolutions heretofore adopted for these purposes since March 1, 1974,
are hereby ratified and confirmed.
C. Background Checks On Municipal Employees, Appointees, Licensees And Contractors:
1. Applicants For Employment And Volunteers: The purpose and intent of this subsection is to
establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to the Minnesota computerized
criminal history information for specified noncriminal purposes of employment background
checks for the positions of all regular part time or full time employees of the city of Little Falls.
a. Criminal History Employment Background Investigations: The city's police department is
hereby the exclusive entity within the city to do a criminal history background investigation on
the applicants for all regular part time or full time employees of the city, unless the city's hiring
authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 39/444
applicants, the police department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
bureau of criminal apprehensions computerized criminal history information system in
accordance with the bureau of criminal apprehension policy. Any data that is accessed and
acquired shall be maintained at the police department under the care and custody of the
police chief or their designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history
data may be released by the police department to the city council, city administrator or other
staff involved in the hiring process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the police department by
written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of Minnesota statute 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the
information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota statutes 364.09, the city will not
reject any applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the
crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is a felony,
gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor. If the city rejects the applicant on this basis, the city
shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:
(1) The grounds and reasons for the denial; and
(2) The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota statute section
364.06 as amended; and
(3) The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and
(4) That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
2. Applicants For City Licenses: The purpose and intent of this subsection is to establish
regulations and will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's computerized criminal history
information for specified noncriminal purposes of licensing background checks.
a. Criminal History License Background Investigations: The city's police department is hereby
the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background investigation on the
applicants for all licenses issued by the city of Little Falls.
In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license
applicants, the police department is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota
bureau of criminal apprehension's computerized criminal history information system in
accordance with the bureau of criminal apprehension's policy. Any data that is accessed and
acquired shall be maintained at the police department under the care and custody of the
police chief or their designee. A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history
data may be released by the police department to the licensing authority, including the city
council, city administrator or other city staff involved with the license approval process.
Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the police department by
written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the
provisions of Minnesota statute chapter 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of
the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota statutes 364.09, the city will not
reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless the
crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor. If the city rejects the applicant on this basis, the city shall
notify the applicant in writing of the following:
(1) The grounds and reasons for the denial; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 40/444
(2) The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota statute section
364.06 as amended; and
(3) The earliest date the applicant may reapply for license; and
(4) That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.
D. Bonds Of City Employees: All city employees shall be covered by a blanket fidelity bond in the
penal sum of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); provided, that the city administrator and all
other employees handling actual funds of the city, shall be bonded in the penal sum of at least
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
E. City Seal: All contracts to which the city is a party, in addition to being signed by the president of the
city council and the city administrator, shall be sealed with the city seal. Said seal shall be kept in
the custody of the city administrator and affixed by this person. The official city seal shall be a
circular disk having engraved thereupon "The City of Little Falls" and such other words, figures or
emblems as the city council may, by resolution, designate.
F. Contracts, Purchases And Rentals By The City: All contracts, purchases and rentals, except a
contract for local improvements made pursuant to Minnesota statutes 429.041 or a contract made
pursuant to the provisions of any other statute having provisions inconsistent herewith, shall be
made pursuant to the uniform municipal contracting law, Minnesota statutes section 471.345. The
city shall not enter into any contract for the doing of any public work before receiving from all other
contracting parties acceptable evidence of compliance with the workers' compensation
requirements of Minnesota law.
G. Deferral Of Special Assessment: The city council may defer the payment of any special
assessment where the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant must apply for the deferment not later than ninety (90) days after the assessment
is adopted by the city council.
2. The applicant must be sixty five (65) years of age or older, or retired by virtue of permanent and
total disability.
3. The applicant is a member of the Minnesota national guard or other military reserves who is
ordered into active military service, as defined in section 190.05, subdivision 5b or 5c as
amended from time to time, as stated in the applicant's military orders, for whom it would be a
hardship to make the payments.
4. The applicant must be the owner of the property.
5. The applicant must occupy the property as their principal place of residence.
6. The applicant's income from all sources shall not exceed the low income limit as established by
the department of housing and urban development as used in determining the eligibility for
section VIII housing.
The deferment shall be granted for as long a period of time as the hardship exists and the
conditions as aforementioned have been met. However, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
notify the city administrator of any change in their status that would affect eligibility for
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 41/444
deferment.
The entire amount of deferred special assessment shall be due within sixty (60) days after loss
of eligibility by the applicant. If the special assessment is not paid within sixty (60) days, the city
administrator shall assess the balance thereafter paid according to the terms and conditions of
the original special assessment.
The option to defer the payment of special assessment shall terminate and all amounts
accumulated plus applicable interest shall become due upon the occurrence of any one of the
following:
a. The death of the owner when there is no spouse who is eligible for deferment.
b. The sale, transfer or subdivision of all or any part of the property.
c. Loss of homestead status on the property.
d. Determination by the city council for any reason that there would be no hardship to require
immediate or partial payment.
H. Deferment Of Special Assessment, Agricultural Land:
1. The city council may defer the payment of any special assessment on agricultural land if the
requirements of subsection H3 of this section are met and if the property:
a. Is subject to the special assessment, is unplatted property consisting of five (5) acres or more,
or a nursery qualifying for classification as Minnesota statutes 273.13, subdivision 23, a or b,
and either:
(1) Is the homestead of the owner or of a surviving spouse, child or sibling of the owner, or is
real estate which is farmed with the real estate which contains the homestead property; or
(2) Has been in the possession of the applicant, applicant's spouse, parent or sibling, or any
combination thereof for at least seven (7) years prior to the date the assessment was levied;
or
(3) Is the homestead of a shareholder in a family farm corporation as defined in Minnesota
statutes section 500.24, as amended from time to time, notwithstanding the fact that legal
title to the real estate may be held in the name of the family farm corporation; or
(4) Is in the possession of a nursery or greenhouse, or an entity owned by a proprietor,
partnership or corporation which also owns the nursery or greenhouse operations on the
parcel or parcels.
2. The applicant must file an application for deferment on forms provided by the city administrator.
The city council may consider all the facts surrounding the application and the special
assessment in determining whether to grant a deferment.
3. Any deferment granted under this subsection shall end at the earlier of such time as specified in
the deferment, or such time as the property no longer meets the requirement of this subsection,
the entire amount of the deferred special assessment shall become due within sixty (60) days. If
the special assessment is not paid within sixty (60) days, the city administrator shall assess the
balance according to the terms and conditions of the original assessment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 42/444
I. Disposal Of Excess Property:
1. Property Declared Surplus: The city administrator may, from time to time, recommend to the city
council that certain personal property (chattels) owned by the city is no longer needed for a
municipal purpose and should be sold or exchanged. By action of the city council, said property
shall be declared surplus, the city administrator is authorized to dispose of said property in the
manner stated herein and directed by the city council.
2. Property Value Less Than One Thousand Dollars: The city administrator may sell surplus
property with a total value of less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) through negotiated sale
or exchange.
3. Property Value Over One Thousand Dollars: The city administrator shall offer for public sale, to
the highest bidder, or sell at public auction to the highest bidder, as directed by the city council,
surplus property with a total estimated value over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Notice of
such public sale or public auction shall be given stating the time, place and terms of sale or
auction, and generally describing the property to be sold or auctioned at least ten (10) days prior
to the date of sale or auction by publication once in the official newspaper.
4. Receipts From Sale: All receipts from sales of surplus property under this subsection shall be
placed in the general fund unless otherwise designated by the city council.
5. Persons Who May Not Purchase; Exception:
a. No employee of the city who is a member of the administrative staff, department head, an
advisor serving the city in a professional capacity, or a city council member may be a
purchaser of property under this subsection. Other city employees may be purchasers if they
are not directly involved in the sale, if they are the highest responsible bidder, and if at least
one week's published or posted notice of sale is given.
b. It is unlawful for any person to be a purchaser of property under this subsection if such
purchase is prohibited by the terms of this subsection.
J. Employee Response Time: The city council recognizes its duty to, insofar as possible, protect the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and their property. In order to fulfill this
responsibility, it may be necessary, in times of individual need or widespread disaster giving rise to
an emergency, to recall city employees. Thus, this section is adopted to require employee
response time to meet such needs.
1. Employee Classifications:
a. Class I employees shall be the following: city administrator, public works director/engineer, the
chiefs of the police department and fire department and all law enforcement officers and
firefighters, the superintendent(s) and assistant superintendent(s) of the utility department,
and the superintendent(s), street foreman and heavy equipment operators of the street
department.
b. Class II employees are all those not in class I.
2. Response Time: The following response time is hereby determined to be reasonable and
required of all city employees within six (6) months after assuming city employment:
a. Class I employees' response time shall be within forty five (45) minutes of the intersection of
Broadway Avenue East and First Street East in the city of Little Falls, Minnesota, by utilizing
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 43/444
all designated speed limits except the fire chief and firefighters.
b. Class I employees' which are the fire chief and firefighters response time shall be within ten
(10) minutes, by utilizing all designated speed limits, of the intersection of Broadway Avenue
East and First Street East in the city of Little Falls, Minnesota, or work full time within the city
of Little Falls, Minnesota, and reside within the fire coverage areas.
c. Class II employees shall not be required to reside within any specific response time.
K. Facsimile Signature: The president of the city council and the city administrator are hereby
authorized to request a depository of city funds to honor an order for payment when such
instrument bears a facsimile of their signature, and to charge the same to the account designated
thereon or upon which it is drawn, as effectively as though it were their manually written signature.
Such authority is granted only for the purpose of permitting such officer an economy of time and
effort.
L. Mayor's Contingency Fund: There is hereby created a mayor's contingency fund under the
provisions of section 7.11 of the city charter. Said fund will be a part of the general fund. The city
council is hereby authorized and directed to annually budget a sum not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for said fund. The mayor shall have absolute control over said fund and may use
and expend the same as he/she may deem in the best interest of the city. Said fund shall be
subject to audit upon request of the city council.
M. Provisions For Public Hearing When Not Otherwise Provided By Law Or City Code Provision:
Unless otherwise provided by law or city code provision, a notice of public hearing shall be a notice
published once in the official newspaper of the city, which publication shall be published at least
ten (10) days prior to the time set for public hearing on the subject matter stated in the notice.
N. Right To Administrative Appeal: If any person shall be aggrieved by any administrative decision of
the city administrator or any board or commission not having within its structure an appellate
procedure, such aggrieved person is entitled to a full hearing before the city council upon serving a
written request therefor upon the mayor and city administrator at least five (5) days prior to any
regular city council meeting and within thirty (30) days of the disputed decision. Such request shall
contain a general statement setting forth the administrative decision to be challenged by the
appellant. At such hearing, the appellant may present any evidence deemed pertinent to the
appeal, but the city shall not be required to keep a verbatim record of the proceedings. The mayor
or other officer presiding at the hearing, may, in the interest of justice or to comply with time
requirements and on the presiding officer's own motion or the motion of the appellant, the city
administrator or a member of the city council, adjourn the hearing to a more convenient time or
place, but such time or place shall be fixed and determined before adjournment so as to avoid the
necessity for formal notice of reconvening.
O. Rules Of Procedure For Appeals And Other Hearings: The city council may adopt certain written
rules of procedure to be followed in all administrative appeals and other hearings to be held before
the city council or other bodies authorized to hold hearings and determine questions therein
presented. Such rules of procedure shall be effective thirty (30) days after adoption and shall be for
the purpose of establishing and maintaining order and decorum in the proceedings.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 44/444
P. Uniform Purchasing Procedures: It is unlawful for any agent or employee of the city to order the
purchase of any supplies or materials or contract for any services, except upon forms and
procedures duly adopted or established therefor, and all purchase orders shall be approved by the
head of the department for which purchase is being made and presented to the city administrator
for approval.
Q. Workers' Compensation: All officers of the city elected or appointed for a regular term of office or to
complete the unexpired portion of any such regular term shall be included in the definition of
"employee" as defined in Minnesota statutes relating to coverage for purposes of workers'
compensation entitlement. (Ord. 77, 6th Series, eff. 10-19-2015)
2.05: FRANCHISES:
A. Definition: "Franchise" as used in this section, shall be construed to mean any special privileges
granted to any person in, over, upon or under any of the streets or public places of the city,
whether such privilege has heretofore been granted by it or by the state or shall hereafter be
granted by the city or by the state.
B. Franchise Ordinances: The city council may grant franchises by ordinance. Franchise rights shall
always be subject to the superior right of the public to the use of streets and public places. All
persons desiring to make any burdensome use of the street or public places, inconsistent with the
public's right in such places, or desiring the privilege of placing in, over, upon or under any street or
public place any permanent or semipermanent fixtures for the purpose of constructing or operating
railways, telegraphing or transmitting electricity, or transporting by pneumatic tubes, or for
furnishing to the city or its inhabitants, or any portion thereof, transportation facilities, water, light,
heat, power, gas, or any other such utility, or for any other purpose, shall be required to obtain a
franchise before proceeding to make such use of the streets or public places, or before proceeding
to place such fixtures in such places.
C. Power Of Regulation Reserved: The city shall have the right and power to regulate and control the
exercise by any person, of any franchise however acquired, and whether such franchise has been
heretofore granted by it or by the state.
D. Conditions In Every Franchise: All conditions specified in this section shall be a part of every
franchise even though they may not be expressly contained in the franchise:
1. The grantee shall be subject to and will perform on its part all the terms of this section and will
comply with all pertinent provisions of the city charter and this code, as the same may from time
to time be amended.
2. The grantee's fares, rates and charges shall at all times be just, fair and reasonable for the
services rendered, and shall in all cases be fixed and from time to time changed unless
regulated by an agency of the state, in the manner following:
a. A reasonable rate shall be construed to be one which will, with efficient management,
normally yield above all operating expenses and deprecation, a fair return upon all money
invested.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 45/444
b. If possible, maximum rates and charges shall be arrived at by direct negotiation with the city
council.
c. If direct negotiations fail to produce agreement, the city council shall, not less than thirty (30)
days before the expiration of any existing rate schedule or agreement, appoint an expert as its
representative, the franchisee shall likewise appoint an expert as its representative, and the
two (2) of them shall appoint a third person, preferably an expert, and the three (3) of them
shall constitute a board of arbitration. The board shall report its findings as soon as possible,
and the rates and charges it shall agree upon by majority vote shall be legal and binding,
subject only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction upon application of one of the
parties.
3. The city council shall have the right to require reasonable extensions of any public service
system, from time to time, and to make such rules and regulations as may be required to secure
adequate and proper service and to provide sufficient accommodations for the public.
4. The grantee shall not issue any capital stock on account of the franchise or the value thereof,
and grantee shall have no right to receive, upon condemnation proceedings brought by the city
to acquire the public utility exercising such franchise, any return on account of the franchise or
its value.
5. No sale or lease of said franchise shall be effective until the assignee or lessee shall have filed
with the city an instrument, duly executed, reciting the facts of such sale or lease, accepting the
terms of the franchise, and agreeing to perform all the conditions required of the grantee
thereunder.
6. Every grant in said franchise which permits for the erection of poles, masts, or other fixtures in
the streets and for the attachment of wires thereto, or for the laying of tracks in, or of pipes or
conduits under the streets or public places, or for the placing in the streets or other public places
of any permanent or semipermanent fixtures whatsoever, shall be subject to the conditions that
the city council shall have the power to require such alterations therein, or relocation or rerouting
thereof, as the city council may at any time deem necessary for the safety, health or
convenience of the public; and particularly, it shall have the power to require the removal of
poles, masts, and other fixtures bearing wires and the placing underground of all facilities for
whatsoever purpose used.
7. Every franchise shall contain a provision granting the city the right to acquire the same in
accordance with statute.
8. The franchise may be obligated by the city to pay the city fees to raise revenue or defray
increased costs accruing as a result of utility operations, including, but not limited to, a sum of
money based upon gross operating revenues or gross earnings from its operations in the city.
E. Further Provisions Of The Franchises: The enumeration and specification of particular matters
which must be included in every franchise or renewal or extension thereof, shall not be construed
as impairing the right of the city to insert in any such franchise or renewal or extension thereof
such other and further conditions and restrictions as the city council may deem proper to protect
the city's interest, nor shall anything contained in this section limit any right or power possessed by
the city over existing franchises. (Ord. 77, 6th Series, eff. 10-19-2015)
2.06: TRUSTS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 46/444
A. Frank And Alice Dewey Park Trust Fund: There is hereby established the Frank and Alice Dewey
park trust fund for the purpose of providing benefits to the city park system for the aesthetic and
recreational enjoyment of the community.
1. All funds received under the last will and testament of Alice E. Dewey shall be paid into the
Frank and Alice Dewey park trust fund, and said funds shall be used only as herein provided.
2. To accomplish the intended purposes, this fund shall be prudently managed and wisely used to
effect its purpose of affording benefit to the public as a whole over the years. This purpose does
not contemplate supplanting the city's traditional responsibility for providing public recreational
facilities, but rather comprehends supplementing and augmenting the city's efforts in meeting
that responsibility, especially when the city council, in the lawful exercise of its discretion,
discerns a public need or appropriate use for the fund's resources within its purpose not
otherwise affordable.
3. In effectuating the purpose of this trust fund, the city council may use the resources of the fund
to acquire land, install equipment, contribute to maintenance, landscape and in other ways to
benefit the public through enhancement of the beauty and usefulness of existing parks or new
parks in the park system, all pursuant to a long term plan and/or occasional project adopted by
decision of the city council from time to time.
4. While it is intended that this fund will remain as a continuing endowment of enduring benefit to
the people of the Little Falls community, the income of which will be used to effect its purpose,
the city council nevertheless will have the power to invade and use the corpus of the fund when
the need or advisability of doing so is discerned.
5. The city council may employ expert advisory services and fiscal management for the fund and
the expense thereof shall be paid from the fund.
6. The corpus of the fund may be expended by the city council as herein authorized by a seveneighths
(7/8) vote of all members of the city council.
7. The income of the fund may be expended by the city council as herein authorized by a majority
vote of all members of the city council.
8. Funds included in this fund shall not be included in or shall it be any part of the budget of the
city.
9. Additions may be made to this fund by interested parties, and funds so received shall be
governed by the provisions of this subsection.
B. Laura Jane Musser Trust Fund: There is hereby established the Laura Jane Musser trust fund for
the purpose of providing benefits to the public for the aesthetic, cultural and heritage enjoyment of
the Musser/Weyerhaeuser properties.
1. One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in funds received from the Musser trust shall be paid into the
Laura Jane Musser trust fund, and said funds shall be used only as herein provided.
2. In effectuating the purpose of this trust fund, the city council may use the resources of the fund
to acquire land, install equipment, contribute to maintenance, landscape, and in other ways to
benefit the public through the enhancement, beauty and usefulness of the
Musser/Weyerhaeuser properties, all pursuant to long term plans, and/or occasional projects
adopted by decision of the city council.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 47/444
3. To accomplish the intended purposes, this fund shall be prudently managed and wisely used to
affect its purpose of affording benefits to the public as a whole over the years.
4. It is intended that this fund will remain as a continuing endowment of enduring benefit to the
Little Falls community and beyond, the income of which will be used to effect its purpose, the city
council nevertheless will have the power to invade and use the corpus of the fund when the
need or advisability of doing so is discerned.
5. The city council may employ expert advisory services and fiscal management for the fund and
the expense thereof shall be paid from the fund.
6. The corpus of the fund may be expended by the city council as herein authorized by a seveneighths
(7/8) vote of all members of the city council.
7. The interest income of the fund may be expended by the city council as herein authorized by a
majority vote of the members of the city council.
8. Funds included in this fund shall not be included in, nor shall they be part of, any other budget of
the city not associated with the Musser/Weyerhaeuser properties.
9. Additions may be made to this fund by interested parties and funds so received shall be
governed by the provisions of this subsection.
C. Minnesota Fishing Museum Trust: There is hereby established the Minnesota Fishing Museum
trust for the purpose of providing benefits to the city by assistance in the operation of a museum for
the preservation and display of artifacts relating to the sport of freshwater fishing; by assisting in
the recognition of persons and organizations for achievement and accomplishment in the
furtherance of Minnesota freshwater fishing; by assistance in the sponsorship and promotion of
freshwater fishing educational programs and events.
1. All funds and assets received from or on behalf of the museum and its programs shall be paid
into and received by the Minnesota Fishing Museum trust, and said funds and assets shall be
used only as herein provided.
2. Some or all of the assets subject to this trust shall be designated as a "permanent collection". All
assets originally designated as part of the permanent collection, together with any later additions
thereto, shall be handled and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
No additions shall be made to the permanent collection unless such additions are accepted as
such by the city. Some or all of the assets subject to this trust, that are not a part of the
permanent collection, shall be designated as a "working collection". All assets designated as
part of the working collection, together with any later additions thereto, shall be handled and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. The corpus of the permanent
collection may be expended by the city council as herein authorized by a seven-eighths (7/8)
vote of all members of the city council. The interest income of the permanent collection may be
expended by the city council as herein authorized by a majority vote of all members of the city
council.
3. The permanent collection shall consist of assorted fishing tackle, lures and equipment, together
with informational materials as designated on an inventory prepared by the Minnesota Fishing
Museum, Inc., and funds accepted by the city. The city or its representative shall perform
curation and maintenance of the permanent collection. The permanent collection shall be
retained by the city unless and until a facility for display of the permanent collection is no longer
maintained within the city. Upon that event, the permanent collection shall be disposed of as
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 48/444
follows: first by offering the collection to another municipality that is willing to maintain the
integrity and operation of the collection as a nonprofit organization for the purposes outlined in
this subsection C; second, in the event the city is not able to find another municipality to continue
the tradition of the Minnesota Fishing Museum, then the Minnesota department of natural
resources would become sole owner of the assets and would be able to use or dispose of any
and all items at their discretion.
4. The working collection shall consist of assorted fishing tackle, lures, equipment, display cases
and funds as designated on an inventory prepared by the Minnesota Fishing Museum, Inc., and
accepted by the city. Assets within the working collection shall be prudently managed and wisely
used to effect the purpose of this trust to afford benefit to the public as a whole over the years.
The city may use the resources of the working collection to acquire land, install equipment,
contribute to maintenance, sponsor programs, and in other ways to benefit the public consistent
with the purposes of this trust. While it is intended that the working collection will remain as a
continuing endowment of enduring benefit to the people of Little Falls, the income of which will
be used to effect its purpose, the city council will nevertheless have the power to invade and use
the corpus of the working collection when the need or advisability of doing so in a manner that is
consistent with intent of this subsection.
5. Additions may be made to the permanent collection or the working collection by interested
parties, and funds so received shall be governed by the provisions of this subsection. No
additions shall be made to the permanent collection unless it has been specifically accepted as
such by the city.
D. William And Burneze Krafve Pine Grove Park Fund: There is hereby established the William and
Burneze Krafve Pine Grove Park fund for the purpose of providing benefits to the Pine Grove Park
And Zoo for the aesthetic and recreational enjoyment of the community and environment of the
animals.
1. All funds received under the last will and testament of William Krafve shall be paid into the
William and Burneze Krafve Pine Grove Park fund, and said funds shall be used only as herein
provided.
2. To accomplish the intended purpose, this fund shall be prudently managed and wisely used to
affect its purpose of affording benefit to the public as a whole over the years. This purpose does
not contemplate supplanting the city's traditional responsibility for providing public recreational
and zoo facilities, but rather comprehends supplementing and augmenting the city's efforts in
meeting that responsibility, especially when the city council, in the lawful exercise of its
discretion, discerns a public need or appropriate use for the fund's resources within its purpose
not otherwise affordable.
3. In effectuating the purpose of this fund, the city council may use the resources of the fund to
acquire land, install equipment, contribute to maintenance, landscape, and capital improvements
to benefit Pine Grove Park And Zoo through enhancement of the beauty and usefulness of the
park and zoo, all pursuant to a long term plan and/or occasional project adopted by decision of
the city council from time to time.
4. While it is intended that this fund will remain as a continuing endowment of enduring benefit to
the people of the Little Falls community, the income of which will be used to effect its purpose,
the city council nevertheless will have the power to invade and use the corpus of the fund when
the need or advisability of doing so is discerned.
5. The city council may employ expert advisory services and fiscal management for the fund and
the expense thereof shall be paid from the fund.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 49/444
6. The corpus of the fund may be expended by the city council as herein authorized by a seveneighths
(7/8) vote of all members of the city council.
7. The income of the fund may be expended by the city council as herein authorized by a majority
vote of all members of the city council.
8. Funds included in the fund shall not be included in, nor shall it be any part of, the budget of the
city.
9. Additions may be made to this fund by interested parties and funds so received shall be
governed by this subsection. (Ord. 77, 6th Series, eff. 10-19-2015)
Chapter 3
BEER, WINE AND LIQUOR
Chapter 3
REGULATING THE POSSESSION, SALE AND
CONSUMPTION OF INTOXICATING AND 3.2 PERCENT
MALT LIQUOR
3.01: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE:
The provisions of Minnesota statutes 340A as they may be amended from time to time, with reference
to the definitions of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to
sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution and consumption of
intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of
this chapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the city council that all future amendments to
Minnesota statutes chapter 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been
in existence at the time this chapter was adopted. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.02: CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW:
The city council is authorized by the provisions of Minnesota statutes 340A.509 as it may be amended
from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter, additional restrictions on the sale and
possession of alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in Minnesota statutes
chapter 340A as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.03: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the definitions contained in Minnesota statutes 340A.101 as it may be amended from
time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this chapter:
LIQUOR: As used in this chapter, without modification by the words "intoxicating" or "3.2 percent malt"
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 50/444
includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.
PARTY ROOM: That portion of a licensed premises designated as a "party room" in a written plan filed
with the city administrator, and meeting the following requirements: a) having a separate entrance
from the rest of the licensed premises; b) being separated from the rest of the licensed premises by
walls and/or doors not open to use by the general public; and c) being provided with separate
washroom facilities from the rest of the licensed premises.
RESTAURANT: An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or
manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table service
is provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is
served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a "restaurant" as defined by this
section, an establishment shall have a license from the state as required under Minnesota statutes
157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet the definition of either a "small
establishment", "medium establishment" or "large establishment" as defined in Minnesota statutes
157.16, subdivision 3(d), as it may be amended from time to time. An establishment which serves
prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza is heated
and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this chapter unless it meets the
definitions of a "small establishment", "medium establishment" or "large establishment".
WINE: Sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine from other
agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, vermouth, cider, perry and sake, in each
instance containing not less than seven percent (7%) nor more than twenty four percent (24%) alcohol
by volume for nonindustrial use. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.04: NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
A. The city council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators and
employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general from harm stemming
from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The city council
especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely
to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault, and
disorderly conduct. The city council also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the city.
B. It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises
when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
nontransparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the
person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a
nontransparent material.
C. It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons upon the licensed premises
to engage in obscene performances, sexual conduct or continued use of obscenities as defined in
Minnesota statutes 617.241 as amended from time to time.
D. A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification for
revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or any other license
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 51/444
issued under this chapter or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of section 3.29 of
this chapter. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.05: CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES:
No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in a public park, on any public
street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other than on the premises of an
establishment licensed under this chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists in the city, or
where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted; unless expressly authorized by the
city council. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.06: NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED:
State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may issue. The city's number of licenses
shall be increased in accordance with any increase provided for by Minnesota statutes chapter 340A
as amended. The city council is not required to issue the full number of licenses that it has available.
(Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.07: TERMS AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES:
Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary
licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All
licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. A
consumption and display permit issued by the commission of public safety, and the accompanying city
consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.08: KINDS OF LICENSES:
The city council of a city that does not have a municipal liquor store is authorized to issue the following
licenses and permits, up to the number specified in section 3.06 of this chapter. The city council of a
city which has a municipal liquor store is authorized to issue only those licenses specified in section
3.27 of this chapter or as allowed by Minnesota statutes 340A. (Ord. 87, 6th Series, eff. 6-6-2016)
A. 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor On-Sale License: 3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be
issued only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used
exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.
B. 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Off-Sale License: 3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale licenses.
C. Temporary 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor License: Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may
be issued only to a club, charitable, religious or nonprofit organization.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 52/444
D. Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only
to exclusive liquor stores or drugstores that have an off-sale license which was first issued on or
before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license established by the city
council under section 3.09 of this chapter shall be established by resolution or a greater amount
which may be permitted by Minnesota statutes 340A.408, subdivision 3, as it may be amended
from time to time.
E. On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to
the following establishments as defined by Minnesota statutes 340A.101, as it may be amended
from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs or
congressionally chartered veterans organization, theaters and exclusive liquor stores. Club
licenses may be issued only with the approval of the commissioner of public safety. The fee for
club licenses established by the city council under section 3.09 of this chapter shall not exceed the
amounts provided for in Minnesota statutes 340A.408, subdivision 2(b) as it may be amended from
time to time. The city council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to
dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the city
under the provisions of Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision 4(b) as it may be amended from
time to time. The city council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to
dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet, conference,
meeting or social affair conducted on the premises of a sport, convention, or cultural facility owned
by the city, under the provisions of Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision 4(a) as it may be
amended from time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor
to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the premises.
F. Sunday On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after
authorization to do so by voter approval at a general election or special election as provided by
Minnesota statutes 340A.504, subdivision 3, as it may be amended from time to time. Sunday onsale
intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a "restaurant" as defined in section 3.03 of
this chapter, club, bowling center, or hotel which has a seating capacity of at least thirty (30)
persons, which holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in
conjunction with the service of food. The maximum fee for this license, which shall be established
by the city council under the provisions of section 3.09 of this chapter, shall be established by
resolution or the maximum amount provided by Minnesota statutes 340A.504, subdivision 3(c) as it
may be amended from time to time.
G. Combination On-Sale/Off-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: Combination on-sale/off-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses if the city has a population less than ten thousand (10,000).
H. Temporary On-Sale Intoxicating Liquor License: Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with
the approval of the commissioner of public safety, which may be issued only in connection with a
social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has
existed for at least three (3) years. No license shall be for longer than four (4) consecutive days,
and the city shall issue no more than twelve (12) days' worth of temporary licenses to any one
organization in one calendar year.
I. On-Sale Wine License: On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the commissioner of public
safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating at least twenty five (25) guests at one
time and meet the criteria of Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision 5, as it may be amended
from time to time, and which meet the definition of "restaurant" in section 3.03 of this chapter; to
licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in Minnesota statutes 340A.4011,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 53/444
subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time and to theaters that meet the criteria of
Minnesota statutes 340A.404(b) as it may be amended from time to time. The fee for an on-sale
wine license established by the city council under the provisions of section 3.09 of this chapter
shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the license fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license.
The holder of an on-sale wine license who holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt beverage license is
authorized to sell malt liquor with content over 3.2 percent (strong beer) without an additional
license.
J. One Day Consumption And Display Permit: One day consumption and display permits with the
approval of the commissioner of public safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a
social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.
K. Approval Of Consumption And Display Permit: Approval of the issuance of a consumption and
display permit by the commissioner of public safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee
which may be imposed by the city council on a person who has been issued a consumption and
display permit under the provisions of section 3.09 of this chapter shall be established by
resolution or the maximum amount permitted by Minnesota statutes 340A.414, subdivision 6, as it
may be amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of
each year.
L. Culinary Class Limited On-Sale License: Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a
business establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale liquor license that, as part of its
business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which payment is made by each participant or
advance reservation required.
The license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class, at no additional
cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six (6) ounces of wine or twelve (12) ounces of
intoxicating malt liquor, during and as a part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises
only.
M. Temporary Off-Sale Wine License: Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the
commissioner of public safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A license
issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of only vintage wine of a brand and vintage that is
not commonly being offered for sale by any wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize
the off-sale of wine for not more than three (3) consecutive days provided not more than six
hundred (600) cases of wine are sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms,
including license fee, imposed by section 3.09 of this chapter. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
N. Brewpubs:
1. On-Sale License: A brewpub may be issued an on-sale intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt
liquor license by the municipality for a restaurant operating in the place of manufacture.
2. Off-Sale License: Notwithstanding Minnesota Statutes Annotated section 340A.405, a brewpub
that holds an on-sale license issued pursuant to this section may, with the approval of the
commissioner of public safety, be issued a license by the city for off-sale of malt liquor produced
and packaged on the licensed premises. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours
for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city in which the brewpub is located, and the malt
liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 54/444
time at exclusive liquor stores, except that malt liquor in growlers only may be sold at off-sale on
Sundays. Sunday sales are as allowed by subsection T of this section. Packaging of malt liquor
for off-sale under this subsection must comply with Minnesota statute 340A.285.
3. Total Retail Sales: A brewpub's total retail sales at on- or off-sale under this section may not
exceed three thousand five hundred (3,500) barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not
total more than five hundred (500) barrels.
4. Interest In Other Retail On-Sale Licenses: A brewpub may hold or have an interest in other retail
on-sale licenses, but may not have an ownership interest in whole or in part, or be an officer,
director, agent, or employee of, any other manufacturer, brewer, importer, or wholesaler, or be an
affiliate thereof whether the affiliation is corporate or by management, direction, or control.
Notwithstanding this prohibition, a brewpub may be an affiliate or subsidiary company of a
brewer licensed in Minnesota or elsewhere if that brewer's only manufacture of malt liquor is:
a. Manufacture licensed under Minnesota statute 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (d);
b. Manufacture in another consumption exclusively in a restaurant located in the place of
manufacture; or
c. Manufacture in another state for consumption primarily in a restaurant located in or
immediately adjacent to the place of manufacture if the brewer was licensed under Minnesota
statute 340A.301, subdivision 6, clause (d), on January 1, 1995.
5. Brewpub Licensed As Importer Prohibited: A brewpub licensed under this section may not be
licensed as an importer under Minnesota statute 340A.302.
O. Brewery/Taproom License:
1. A brewer licensed under Minnesota statute 340A.301 may be issued an on-sale
brewery/taproom license for the "on-sale" of malt liquor produced on the licensed premises,
subject to the following conditions:
a. The on-sale of malt liquor may only be made during the days and hours that "on-sale" of liquor
may be made, as prescribed by state law or within this chapter.
b. A brewer may only hold one brewery/taproom license within the city.
c. The only alcohol beverage that may be sold or consumed on the premises of a licensed
brewery/taproom will be the malt liquor produced by the brewer upon the brewery/taproom
premises.
d. The holder of a brewery/taproom license who also holds a brewpub off-sale license is
permitted to sell "growlers", which is defined as a container with a capacity of up to sixty four
(64) ounces or in seven hundred fifty milliliter (750 ml) bottles, for takeout or off-sale of craft
beer. The growler must be sealed by a paper or adhesive band strip or sleeve that is applied
over the top of the closure in such a manner that the seal must be broken in order to open the
container. The adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer.
e. Nothing in this subsection precludes the holder of a brewery/taproom license from also
holding a license to operate a restaurant on the premises of the brewery.
2. A brewery/taproom license may not be issued to a brewer if the brewer seeking the license, or
any person having an economic interest in the brewer seeking the license or exercising control
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 55/444
over the brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews or produces more than two hundred
fifty thousand (250,000) barrels of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces more than two
hundred fifty thousand (250,000) gallons of wine annually, as defined and prescribed by
Minnesota statute 340.401.
P. Brewpub Off-Sale Intoxicating License: A brewpub off-sale intoxicating malt liquor license may be
issued to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota commissioner of public
safety for the operation of a brewpub and shall be operated in and as a part of a restaurant
establishment for which an on-sale intoxicating liquor license has been issued by the city.
1. An off-sale license may be issued solely for the malt liquor produced and packaged on the
licensed premises and only upon approval of the license by the Minnesota commissioner of
public safety.
2. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores and
must be removed from the licensed premises before the applicable off-sale closing time
requirements.
3. Only malt liquor may be brewed or manufactured at the licensed premises and not more than
three thousand five hundred (3,500) barrels of malt liquor in a calendar year may be brewed or
manufactured at the licensed premises.
4. The malt liquor sold off-sale shall be packaged in sixty four (64) ounce containers commonly
known as "growlers" or in seven hundred fifty milliliter (750 ml) bottles and shall have the
following requirements for packaging:
a. The containers shall bear a twist type closure, cork, stopper or plug;
b. At the time of sale, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall be applied to the
container and extend over the top of the twist type closure, cork, stopper or plug forming a
seal that must be broken upon opening of the container;
c. The adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the brewer/licensee
selling the malt liquor;
d. The containers shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt liquor, bear the
name and address of the brewer/licensee selling the malt liquor, and the contents in the
container packaged as required herein shall be considered intoxicating liquor unless the
alcoholic content is labeled as otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota rules,
part 7515.1100.
Q. Microdistillery Cocktail Room License:
1. The city may issue the holder of a microdistillery license under Minnesota statute 340A.22 a
microdistillery cocktail room license. A microdistillery cocktail room license authorizes on-sale of
distilled liquor produced by the distiller for consumption on the premises of or adjacent to one
distillery location owned by the distiller. Nothing in this subsection precludes the holder of a
microdistillery cocktail room license from also holding a license to operate a restaurant at the
distillery. Minnesota statute 340A.409 shall apply to a license issued under this section. All
provisions of this chapter shall apply to a license issued under this section unless the provision
is explicitly inconsistent with this subsection.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 56/444
2. A distiller may only have one microdistillery cocktail room license under this section and may not
have an ownership interest in a distillery licensed under Minnesota statute 340A.301, subdivision
6, paragraph (a).
3. The city shall impose a licensing fee on a distiller holding a microdistillery cocktail room license
under this section, subject to limitations applicable to the license fees under Minnesota statute
340A.408, subdivision 2, paragraph (a).
4. No single entity may hold both a microdistillery cocktail room and brewery/taproom license, and
a cocktail room and taproom may not be collocated.
R. Microdistillery, Off-Sale: An off-sale of distilled spirits of the microdistillery may be issued by the city
for the sale of one 375-milliliter bottle per customer per day of product manufactured on site,
subject to the following requirements:
1. Off-sale hours of sale must conform to hours of sale for retail off-sale licensees as established in
Minnesota statute 340A.504; and
2. No brand may be sold at the microdistillery unless it is also available for distribution by
wholesalers.
S. Small Brewer Off-Sale Intoxicating: A "small brewer off-sale intoxicating" license authorizes a
microbrewery that manufacturers less than twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor per year
to sell malt liquor to the public in sixty four (64) ounce containers, commonly known as "growlers"
or in seven hundred fifty milliliter (750 ml) bottles as permitted by Minnesota statute 340A.301. The
amount of malt liquor sold at off-sale may not exceed five hundred (500) barrels annually; off-sale
shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores, and the off-sale must be
removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores.
1. The malt liquor shall be packed in sixty four (64) ounce containers commonly known as
"growlers" or in seven hundred fifty milliliter (750 ml) bottles. The containers or bottles shall bear
a twist type closure, cork, stopper or plug. At the time of the sale, a paper or plastic adhesive
band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extended over the top of the
twist type closure, cork, stopper or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the
container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the
brewer. The containers or bottles shall be identified as malt liquor, contain the name of the malt
liquor, bear the name and address of the brewer selling the malt liquor, and shall be considered
intoxicating liquor unless the alcoholic content is labeled as otherwise in accordance with the
provision of Minnesota rules, part 7515.1100.
2. A brewer may, but is not required to, refill any growler with malt liquor for off-sale at the request
of a customer. A brewer refilling a growler must do so at its licensed premises and the growler
must be filled at the tap at the time of sale. A growler refilled under this paragraph must be
sealed and labeled in the manner described in subsection S1 of this section.
3. A brewer may only have one license under this subsection.
4. The city may not issue a license under this subsection to a brewer if the brewer seeking the
license, or any person having an economic interest in the brewer seeking the license or
exercising control over the brewer seeking the license, is a brewer that brews more than twenty
thousand (20,000) barrels of its own brands of malt liquor annually or a winery that produces
more than two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) gallons of wine annually.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 57/444
T. Sunday Growler Off-Sale Intoxicating: Authorizes a small brewer that manufactures less than
twenty thousand (20,000) barrels of malt liquor per year to sell malt liquor to the public in sixty four
(64) ounce containers, commonly known as "growlers" or in seven hundred fifty milliliter (750 ml)
bottles as permitted by Minnesota statute 340A.301, on Sundays between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 87, 6th Series, eff. 6-6-2016)
3.09: LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA:
A. No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed any limit established by Minnesota
statutes 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license.
B. The city council may establish from time to time in a resolution establishing fees the fee for any of
the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
licenses and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws and this chapter.
C. The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the license
year shall be prorated on a monthly basis.
D. All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the city, with the exception
of an on-sale liquor license which one-half (1/2) may be deferred and paid no later than June 15 of
the license year. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
E. A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if authorized by Minnesota
statutes 340A.408, subdivision 5, as it may be amended from time to time.
F. Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in their annual fee by the amount
specified in Minnesota statutes 340A.408 if at the time of initial application or renewal they:
1. Agree to have a private vendor train all employees within sixty (60) days of hire and annual
thereafter in laws pertaining to the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks and the
responsibility of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;
2. Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons appearing to be thirty (30) years old
or less;
3. Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award employees who catch underage
drinkers and a written penalty to punish employees in the event of a failed compliance check;
4. Failure to abide by the provisions of this paragraph may result in suspension of the license until
the conditions of the fee reduction are met and may result in suspension and/or revocation of the
license pursuant to section 3.21 of this chapter. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.10: CITY COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE:
The city council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license or for
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 58/444
the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has a right to a license under this chapter. (Ord.
78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.11: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Forms: Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall be on a form provided by the
city. Every application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant age, representations as
to the applicant's character, with references as the city council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its
location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the
business, how long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other information as
the city council may require from time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license shall be in the form prescribed by the commissioner of public safety and shall also contain
the information required in this section. The form shall be verified and filed with the city. No person
shall make a false statement in an application.
B. Financial Responsibility: Prior to the issuance of any license under this chapter, the applicant shall
demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in Minnesota statutes 340A.409, as it may
be amended from time to time, with regard to liability under Minnesota statutes 340A.801, as it
may be amended from time to time. This proof will be filed with the city and the commissioner of
public safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial responsibility under this section
shall conform to Minnesota statutes 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation
of a business which is required to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at
all times effective proof of financial responsibility is cause for revocation of this license. (Ord. 78,
6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.12: DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES:
The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises within which liquor
may be dispensed and consumed. The description may not include any parking lot or sidewalk. (Ord.
78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.13: APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL:
At least sixty (60) days before licenses issued under this chapter are renewed, an application for
renewal shall be filed with the city. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the
sound discretion of the city council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed. (Ord. 78, 6th
Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.14: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the approval of the city council. Any
transfer of stock of a corporation licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of
stock without prior city council approval is grounds for revocation of the license. An application to
transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 59/444
provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-
2015)
3.15: INVESTIGATION:
A. Preliminary Background And Financial Investigation: On an initial application for a license, on an
application for transfer of a license and, in the sound discretion of the city council that it is in the
public interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the city shall conduct a
preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the
commissioner of public safety for the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an
investigation fee established by resolution which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost
of the preliminary investigation is less than the amount established by resolution, the unused
balance shall be returned to the applicant.
B. Comprehensive Background And Financial Investigation: If the results of a preliminary investigation
warrant, in the sound discretion of the city council, a comprehensive background and financial
investigation, the city council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
commissioner of public safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive
background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be established by
resolution, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation is to be conducted
within the state, as established by resolution, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if
the investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to
the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any
investigation and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the
event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the
commissioner of public safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an onsale
wine license. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.16: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE:
A. Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application.
B. Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued within the city to any one person.
C. No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes,
assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the city, county and state
are delinquent.
D. No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law.
E. No license shall be granted within five hundred feet (500') of any school or church. The distance is
to be measured from the closest side of the church to the closest side of the structure on the
premises within which liquor is to be sold. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.17: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 60/444
The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall result in
a suspension of the license until the condition is met.
A. Within ninety (90) days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment
which has an on-sale license shall receive training regarding the selling or serving of liquor to
customers. Proof of training shall be provided by the licensee.
B. Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and conditions of sobriety
and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the
licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable for all penalties provided by this chapter and the
law equally with the employee.
C. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, Health Officer, City employee, or any other person
designated by the City Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and
search the premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the
time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.
D. No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is
prohibited.
E. Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of State law and of this chapter is a
continuing condition of any license.
F. Failure by an off-sale intoxicating liquor licensee, who has received a fee reduction pursuant to
subsection 3.09F of this chapter, to abide with the provisions of subsection 3.09F of this chapter.
(Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.18: HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE:
A. The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by Minnesota Statutes 340A.504, as it
may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council may, by resolution or ordinance,
provide for more restrictive hours than State law allows; except as listed below, there shall be no
sales of on sale intoxicating liquor:
1. Between two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. Monday through Sunday; and
(Ord. 1, 7th Series, eff. 10-2-2017)
B. No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating
liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than thirty (30) minutes after
the time when a sale can legally occur.
C. No on-sale licensee or employee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container containing
intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool or other place
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 61/444
where customers are served, more than thirty (30) minutes after the time when a sale can legally
occur.
D. No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed
premises more than thirty (30) minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.
E. Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the
license. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.19: MINORS ON PREMISES:
A. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the
place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on-sale, except that
persons under the age of eighteen (18) may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of
a bus person, host or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other
multipurpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor
are sold at retail on-sale.
B. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years may enter a licensed establishment except to
work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, hotel, club or bowling alley, or
attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor is not sold, and then
only if accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, except as listed in Minnesota Statutes
340A.503, subdivision 4(b), as it may be amended from time to time. This subsection shall not
apply to that portion of the licensed premises designated by the licensee as a "party room" if the
following conditions have been met:
1. The licensee has previously designated the area as a party room by a written description filed
with and accepted by the City Administrator;
2. The licensee has previously informed the Chief of Police of a specific party to be held in the
party room when minors will be present. If the Chief of Police determines security for such party
to be appropriate, the licensee shall reimburse the costs of such security. (Ord. 78, 6th Series,
eff. 7-6-2015)
3.20: RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION:
No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of business unless it has a
license to sell on-sale or a permit from the Commission of Public Safety under the provisions of
Minnesota Statutes 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by
the City Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-
2015)
3.21: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. The city council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or revoke any liquor
license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 62/444
or provision of this chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial
responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an
opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the administrative procedures act, Minnesota statutes 14.57
to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The city council may act as the hearing body
under that act, or it may contract with the office of hearing examiners for a hearing officer.
B. The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation which shall be imposed by the
city council for violation of the provisions of this chapter or Minnesota statutes 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended
from time to time:
1. For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the
license is under suspension, sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent
malt liquor, or violation of section 3.04 of this chapter, the license shall be revoked.
2. The license shall be suspended by the city council after a finding under subsection A of this
section that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule or provision of this
chapter for at least the minimum periods as follows:
a. For the first violation, at least one day's suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties
which may be imposed.
b. For a second violation within any three (3) year period, at least three (3) consecutive days'
suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
c. For the third violation within any three (3) year period, at least seven (7) consecutive days'
suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.
d. For a fourth violation within any three (3) year period, the license shall be revoked.
3. The city council shall select the day or days during which the license will be suspended.
C. Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an immediate suspension of any
license issued pursuant to this chapter or state law without further action of the city council. Notice
of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee
of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of
lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing
thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the city administrator, a hearing before the city
council shall be granted within ten (10) days. Any suspension under subsection B of this section
shall continue until the city council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state
law and this chapter have again been met.
D. The provisions of section 3.29 of this chapter pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed
in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or revocation under this chapter. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff.
7-6-2015)
3.22: APPLICATION OF SECTIONS 3.24 TO 3.27 OF THIS CHAPTER:
Sections 3.24 to 3.27 of this chapter apply only to a city that has an existence on the effective date
hereof a municipal liquor store. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 63/444
3.23: EXISTING MUNICIPAL STORE CONTINUED:
If the city has in existence on the effective date hereof a municipal liquor store for the sale of
intoxicating liquor, the store is continued. Except as provided in section 3.27 of this chapter, no
intoxicating liquor may be sold at retail elsewhere in the city. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.24: LOCATION:
The municipal liquor store shall be located at a suitable place in the city as the city council determines
by motion. However, no premises upon which taxes, assessment, or other public charges are
delinquent shall be leased for municipal liquor store purposes. The city council shall have the right to
establish off-sale stores at other locations as it may, from time to time, by motion, determine. (Ord. 78,
6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.25: OPERATION:
A. Manager: The municipal liquor store shall be in the immediate charge of a liquor store manager
selected by the city council and paid compensation as is fixed by the city council. The manager
shall not be a person who would be prohibited by law or any provision of this chapter from being
eligible for an intoxicating liquor license.
B. Other Employees: The city council may also appoint additional employees as may be required and
shall fix their compensation. All employees, including the manager, shall hold their positions at the
pleasure of the city council. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be employed in the
store.
C. Municipal Liquor Store Fund: All of the revenues received from the operation of a municipal liquor
store shall be deposited in the golf fund from which all ordinary operating expenses, including
compensation of the manager and employees, shall be paid. Surpluses accumulating in the fund
may be transferred to the general fund of the city or to any other appropriate fund of the city by
resolution of the city council, and may be expended for any municipal purpose. The handling of
municipal liquor store receipts and disbursements shall comply with the procedures prescribed by
law and charter for the receipts and disbursements of city funds generally. The city council shall
incorporate into the reports published pursuant to Minnesota statutes sections 471.697 and
471.698, the golf fund, in accordance with a form and style prescribed by the state auditor.
D. Hours Of Operation: The hours during which the sale of intoxicating liquor may be sold shall be as
provided in section 3.18 of this chapter. No person, other than the manager or store employees,
may remain in the municipal liquor store longer than one-half (1/2) hour after the time when the
sale of intoxicating liquor must cease. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.26: PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The city shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility required by licensees of retail intoxicating
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 64/444
liquor establishments under the provisions of Minnesota statutes 340A.409, as it may be amended
from time to time. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
3.27: ISSUANCE OF OTHER LICENSES:
A. On-Sale Licenses For The Sale Of Intoxicating Liquor: The city council may issue in its sound
discretion on-sale licenses to a club under Minnesota statutes 340A.404, subdivision 1(9)(4), as it
may be amended from time to time. If the voters have authorized their issuance at a special
election called for that purpose, the city council may issue in its sound discretion on-sale liquor
licenses to hotels and restaurants. The number of on-sale licenses issued under this section is
governed by Minnesota statutes 340A.413, as it may be amended from time to time, as limited by
the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of these licenses is governed by the provisions of this
chapter.
B. Off-Sale Licenses For The Sale Of Intoxicating Liquor: State law does not authorize the issuance of
off-sale licenses for the sale of intoxicating liquor by cities which operate a municipal liquor
dispensary.
C. On- And Off-Sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses: The city council may issue 3.2 percent malt
liquor licenses in its sound discretion as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-
2015)
3.28: SOCIAL HOST:
A. The city council intends to discourage underage possession and consumption of alcohol, even if
done within the confines of a private residence, and intends to hold persons criminally responsible
who host events or gatherings where persons under twenty one (21) years of age possess or
consume alcohol regardless of whether the person hosting the event or gathering supplied the
alcohol. The city council finds:
1. Events and gatherings held on private or public property where alcohol is possessed or
consumed by persons under the age of twenty one (21) are harmful to those persons and
constitute a potential threat to public health requiring prevention or abatement.
2. Prohibiting underage consumption acts to protect underage persons, as well as the general
public, from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or alcohol related
traffic collisions.
3. Often, events or gatherings involving underage possession and consumption occur outside the
presence of parents. However, there are times when the parent(s) is/are present, and condone
the activity, and in some circumstances provide the alcohol.
4. Even though giving or furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime, it is difficult to prove,
and an ordinance is necessary to help further combat underage consumption.
5. A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person criminally responsible for hosting an event
or gathering where underage possession or consumption occurs.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 65/444
B. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meaning:
ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or
any other distilled spirits including dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by
whatever process produced.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing
alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol
by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined
with other substances.
EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of three (3) or more persons who have assembled or
gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
HOST OR ALLOW: To aid, conduct, entertain, organize, supervise, control or permit a gathering or
event.
PARENT: Any person having legal custody of a juvenile: 1) as a natural, adoptive parent or
stepparent; 2) as a legal guardian; or 3) as a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, or any association of one or
more individuals. A person does not include any city, county or state agency.
RESIDENCE, PREMISES OR PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any home, yard, farm, field,
land, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis,
whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented or used with or without permission or compensation.
UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual under twenty one (21) years of age.
C. The following are prohibited acts:
1. It is unlawful for any person(s) to host or knowingly allow an event or gathering to take place at
any residence or premises or any other private or public property where alcohol or alcoholic
beverages are present when the person knows that an underage person will or does: a)
consume any alcohol or alcoholic beverage; or b) possess any alcohol or alcoholic beverage
with the intent to consume it and the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession
or consumption by the underage person(s).
2. A person is criminally responsible for violating subsection C1 of this section if the person
intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or otherwise procures another to
commit the prohibited act.
3. A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present at the event or gathering
to be criminally responsible.
D. This section does not apply to:
1. Conduct solely between an underage person and his or her parents while present in the parent's
household;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 66/444
2. Legally protected religious observances;
3. Retail intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor licensees, municipal liquor stores, or bottle
club permit holders who are regulated by Minnesota statutes 340A.503, subdivision 1(a)(1);
4. Situations where underage persons are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages
during the course and scope of employment.
E. This section can be enforced by any peace officer.
F. If any term or provision of this section is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be illegal or
in conflict with any law, the validity of the remaining terms or provisions shall not be affected and
this section shall be construed and enforced as if this section did not contain the particular term or
provision to be invalid.
G. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-
2015)
3.29: PENALTIES:
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or Minnesota statutes 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended
from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by
law.
B. The city council shall impose a civil penalty of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each
violation of Minnesota statutes 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this chapter.
Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order for the city council to impose the
civil penalty. A hearing under the administrative procedures act, Minnesota statutes 14.57 to 14.70,
as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the city
council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any
person who wishes to speak. Nonpayment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation
of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be
imposed in addition to any suspension unless the license is revoked:
1. For the first violation: Five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. For the second violation within any three (3) year period: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
3. For the third and subsequent violations within any three (3) year period: Two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
C. The term "violation" as used in section 3.21 of this chapter includes any and all violations of the
provisions in this section or of Minnesota statutes 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or
any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number
of violations shall be determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three (3)
year period. Revocation shall occur within sixty (60) days following a violation for which revocation
is imposed. (Ord. 78, 6th Series, eff. 7-6-2015)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 67/444
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Article I. General Provisions
4.01: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings stated:
ACT: The Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq., as amended).
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The City of Little Falls, its employees or designees
designated to enforce the provisions of this Code.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general
good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance
procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly
or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include
treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge
or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND 5 (BOD5): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty degrees
centigrade (20C) and as expressed in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal, sometimes called the house connection or service connection.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic
matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as determined in accordance with standard laboratory
procedure as set out in the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater".
CITY APPROVED GARBAGE BAG: A color coded thirty two (32) gallon plastic bag, purchased by the
hauler or city and made available for retail distribution for a price, which includes tipping fees.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
COLLECTION: The aggregation of solid waste and/or recyclable materials from the place at which it is
generated and includes all activities up to the time when the material is delivered to a designated
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 68/444
facility.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer, or as an
industrial sewer and a storm sewer.
COMMERCIAL USER: All users of the system classified as industrial users in the "Standard Industrial
Classification Manual", 1972, U.S. office of management and budget, as amended and supplemented
under divisions A, B, D, E, and I, but who are excluded from such definition for the purposes of this
chapter because they discharge primarily segregated domestic wastes, or wastes from sanitary
conveniences, except that the classification shall not include such exempt users who are otherwise
classified in this chapter as "domestic users". In addition, commercial users shall include any other
place of business which discharges only sanitary wastes.
COMPANY: A natural or corporate person, business association, political subdivision, public or private
agency of any kind, its successors and assigns, who or which:
A. Is a private utility system to which a franchise has been granted by the city; or
B. Seeks or is required to construct, install, operate, repair, maintain, remove or relocate facilities
in the city.
CONSTRUCTION: Any one or more of the following: preliminary planning to determine the feasibility
of treatment works, engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal or economic investigations or studies,
surveys, designs, plans, working drawings, specifications, procedures, or other necessary actions,
erection, building, acquisition, alteration, remodeling, improvement, or extension of treatment works,
or the inspection or supervising of any of the foregoing items.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits or city land
disturbance permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of greater than
five thousand (5,000) square feet. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
CONSUMER AND CUSTOMER: Refers to any user of a utility.
COOLING WATER: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw
material, product, byproduct, or waste.
DOMESTIC USER: Those establishments whose wastes consist solely of domestic sanitary wastes.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: Wastewater derived principally from a dwelling due to domestic
activities. It may not contain groundwater, surface water or stormwater.
EPA: United States environmental protection agency.
FACILITIES: Telecommunications equipment of any kind, including, but not limited to, audio, video,
paging, facsimile or similar service, not governed by Minnesota statutes chapter 238, including all
trunks, lines, circuits, physical connections, switching equipment, wireless communication equipment
of all kinds, and any necessary appurtenances owned, leased or operated by a company on, over, in,
under, across or along public grounds.
FLOW: The quantity of sewage expressed as gallons or cubic feet per twenty four (24) hours.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 69/444
FOOD HANDLERS AND PROCESSORS: Users of the system with kitchens serving the general
public and serving a minimum of twenty (20) persons in an average day. Examples of users in this
class include restaurants, and institutional facilities such as schools, nursing homes, hospitals, etc.
Also included are businesses processing food that results in considerable grease being discharged to
the sewer system. Examples include meat markets and bakeries.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes resulting from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage or sale of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, vegetables,
condemned food, solid waste, paper, glass, etc.
GENERAL MUNICIPAL USER: Any user discharging sewage to the general municipal flow other than
entities identified as significant industrial users and municipalities.
GENERAL PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS: The general pretreatment regulations for existing and
new sources of pollution promulgated by EPA under section 307(b) and (c) of the clean water act and
found at 40 CFR part 403.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste or combination thereof,
which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may
cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise
managed.
HEAVY DENSITY: A parcel of land, the surface of which is covered by between sixty seven percent
(67%) to one hundred percent (100%) impervious surface.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An "illicit connection" is defined as either of the following: any drain or
conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the
storm sewer system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm sewer system
and any connections to the storm sewer system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized
enforcement agency, or any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use
to the storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and
approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm sewer system.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any surface which does not provide vertical drainage of water, including,
but not limited to, roofs, buildings, concrete, bituminous surfaces, surface concrete pavers and class V
gravel.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR
122.26(b)(14).
INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT OR PERMIT: A permit issued by the city of Little Falls to an
industrial user to use the city disposal system, as established herein.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any "entity", as defined in the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" (latest
edition) as categorized, that discharges wastewater to the public sewer, including, but not limited to,
agriculture, forestry, fishing, mining, manufacturing, transportation, communications, electric, gas and
sanitary sewers, or any user who discharges, singly or by interaction with other wastes:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 70/444
A. Contaminate the sludge of the wastewater treatment system;
B. Injure or interfere with the treatment process;
C. Create a public nuisance or hazard;
D. Have an adverse effect on the waters receiving wastewater treatment plant discharges;
E. Exceed NDSW limitations.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Solid, liquid or gaseous wastes, including cooling water (except where
examined by an NPDES permit), resulting from any industrial, manufacturing or business process, or
from the development, recovery or processing of a natural resource.
INFILTRATION: The water entering a sewer system, including sewer service connections, from the
ground, through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or
manhole walls. "Infiltration" does not include, and is distinguished from "inflow", as defined in this
section.
INFLOW: The water discharged into a sewer system, including service connections from such sources
as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, cooling water
discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm
sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, stormwater, surface runoff, street wash waters or
drainage. "Inflow" does not include, and is distinguished from, "infiltration", as defined in this section.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from
other sources inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of any
requirements of the Little Falls publicly owned treatment works' NPDES permit, or of the prevention of
sewage sludge use or disposal with statutory provisions and regulations or permits.
LIGHT DENSITY: A parcel of land, the surface of which is covered by between zero percent (0%) to
thirty three percent (33%) impervious surface.
LOAD: Quantities of sewage characteristics such as BOD and SS, and other constituents as
expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) or pounds per twenty four (24) hours.
MPCA: Minnesota pollution control agency.
MEDIUM DENSITY: A parcel of land, the surface of which is covered by between thirty four percent
(34%) to sixty six percent (66%) impervious surface.
MONITORING: The measurement, sometimes continuous, of water quality.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 71/444
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and
detention basins, natural and human made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other
drainage structures.
MUNICIPAL UTILITY: Refers to any municipally owned utility system.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT OR NPDES PERMIT: The
system for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources
into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans by the administrator of the
environmental protection agency pursuant to sections 402 and 405 of the federal water pollution
control act, amendment 1972.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or
ground water.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm sewer system that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTEWATER (NDSW): Wastewater that is primarily introduced
by residential users with BOD5 concentrations not greater than two hundred milligrams per liter (200
mg/l), and total suspended solids concentrations not greater than two hundred milligrams per liter (200
mg/l).
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS (O&M COSTS): The expenses related to the costs of the
operation, maintenance, replacement and administration of the total treatment works or system.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity
recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight
of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a
hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. "Pollutants" may include, but are not
limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and
solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnance and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved,
including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
PRETREATMENT: The application of physical, chemical and biological processes to reduce the
amount of pollutants in, or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in, a wastewater prior to
discharging such wastewater into the publicly owned wastewater treatment system.
PRIVY OR PRIVY VAULT: A small building having a bench with holes through which the user may
defecate or urinate.
PUBLIC GROUNDS: Highways, roads, streets, alleys, public ways, utility easements and public
grounds in the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 72/444
PUBLIC SEWER: Any sewer owned or operated by a unit or agency of government.
RECYCLABLE ITEMS: Aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard, the type of glass, paper and/or plastics
that are recyclable.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Materials that are separated from solid waste for the purpose of
recycling and includes aluminum recyclables, can recyclables, corrugated cardboard, glass
recyclables, paper recyclables and plastic recyclables.
RECYCLING: The process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials and reusing the materials
in their original form or using them in manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of
recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances
which are necessary during the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term "operation and
maintenance" includes replacement.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: For garbage and recycling only, the owner of an attached and
detached single or double dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF): The volume of runoff generated by a one-third (1/3)
acre lot covered by no more than thirty three percent (33%) impervious surface.
RESIDENTIAL USER: A user of the wastewater collection facility whose building is used primarily as a
private residence and discharges NDSW.
SIC: The standard industrial classification code (1972) issued by the executive office of the president,
office of management and budget, for use in the classification of establishments by types of business
and the primary and economic activity engaged.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer intended to carry only sanitary or sanitary and industrial wastewaters
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SANITARY WASTES: The liquid and water carried waste discharged from sanitary plumbing facilities.
SEPARATION OR TO SEPARATE: To place and store recyclable materials in containers provided by
the city in a manner determined by the city, apart from solid waste.
SERVICE: Refers to providing a particular utility to a customer or consumer.
SEWAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM: Each, and all, of the common lateral sewers within a publicly
owned treatment system, which are primarily installed to receive wastewaters directly from facilities
which convey wastewater from individual structures or from private property, and which include
service connection "Y" fittings designed for connection with those facilities. The facilities which convey
wastewater from individual structures, from private property to the public lateral sewer or its
equivalent, are specifically excluded from this definition, with the exception of pumping units and
pressurized lines for individual structures or groups of structures when such units are cost effective
and are owned and maintained by the grantee.
SEWAGE OR WASTEWATER: The water carried waste products from residences, public buildings,
institutions, industrial establishments or other buildings, including the excrementitious or other
discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals, together with such water used to wash or
flush.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 73/444
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage, industrial waste or other waste liquids.
SEWER SERVICE LINE: A privately owned line connection with the City sanitary sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM OR SEWERAGE SYSTEM: Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains,
and all other devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for collecting or conducting sewage,
industrial wastes or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the City wastewater treatment system
whose flow: a) exceeds twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more process wastewater flow per
average workday; b) has exceeded five percent (5%) of the average dry weather flow or organic load
carried by the City wastewater treatment system during any one day; c) has in its waste "toxic
pollutants", as defined pursuant to section 307 of the Act, or Minnesota Statutes and Rules; or d) has
a significant impact, either by itself or in combination with other contributing industries, on the
wastewater disposal system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions
generated by the system.
SINGLE-FAMILY HOME AND DUPLEX: A residential accommodation, including complete kitchen
facilities permanently installed which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use exclusively as
living quarters for one or two (2) families, and not more than an aggregate of two (2) roomers or
boarders, and also including detached, semidetached and attached dwellings.
SLUDGE: The solids and associated liquids in Municipal wastewater which are encountered and
concentrated by the Municipal wastewater treatment plant.
SLUG: Any discharge of water, wastewater or industrial waste which, in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes
more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentrations, quantities or flows during
the normal operation.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER: A container specifically manufactured and approved by the City or a
thirty two (32) gallon plastic bag approved by the City, specifically constructed for solid waste disposal
for one and two family dwelling units, and a dumpster for multi-family dwelling units.
SOLID WASTE OR SOLID WASTE MATERIAL: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste including
garbage (food waste), rubbish (nonfood waste) and wood ashes.
STORM SEWER: A sewer which carries storm and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling or processed water.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A document which describes the Best
Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of
pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent
practicable.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage
or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering, in accordance with the latest edition
of standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 74/444
TREATMENT WORKS OR PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): Any devices and
systems for the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of Municipal sewage, domestic sewage
or liquid industrial wastes used to implement section 201 of the Act, or necessary to recycle or reuse
water at the most economical cost over the useful life of the works. These include intercepting sewers,
outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment,
and their appurtenances; extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof;
elements essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and clear well
facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the
treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment (including
land for composting sludge, temporary storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of
treated wastewater in land treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system
for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of Municipal waste or
industrial waste, including waste in combined stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A residential building containing two (2) dwelling units, including detached,
semidetached and attached dwellings.
USEFUL LIFE: Estimated period during which a treatment works will be operated.
USER: Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity, whether Municipal or otherwise, discharging
sewage into the disposal system.
UTILITY: Refers to all utility services, whether the same be public Municipally owned facilities or
furnished by private utility companies.
WASTEWATER: The water carried waste products from residences, public buildings, institutions,
industrial establishments or other buildings, including the excrementitious or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals, together with such water used to wash or flush.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES: That portion of the treatment works specifically utilized for
wastewater treatment and subsequent sludge disposal. This shall include any future treatment
facilities as may be necessary to comply with the State and Federal laws.
WATER AND WASTEWATER BASE FEE: The base fee for water and wastewater will be a fee
established to pay for nonoperating expenditures which will include expenses not defined in the
operation and maintenance of the City's water treatment, power and pumping and distribution and
wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment. Examples of expenses in this category are debt
service principal and interest payments, capital improvement plan expenses or other expenses that
are transferred out of the operating funds and/or made from the Improvement Fund. The fee may be
based on number of units served by the meter, meter size or any combination thereof as set by
resolution of the City Council.
WATER AND WASTEWATER USAGE FEE: The usage fee for water and wastewater will be a fee
established to pay for the annual operation and maintenance of the water treatment facility, including
power and pumping, distribution and administration and the wastewater collection, conveyance and
treatment facilities including sludge disposal costs and administration. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-
2016; amd. Ord. 99, 6th Series, eff. 8-21-2017)
4.02: FIXING RATES AND CHARGES FOR MUNICIPAL UTILITIES:
All rates and charges for municipal utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, base and usage
rates for service including industrial user rates, connection, disconnection, reconnection, drive by,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 75/444
stormwater, permit and deposit fees shall be fixed, determined and amended by the council and
adopted by resolution. Such resolution, containing the effective date thereof, shall be kept on file and
open to inspection in the office of the city administrator, and shall be uniformly enforced. (Ord. 84, 6th
Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.03: CONTRACTUAL CONTENTS:
Provisions of this chapter relating to municipal utilities shall constitute portions of the contract between
the city and all consumers of municipal utility services, and every such consumer shall be deemed to
assent to the same. All contracts between franchises and consumers of utility services, other than
municipal, shall be in strict accord with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-
2016)
4.04: RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO MUNICIPAL UTILITIES:
A. Applications, Accounts, Billing, Payment, Collection And Penalty:
1. Application For Service: Application for water, sewer, garbage, recycling or other utility service
installation, and for water, sewer, garbage, recycling and other utility service shall be made to the
city on forms prescribed and furnished by the city. Every person applying for water and sewer
service from the municipal water and sewer system, and every owner of property for which such
application is made, shall be deemed by such application to consent to all provisions of this
code, rules and regulations of the city relating to the municipal water and sewer systems. No
connection shall be made until consent has been received from the city to make the same. All
municipal utilities shall be sold and delivered to the customers under the then applicable rate
applied to the amount of such utilities taken as metered or ascertained in connection with such
rates.
2. Accounts In Name Of Owner: All accounts shall be carried in the name of the owner who
personally, or by his authorized agent, shall apply for such service. The owner shall be liable for
water, sewer and other utility services supplied to his property, whether he is occupying the
property or not, and any charges unpaid shall be a lien upon the property.
3. Billing: All water, sewer and other utility services shall be billed monthly, except that such billing
period may be shortened or lengthened to adjust for a readout or new connection period, as the
case may be.
4. Payment: The amount listed on the monthly statements shall be due fifteen (15) days from the
billing date. If the fifteenth day shall fall on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the time shall be
extended to the close of business on the next succeeding day on which business is normally
transacted. If payment is not made by this date, there shall be added to the amount due a
penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%). The penalty shall be a onetime charge on the
current charges for each billing period.
B. Discontinuance Of Service:
1. All municipal utilities may be shut off or discontinued whenever it is found that: a) the owner or
occupant of the premises served, or any person working on any connection with the municipal
utility systems, has violated any requirement of this code relative thereto, or any connection
therewith; or b) any charge for a municipal utility service, or any fees or charges in connection
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 76/444
therewith, imposed on the present owner or occupant of the premises served, remains
delinquent for more than fifteen (15) days after due notice thereof; or c) there is fraud or
misrepresentation by the owner or occupant in connection with any application for service or
delivery or charges therefor.
2. Water shall not be shut off until a disconnect notice has been personally delivered to the
property or the property owner notified by certified mail. The notice shall state that if the payment
is not made before a date stated on the notice, but not less than seven (7) days after the date on
which the notice is given, the water supply to the premises will be shut off.
3. The occupant may, before the due date stated in said notice, request a hearing for cause on the
matter, in which case the supply will not be cut off until after said hearing is held and a decision
made thereon. Upon a request for a hearing, the city council itself, or a panel of three (3)
impartial residents of the city, appointed by the city administrator, shall hold a hearing on the
matter. If, as a result of the hearing, the city council or the panel finds that the amount claimed to
be owing is actually due and unpaid and there is no legal reason why the water supply of the
delinquent customer should not be shut off in accordance with this section, then the city may
shut off the water supply as herein provided.
C. Ownership Of Municipal Utilities: Ownership of all municipal utilities, plants, lines, mains,
extensions and appurtenances thereto, shall be and remain in the city and no person shall own
any part or portion thereof. It is the property owner's responsibility for the connection and
maintenance of the sanitary sewer from their building to the connection in the public right of way
(i.e., sanitary sewer main). It is the property owner's responsibility for the connection and
maintenance of the water lines from their building to the service connection in the public right of
way (i.e., curb box). Private facilities and appurtenances constructed on private property are not
intended to be included in municipal ownership.
D. Right Of Entry: The city has the right to enter in and upon private property, including buildings and
dwelling houses, in or upon which is installed a municipal utility, or connection therewith, at all
times reasonable under the circumstances, for the purpose of reading utility meters, for the
purpose of inspection and repair of meters or a utility system, or any part thereof, for the purpose
of connecting and disconnecting service and for the purpose of confirming connection to the city
sewer system.
E. Unlawful Acts:
1. It is unlawful for any person to wilfully or carelessly break, injure, mar, deface, disturb or in any
way interfere with any buildings, attachments, machinery, apparatus, equipment, fixture or
appurtenance of any municipal utility or municipal utility system, or commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the use of any municipal utility.
2. It is unlawful for any person to make any connection with any municipal utility system without
first having applied for and received a permit from the city to make the same.
3. It is unlawful for any person to turn on or connect a utility when the same has been turned off or
disconnected by the city for nonpayment of a bill, or for any other reason.
F. Permits And Connection:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 77/444
1. Applications for permits shall be made by the owner or authorized agents of the owner, and shall
state the party employed to do the work, location, name of owner, street number of the building
to be connected, and how occupied. No person shall extend any private building drain beyond
the limits of the building or property for which the service connection permit has been given.
2. Connection And Inspection: The applicant for the permit shall notify the city when ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer or water. The connection and inspection shall be
made by the building inspector.
3. Excavations: All excavations for sewer and water installation shall be adequately guarded with
barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and
other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city.
G. Municipal Utility Services And Charges A Lien:
1. Payment for service and charges provided for herein shall be the primary responsibility of the
owner of the premises served, and shall be billed to him unless otherwise authorized in writing
by the owner and consented to by the city. The city may collect the same in a civil action or, in
the alternative and at the option of the city, as otherwise provided in this subsection.
2. Each charge is hereby made a lien upon the premises served. All such charges which are more
than thirty (30) days past due shall be certified by the city administrator to the county auditor on
the date established by the state, which coincides with special assessment certification to the
county auditor, and the city administrator in so certifying such charges to the county auditor shall
specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served, and the name of the owner
thereof. A certification fee adopted by resolution of the city council will be assessed along with
the delinquent bill. The amount so certified shall be extended by the county auditor on the tax
rolls against such premises in the same manner as other taxes, and collected by the county
treasurer, and paid to the city along with other taxes.
H. Damage To Municipal Utility Equipment: It is unlawful for any person to intentionally cause any
damage to any municipal utility equipment or appurtenance, including, but not limited to, meters,
streetlights, water hydrants and curb cocks. Anyone unintentionally causing such damage shall
pay the reasonable value thereto to the city, including labor for renewal and installation of any
equipment and shall be, in effect, an insurer of any equipment in his possession or with which he
comes in contact.
I. Municipal Utility Service Outside The City: Premises located outside the city shall not be connected
to or served by any municipal utility, except such premises as are publicly owned or presently
served. Persons needing municipal utility service whose property is located outside the corporate
limits must initiate and complete annexation proceedings in advance prior to being provided with
such service or services. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.05: REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL FRANCHISES:
All franchises shall provide the city with maps, charts or plats showing its lines, facilities and
appurtenances constructed or installed on public property. Such maps, charts and plats shall be
continually revised to show any changes thereon. Any such facilities, lines and appurtenances shall, at
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 78/444
the direction of the city, be moved or rearranged when necessary to accommodate municipal use of
such public property, and at the expense of the franchisee. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.06 - 4.09: RESERVED:
Article II. Stormwater Utility
4.10: STORMWATER UTILITY ESTABLISHED; REVENUES; FEES:
A. Purpose And Establishment: A municipal storm sewer drainage system utility for the city is hereby
established. The municipal storm sewer system shall be operated pursuant to Minnesota statutes
section 444.075. Revenues derived from the municipal storm sewer system shall be dedicated to
the construction, maintenance, operation, establishment and repair of the existing municipal storm
sewer drainage system and additions thereto.
B. Stormwater Drainage Fees:
1. To calculate the stormwater utility drainage fee, the residential equivalent factor (REF) for each
parcel's stormwater use classification shall be multiplied by that parcel's size, and then multiplied
by the stormwater drainage rate (fee = REF x acreage x rate).
2. The city shall determine the REF for each parcel of property within the city based upon the
amount of impervious area on the property and other factors reasonably affecting the amount of
stormwater drainage from each parcel of property. The REF classifications used by the city shall
be as follows:
Class Stormwater Land Use Classification REF
1 Vacant, parks and cemeteries 0.0
2 One- and two-family residential 1.0
3 Light density (up to 1/3 impervious) 1.0
4 Medium density (1/3 to 2/3 impervious) 2.0
5 Heavy density (over 2/3 impervious) 3.0
3. For the purpose of calculating stormwater drainage fees, actual acreage shall be used, except
for those parcels used for one- and two-family dwellings. All parcels used for one- and two-family
dwellings shall be calculated using one-third (1/3) of an acre, regardless of their actual size.
4. The city shall notify each landowner of the initial stormwater land use classification and REF by
mailed notice to the address used for real property taxes. As part of the process of approving a
stormwater management plan, the city shall determine the stormwater land use classification
and REF for new construction.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 79/444
5. The city shall reduce the fee charged if the landowner shows that some or all of the stormwater
runoff generated by the parcel does not enter the stormwater drainage system maintained by the
city. The fee shall be reduced by the percentage of water diverted into other drainage systems,
detention facilities or retention facilities, but in no case shall be reduced below the fee charged
for a light density parcel of equal size.
6. Each parcel less than one-third (1/3) of an acre in size shall be charged a minimum fee. The
minimum fee shall be equal to the fee charged to parcels used for one- and two-family dwellings.
(Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.11: STORMWATER ILLICIT DISCHARGE:
A. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the storm
sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This section
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this section are:
1. To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
by stormwater discharges by any user.
2. To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer (MS4)
system.
3. To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
B. Applicability: This section shall apply to all water entering the storm sewer system generated on
any developed and undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement
agency.
C. Responsibility For Administration: The city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this section. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency
may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or
entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency.
D. Ultimate Responsibility: The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this section
are minimum standards; therefore this section does not intend nor imply that compliance by any
person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of
pollutants.
E. Discharge Prohibitions:
1. Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
municipal storm sewer system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to,
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of
any illegal discharge to the storm sewer system is prohibited, except as described as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 80/444
a. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this section:
water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering,
diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm
drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation,
springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than 1 ppm chlorine), firefighting activities, and
any other water source not containing pollutants.
b. Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
c. Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized
enforcement agency prior to the time of the test.
d. The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the
authority of the federal environmental protection agency; provided, that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or order, and other applicable laws and
regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the
storm sewer system.
2. Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
a. The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm
drain system is prohibited.
b. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or
prevailing at the time of connection.
c. A person is considered to be in violation of this section if the person connects a line conveying
sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
F. Suspension Of MS4 Access:
1. Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The city may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop
an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the
United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
2. Suspension Due To Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation
of this section may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce
an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a
reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access
to premises terminated pursuant to this subsection, without the prior approval of the authorized
enforcement agency.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 81/444
G. Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges: Any person subject to an industrial or construction
activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof
of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing
of discharges to the MS4.
H. Monitoring Of Discharges:
1. Applicability: This subsection applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated
with industrial activity, including construction activity.
2. Access To Facilities:
a. The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
section as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a
discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow
access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency.
b. Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the
conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
c. The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary
in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of
the facility's stormwater discharge.
d. The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary.
The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
e. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be
inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral
request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne
by the operator.
f. Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility is a violation of a
stormwater discharge permit and of this section. A person who is the operator of a facility with
an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this
section.
g. If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section or any order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community,
then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any
court of competent jurisdiction.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 82/444
I. Requirement To Prevent, Control And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By Use Of Best Management
Practices: The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity,
operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the
storm sewer system or waters of the state. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm sewer system or watercourses
through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to
implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). Compliance
with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater
associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
J. Watercourse Protection: Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free
of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
K. Notification Of Spills: Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or
operation, has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or
may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm sewer system
or water of the state, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials,
said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person
shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the
next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the city within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the
owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the discharge
and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3)
years.
L. Enforcement:
1. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to
meet a requirement of this section, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by
written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and desist;
d. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 83/444
e. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
f. The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
2. Remediation Or Restoration: If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property
are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration
must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or
restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental
agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
M. Appeal Of Notice Of Violation: Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the
determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within
seven (7) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the
appropriate authority or their designee shall take place within fifteen (15) days from the date of
receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be
final.
N. Enforcement Measures After Appeal: If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7) days
of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement
agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject
private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in
possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
O. Cost Of Abatement Of The Violation: Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the
owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within seven
(7) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the
municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall
become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for
the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than
twelve (12) equal payments. Interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum shall be assessed
on the balance beginning on the seventh day following discovery of the violation.
P. Injunctive Relief: It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this section. If a person has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this section, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or
permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
Q. Violations Deemed Public Nuisance: In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties
provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
section is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance,
and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate,
enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 84/444
R. Remedies Not Exclusive: The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of
the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-
2016)
4.12 - 4.19: RESERVED:
Article III. Water
4.20: RULES AND REGULATIONS RELATING TO WATER SERVICE:
A. Deficiency Of Water And Shutting Off Water: The city is not liable for any deficiency or failure in the
supply of water to customers, whether occasioned by shutting the water off for the purpose of
making repairs or connections, or by any other cause whatever. In case of fire, or alarm of fire,
water may be shut off to ensure a supply for firefighting. In making repairs or construction of new
works, water may be shut off at any time and kept off so long as may be necessary.
B. Repair Of Leaks: It is the responsibility of the consumer or owner to maintain the service pipe from
the curb stop into the house or other building. In case of failure upon the part of any consumer or
owner to repair any leak occurring in his service pipe within twenty four (24) hours after oral or
written notice has been given the owner or occupant of the premises, the water may be shut off
and will not be turned on until a reconnection charge has been paid and the water service has
been repaired. When the waste of water is great or when damage is likely to result from the leak,
the water will be turned off if the repair is not proceeded with immediately. Water lines in public or
privately owned property, privately owned on the effective date hereof, shall continue to be the
responsibility of the owner.
C. Abandoned Services And Penalties: All water service installations connected to the city water
system that have been abandoned or, for any reason, have become useless for further service,
shall be disconnected at the city water main or capped as authorized and directed by the city
engineer's office. A plumber shall perform the actual disconnection or capping. In the event that an
abandoned water service line, or a water service line that may have become useless for further
service, is not disconnected at the city water main, the owner shall be responsible for the proper
maintenance and repair of said water service line so long as the same is connected to a city water
main. If at any time the city engineer's office should find that a capped water service line is not
maintained and kept in a proper state of repair, the city engineer's office may order the same
disconnected at the city water main. The owner of the premises served by the abandoned or
useless water service line shall pay the cost of all work required to be done upon said water
service line under the provisions of this subsection.
D. Service Pipes: Every service pipe must be laid in such manner as to prevent rupture by settlement.
The service pipe shall be placed not less than seven feet (7') below the surface in all cases so
arranged as to prevent rupture and stoppage by freezing. Frozen service pipes between the curb
stop and the building shall be the responsibility of the owner. Service pipes must extend from the
curb stops to the building; or if not taken into a building then to the hydrant or other fixture which
they are intended to supply. A valve, the same size as the service pipe, shall be placed close to the
inside wall of the building, ahead of the meter and well protected from freezing. Installation of water
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 85/444
service lines shall be in compliance with Minnesota plumbing code. If copper tubing is used, joints
shall be flared and kept to a minimum. Not more than one joint shall be used for a service up to
seventy feet (70') in length. All joints shall be left uncovered until inspected. Minimum size
connection with the water mains shall be three-fourths inch (3/4") in diameter for single occupancy
residences, and one inch (1") in diameter for all other establishments. Water lines may be trenched
in simultaneously with sewer lines and not metered, provided a seal is installed which is subject to
a random check by the city. It is unlawful to break or otherwise tamper with said seal.
E. Meters: The city shall supply water meters of one inch (1") or less in size. Repairs of meters not
resulting from normal usage shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Meters exceeding
one inch (1") in size shall be purchased by the property owner in accordance with city
specifications and maintained by the city at the property owner's expense. Installation of all meters
shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Meters of one and one-half inches (11/2") must be
valved on each side of the meter.
1. Meter Test: Whenever a consumer shall request the city to test any utility meter in use by them,
such a request shall be accompanied by a cash deposit for each meter to be tested. If any such
meter is found to be inaccurate, the same shall be replaced with an accurate meter and the
deposit thereon refunded. If the meter shall be found to be accurate in its recordings or
calculations, it shall be reinstalled and the deposit shall be retained by the city to defray the cost
of such test.
2. Circumvent Municipal Utility Meter: It is unlawful for any person to "jumper", or by any means or
device fully or partially circumvent a municipal utility meter, or to knowingly use or consume
unmetered utilities, or use the services of any utility system, the use of which the proper billing
authorities have no knowledge.
F. Private Water Supplies: No water pipe of the city water system shall be connected with any pump,
well, pipe, tank or any device that is connected with any other source of water supply and when
such are found, the city shall notify the owner or occupant to disconnect the same and, if not
immediately done, the city water shall be turned off. Before any new connections to the city system
are permitted, the city shall ascertain that no cross connections will exist when the new connection
is made.
G. Restricted Hours For Sprinkling: Whenever the city shall determine that a shortage of water
threatens the city, it may limit the times and hours during which water may be used from the city
water system for lawn and garden sprinkling, irrigation, car washing, air conditioning and other
uses, or either or any of them. It is unlawful for any water consumer to cause or permit water to be
used in violation of such determination after public announcement thereof has been made through
the news media specifically indicating the restrictions thereof.
H. Private Fire Hose Connections: Owners of lumberyards, factories, stores, elevators, warehouses,
hotels and other buildings, if they are regular municipal water consumers, may apply for and obtain
permission to connect the street mains with hydrants, large pipes and hose couplings for use in
case of fire only and free of charge for such use, but at their own installation expense.
I. Opening Hydrants: It is unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department or other
person duly authorized by the city, in pursuance of lawful purpose, to open any fire hydrant or
attempt to draw water from the same, or in any manner interfere therewith. It is also unlawful for
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 86/444
any person so authorized to deliver or suffer to be delivered to any other person any hydrant key or
wrench, except for the purposes strictly pertaining to their lawful use. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-
21-2016)
4.21 - 4.29: RESERVED:
Article IV. Sewerage Service
4.30: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS, CHARGES:
A. Purpose:
1. This section sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the city wastewater disposal
system and enables the city to comply with all state and federal laws. This section also
establishes the determination and levying of charges of all users discharging thereto.
2. The objectives of this section are to:
a. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater disposal system which will interfere
with the operation of the system or the use or disposal of the sludge; and
b. Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works which will pass
through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters of the state or the atmosphere,
or otherwise be incompatible with the system; and
c. Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system; and
d. Establish the authority to determine and levy fees that are necessary for the efficient,
economic and safe operation of the city wastewater disposal system for the protection of the
health, safety and general welfare of the public.
3. This section provides for the regulation of discharges into the city wastewater disposal system
through the issuance of permits to certain users and through enforcement of the general
requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, provides for penalty
relief, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees necessary to carry out the
program established herein.
4. This section shall apply to all users within the city and to users outside the city, who are by
contract or agreement with the city, users of the city wastewater disposal system. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the city administrator or representative shall administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this section.
5. This section does not establish the city as being responsible for the state or federal pretreatment
program requirements.
B. General Sewer Use Regulations:
1. Treatment Required: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city
jurisdiction any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 87/444
2. Privy Or Vault Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to hereafter construct or utilize any privy or privy
vault on any part of any lot or parcel of land in the city. It shall be unlawful to hereafter construct
any on site wastewater treatment system on any lot or parcel of land in the city abutting on a
public sanitary sewer with which connections may be made, if said on site wastewater treatment
system be within five hundred feet (500') of said public sewer. Construction of any new on site
wastewater treatment system shall further only be allowed after a permit has been issued by the
city and/or county. The design, construction and repairs of any such on site system shall be in
full compliance with Minnesota rule chapter 7080. All on site wastewater treatment systems
either existing or constructed under the provisions herein established shall be operated and
maintained as effective treatment systems. Correction and improvement of on site wastewater
treatment systems shall be the responsibility of the owner and shall be accomplished as may be
directed by the city in compliance with Minnesota rules chapter 7080.
3. Application: There shall be two (2) classes of sewer permits: a) for residential and commercial
service; and b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or any other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the city or city administrator. The industry, as a condition
of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
4. Cause To Connect: The city shall have power whenever there is a public sewer in the public
highways or grounds upon which any premises in the city abuts or is within five hundred feet
(500') of said public sewer, to cause the owner, lessee or occupant of such parcel of land to
connect said premises with said public sewer by a sufficient sanitary sewer whenever, in the
city's opinion, the same may be necessary for the preservation of the public health. The city shall
serve upon such owner, lessee or occupant ten (10) days' notice in writing specifying the time
when such sewer connection or connections must be made and completed, and if the said
owner or occupant neglects to complete the same within the time specified, in addition to the
penalties imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the city may cause it to
be done and shall either recover the whole amount of the expense thereof by an action against
the owner, in the name of the city, before any court having jurisdiction thereof, or assess the
same against said premises pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Annotated.
5. Preliminary Treatment And/Or Pretreatment: Where preliminary treatment and/or pretreatment
facilities are required or provided for any wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
effective operation by the sewer user at owner's expense. Failure to do so shall void the right of
sewage system use, and the city reserves the right to discontinue service.
6. Control Manhole: The city may as a condition of providing sewer service require a control
manhole built on the building sewer at the owner's expense to facilitate observation, sampling,
inspection and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible,
safely located and built in accordance with city standards for sewer manholes. The necessity of
a control manhole will be based on sewage volume, whether it is a processing waste, or an
industrial waste, and whether the waste requires control within the operation to meet acceptable
conditions for discharge to the sewerage system. The control manhole may also be required for
users with industrial wastewater discharge permits.
7. Special Agreements: Nothing within this chapter shall be interpreted to require the service of
sewage wastes at published sewer rates when such waste may impair the system or cause a
higher than normal expense in operation of the sewerage system. Nor shall this chapter be
interpreted as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industry whereby the industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industry; providing, that the city NPDES
and/or state disposal permit limitations are not violated.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 88/444
8. Inspection, Measurement, Testing: Inspection by duly authorized city employees bearing proper
identification shall, at reasonable times, be permitted to enter upon properties served by sanitary
sewers for the purpose of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing in connection with
operation of the sewer system.
9. Contractors' Responsibility: Contractors employed on city contracts, plumbers, and other
persons engaged in construction or maintenance activity where there is connection to or danger
of damage to the sewer system shall exercise particular care to protect the sewer system, and
shall at all times protect, keep foreign materials out, and accomplish construction or connections
in a neat and workmanlike manner. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this chapter and shall
not stop the city from correcting the damage or removing the foreign material, if necessary, on
an overtime basis, and collecting the costs therefor. For other than immediate necessary repair
or removal, a ten (10) day written notice shall be deemed adequate notice to the party to repair
damage, correct faulty construction or remove material from the sewerage system.
10. Prohibited Connections: Roof, groundwater or surface drain connections to the city sanitary
sewer system are prohibited.
11. Service Restrictions: A sewer service line serving more than one property owner shall not be
allowed.
12. Replacement Of Lines: The city may order existing sewer service lines serving more than one
owner to be replaced as separate lines whenever in the city's opinion the same may be
necessary for the preservation of public health. The city may also order existing sewer service
lines to be replaced if it is demonstrated the sewer line is cracked, separated, or exhibiting other
deficiencies. Examples of deficiencies include, but are not limited to, root intrusion, water
infiltration or inflow sediment intrusion, etc.
13. Manholes: Entrance into sewer manholes or opening the same for any purpose whatever
except by duly authorized city employees or their agents is prohibited.
14. New Connections: Any new connection to the sanitary sewer system shall be prohibited unless
sufficient capacity is available in all downstream facilities, including, but not limited to, capacity
for flow, BOD5 and suspended solids, as determined by the city. All such allowed connections of
the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the state building
and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight,
and verified by proper testing to prevent the inclusion of infiltration/inflow.
15. Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided at the owner's expense when,
in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
floatable grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients. This may apply to food handlers and processors and car washes. All interceptors
shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of interceptors, including proper removal and disposal of the
captured materials by appropriate means, and shall maintain a record of dates cleaned and
means of disposal, which are subject to review by the city.
16. Sanitary Sewer Mains: Sanitary sewer mains shall meet the appropriate specifications of the
ASTM, the WPCF manual of practice no. 9, the standard utilities specifications of the City
Engineers Association Of Minnesota, and any other applicable rules and regulations of the city.
17. Sanitary Or Storm Sewers: No sanitary or storm sewers system shall be constructed in the city
(except house or building service sewers), except by the city or by others as permitted and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 89/444
subject to inspection. No such sewers shall be considered to be a part of the public sewer
system unless accepted by the city.
C. General Discharge Prohibitions: No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances into the wastewater disposal system or to any
public sewer:
1. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient
either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in
any other way to the wastewater disposal system, or to the operation of the system. At no time
shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter read at the point of discharge
into the system or at any point in the system, be more than five percent (5%) nor any single
reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited
materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides.
2. Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other
interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities, such as, but not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or
tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grindings or polishing wastes.
3. Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the
wastewater disposal system.
4. Any garbage, either household or commercial, that has not been shredded so that the garbage
particles are smaller than one-half inch (1/2") in their largest dimension. Adequate water flow
volume to wash such garbage through the sewers shall be provided.
5. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either by itself or by interaction
with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal
system, or cause the wastewater effluent to fail a whole effluent toxicity test. A toxic pollutant
shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to the clean water act.
6. Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gas, or solid which either by itself or by interaction with other
wastes is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or is sufficient to prevent entry
into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
7. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. "Objectionable color" is defined as the
color being visible in the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
8. Any wastewater which creates conditions at or near the wastewater disposal system which
violate any statute or any rule, regulation or ordinance of any public agency or state or federal
regulatory body.
9. Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150F) (65.6C), or causing, individually or in combination with other wastewater, the influent at
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 90/444
the wastewater treatment plant to have a temperature exceeding one hundred four degrees
Fahrenheit (104F) (40C).
10. Any "slug load", which shall mean any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge of such volume or strength as to cause inhibition or disruption in
the wastewater disposal system. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain
concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15)
minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentrations, quantities or
flow of the user during normal operation.
11. Cooling water or unpolluted storm or ground water.
12. Any wastewater containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of
one hundred milligrams per liter (100 mg/l), that will, or is likely to, solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between zero degrees Celsius (0C) and fifty degrees Celsius (50C), and which
will, or is likely to, cause obstruction to the flow in the sewers or other interference to the
collection, pumping or wastewater treatment systems; and any wastewater containing oil and
grease concentrations of mineral origin of greater than one hundred milligrams per liter (100
mg/l), whether emulsified or not.
13. Wastewater containing inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime
slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate) in such quantities that they would cause disruption or interference with the
wastewater collection and treatment system.
14. Discharges of the following substances shall be limited to concentrations or quantities which
will not harm the wastewater facility, streams, soils, vegetation or groundwater, and will not
otherwise create a hazard or nuisance. The city may set limitations lower than the prohibition
limits outlined below. Consideration will be given to such factors as the quantity of waste in
relation to flows and velocities, materials of construction, the city NPDES and state disposal
system permits, capacity of the treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes and other
pertinent factors:
a. Food waste not properly shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely
under normal conditions with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension.
b. Radioactive wastes or isotopes in concentrations that exceed limits established by applicable
state and federal regulations.
c. Wastewaters with BOD5 or suspended solid levels that require additional treatment, except as
may be permitted by specific written agreement with the city subject to this chapter.
d. Wastewater containing substances which cannot be treated to produce effluent quality
required by the permit or causes a violation of any applicable local, state or federal regulation.
In addition to these prohibitions, no user shall discharge to any public sewer any discharge
which causes "interference", as defined in section 4.01 of this chapter, with the wastewater
disposal system. Where an industrial user is in compliance with specific prohibitions or
standards and pollutants in the effluent from the industrial user's facility later to cause or
significantly contribute to a violation of any requirement of the treatment plant's NPDES or
state disposal system permit, and are likely to cause such a violation in the future, or is
causing interference, the city will take appropriate action to develop and enforce specific
effluent limits for that industrial user to ensure renewed and continued compliance with the
treatment plant's NPDES or state disposal system permit.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 91/444
D. Limitations On Wastewater Strength:
1. State Requirements: State requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met by all users
which are subject to such standards in any instance in which they are more stringent than
federal requirements and limitations or those in this section or any other applicable ordinance.
2. City Right Of Revision:
a. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements
on discharges to the wastewater disposal system.
b. In the event of discharges to the public sewers which contain substances or possess
characteristics prohibited in this section, or which, in the judgment of the city, may have a
deleterious effect (including interference) to the treatment facility, receiving waters, soils or
vegetation, or which create a hazard or nuisance, the city may:
(1) Refuse to accept the wastes.
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require payment to cover all the added costs of handling, treating and disposing of wastes
not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
3. Dilution: No user shall increase the use of processed water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a
discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the limitations contained herein or contained in any state requirements or contained in a city
discharge permit.
4. Supplemental Limitations: As stated herein, the city may impose additional specific limitations on
any wastewater that is to be discharged into the city wastewater disposal system.
5. Additional Prohibited Discharges: In addition to general discharge prohibition, industrial users
shall not discharge:
a. Wastes with a closed cup flashpoint less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140F).
b. Pollutants that result in toxic gases, vapors and fumes in quantities that may cause worker
health and safety problems.
c. Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil in amounts that could
cause pass-through or interference at the wastewater treatment facilities.
d. Pollutants trucked or hauled to the wastewater treatment works, except at discharge points
designated by the city.
E. Accidental Discharges:
1. Prevention Of Accidental Discharge: Each user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this section. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 92/444
be approved by the city before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans
and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify
the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this section.
2. Accidental Discharge:
a. Accidental discharges of prohibited waste into the POTW, directly or through another disposal
system, or to any place from which such waste may enter the POTW, shall be reported to the
city by the persons responsible for the discharge, or by the owner, lessee or occupant of the
premises where the discharge occurred, immediately upon obtaining knowledge of the fact of
such discharge. Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or
damage to the wastewater disposal system or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on
the city on account thereof under any state or federal law. The responsible person shall take
immediate action as is reasonably possible to minimize or abate the prohibited discharge.
b. The responsible person shall send a letter describing the prohibited discharge to the city
within seven (7) days after obtaining knowledge of the discharge. The letter shall include the
following information:
(1) The time and location of the spill;
(2) Description of the accidentally discharged waste, including estimate of pollutant
concentrations;
(3) Time period and volume of wastewater discharged;
(4) Actions taken to correct or control the spill;
(5) A schedule of corrective measures to prevent further spill occurrences.
3. Slug Discharge: In the event that an industrial user discharges a slug in such volume or strength
that the industrial user knows or has reason to know it will cause interference in the POTW, the
industrial user shall immediately report the same to the city. Within seven (7) days thereafter, the
industrial user shall send a letter to the city describing the slug as specified under subsection E2,
"Accidental Discharge", of this section. After such a discharge, a plan is required to prevent
additional slug or accidental discharges. This plan will contain the following at a minimum:
a. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
b. Description of stored chemicals;
c. Procedure for promptly notifying the POTW of slug discharges;
d. Procedures necessary to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff and worker training;
e. Any necessary measures for building containment structures or equipment;
f. Any necessary measures for controlling toxic organic pollutants (including solvents);
g. Any necessary procedures and equipment for emergency response;
h. Any necessary follow up practices to limit the damage suffered by the POTW or the
environment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 93/444
F. General Pretreatment Requirements:
1. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this section. Any
facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of
the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to
the city under the provisions of this section. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the
user's initiation of the changes.
2. All records relating to compliance with city pretreatment standards shall be made available by
the city to officials of the EPA or MPCA, upon request.
G. Wastewater Discharge Permits:
1. Industrial Survey: All industrial users and some commercial users will be contacted by the city to
complete an industrial survey. Completion of the survey within forty five (45) days is mandatory
for the industrial and commercial users contacted. This survey will be used by the city to
determine potential users that may be required to apply for a city wastewater discharge permit.
2. Mandatory Permits: All industries proposing to connect or to commence a new discharge to the
wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or
discharging into the wastewater disposal system if the discharge would result in the industry
being classified as a "significant industrial user". All existing significant industrial users or
industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards connected to or
discharging into the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date hereof.
3. Permit Application: Users required to apply for a wastewater discharge permit shall complete
and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city, and accompanied by the
applicable fee as set and adjusted from time to time by the city by resolution. Existing users shall
apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after notification of their need to
apply for a permit, and proposed new users shall apply at least one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to connecting or discharging to the wastewater disposal system. In support of the
application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
a. Name, address, location (if different from the address);
b. SIC number according to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual", bureau of the
budget, 1972, as amended;
c. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those governed by
subsection C of this section as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant
to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR part 136, as amended. Parameters to be
tested will be decided by the city. The industry is responsible for all testing costs;
d. Time and duration of discharge;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 94/444
e. Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal
variations, if any;
f. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer
connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;
g. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials
which are or could be discharged, including sludges, floats, skimmings, etc.;
h. Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are
limited by the city, state or national categorical pretreatment standards;
i. Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production;
j. Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
k. Number of full and part time employees, and hours of work; and
l. Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit
application.
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater
discharge permit, subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
4. Permit Conditions: Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable regulations and fees established by the city. Permits may
contain the following:
a. The unit charge or schedule of fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater
disposal system;
b. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
c. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulation and equalization;
d. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
e. Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of pretreatment facilities;
f. Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency and
method sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule;
g. Compliance schedules;
h. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
i. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as
specified by the city, but in no case less than three (3) years, and affording city access thereto;
j. Requirements for notification to and acceptance by the city of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the
wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 95/444
k. Requirements for notification of slug or accidental discharges as provided in this section, and
reporting of permit violations;
l. Requirements for disposal of sludges, floats, skimmings, etc.;
m. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this section;
and
n. Requirement for whole effluent toxicity testing or toxicity reduction evaluations.
5. Permit Duration: Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years.
The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to
the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be
subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are
identified in subsection C of this section are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall
be informed of any proposed changes in this permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective
date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time
schedule for compliance.
6. Permit Modifications: Permits may be subject to modification where a change in the volume or
characteristics of an industrial wastewater which either singly or by interaction with other wastes
may have a negative impact on the wastewater treatment process. Permits may also be subject
to change even if there is no change in the industrial wastewater, but the wastewater is causing
interference or noncompliance with local, state or federal requirements.
7. Permit Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new
owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation, without the approval of the
city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit.
8. Confidential Information:
a. Information and data on a user obtained from applications, permits, monitoring programs and
inspections shall be available to the public or other government agencies without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city
that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
b. When requested by the person furnishing a report, and until such time as the information is
determined not to be confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
NPDES permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential
information. Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any
governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless ten (10) day
notification is given to the user.
9. Sludge Generated: Sludges, floats, skimmings, etc., generated by an industrial or commercial
pretreatment system shall not be placed into the city wastewater disposal system. Such sludges
shall be contained, transported and disposed of in accordance with all federal, state and local
regulations.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 96/444
10. Toxicity Reduction Evaluation: If the treatment plant effluent exhibits toxicity, or if the POTW
sludge is considered a hazardous waste, the city may investigate the cause by a toxicity
reduction evaluation (TRE). Since industrial users are a major potential source of toxic
compounds, the city may require all or some industries to prove that their discharges are not
toxic. Industries found to be discharging toxic substances will be responsible for determining the
exact nature of their toxicity and taking corrective actions to reduce or eliminate the toxicity. The
responsible industries shall be responsible for the testing costs.
H. General User Reports: The city may require that any person discharging or proposing to discharge
wastewater to the wastewater disposal system file a periodic discharge report. The discharge
report may include, but not be limited to, nature of process, rates of flow, mass discharge rate, raw
material and production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees,
compliance status with any state or federal pretreatment standards, or other information which
relates to the generation of waste, including wastewater constituents and concentrations in the
wastewater discharge. Such reports may also include sludge disposal practices and the chemical
constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on site, even though they may not
normally be discharged. At a minimum, a summary of such data indicating each industrial user's
compliance with this section shall be prepared semiannually during the months of June and
December and submitted to the city. In addition to discharge reports, the city may require
information in the form of a wastewater discharge permit application, self-monitoring reports and
compliance schedules. Refer also to monitoring requirements required in subsection I of this
section.
I. Monitoring Facilities:
1. Monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurements of the building sewer
and/or internal drainage systems shall be provided and operated by all industrial users, except
as mentioned later in this section. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the
user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample
room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and composition of
samples for analysis. The facility and sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at
all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
2. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be
provided in accordance with the city requirements and all applicable local construction standards
and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written
notification by the city, unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the city.
3. The city shall not require installation of such devices where the city determines that such
industrial user has concentrations of BOD5 and suspended solids no greater than normal
domestic strength wastewater (NDSW), and a satisfactory method and access exist for sampling
and determining the total daily sewage flow.
J. Inspection And Sampling: The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city ready
access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, MPCA and EPA shall
have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 97/444
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with any security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, the city, MPCA and EPA will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
K. Final Compliance Date Reporting Requirements: Within ninety (90) days following the date for final
compliance with any permit requirements, the user shall submit to the city a report regarding the
discharge. The report shall state whether the applicable permit requirements are being met and, if
not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
facility into compliance with the applicable permit requirements. This statement shall be signed by
the user.
L. Slug Or Accidental Discharge:
1. The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service of a user and/or a wastewater
discharge permit (after informal notice to the discharger) when such suspension is necessary, in
the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the
environment, or to the wastewater disposal system, or would cause a violation of the treatment
plant's NPDES or state disposal system permit.
2. Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater
discharge permit shall immediately stop the discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the wastewater disposal system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall
reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of
the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the causes of the slug or accidental discharge and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of
occurrence.
M. Revocation Of Permit: The city may revoke the permit of any user which fails to factually report the
wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; which fails to report significant
changes in wastewater constituents or characteristics; which refuses reasonable access to the
user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or which is in violation of conditions of
its permit, this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations.
N. Notification Of Violation And Enforcement: Whenever the city finds that any person has violated or
is violating this section, wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement
contained herein, other than by failure to pay fees when due, the city may serve upon such a
person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and enforcement order. Within thirty (30)
days of the date of the notice, unless a shorter time frame is necessary due to the nature of the
violation, the user shall comply with the enforcement order.
O. Cost Of Damage: When any user violating any of the provisions of this section, any order of the city
council and/or any order of the city administrator has a discharge which causes a deposit,
obstruction, damage or other impairment to the city wastewater collection and disposal system, the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 98/444
city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, including,
without limitation:
1. The added cost to the city of handling the improper discharge;
2. The costs incurred by the city in correcting the violation, in repairing damage to the city disposal
system, and in cleanup of the unauthorized discharge;
3. Any costs or penalties imposed on the city by regulatory authorities by reason of the
unauthorized discharge.
P. Falsifying Information: No person shall knowingly make any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this section or wastewater discharge permit, or falsify, tamper with, or
knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this section.
Q. Basis For Sewer Usage Charges: The sewer usage to be so charged against any property within
the city shall be based upon the quantity of water used at each lot, parcel of land, building or
premises as the water is measured by the water meters there in use. Industrial or other users
which discharge flows with concentrations in BOD, suspended solids or other components that
affect the treatment process and costs shall be charged a sewer usage fee which appropriately
covers such additional costs.
R. Residential Properties: For residential properties, the sewer usage charges for the second and third
quarters of the year shall not exceed the sewer usage charge for the last quarter of the previous
year and the first quarter of the current year. This provision does not apply to residential uses
combined with business or industrial uses. This provision is intended to grant credit for lawn
sprinkling where larger areas of lawn exist in relation to residential uses and water use does not
add to sewage flow. The city administrator shall approve policies to correct errors or waive
penalties and adjust bills where extraordinary circumstances exist.
S. Disconnection: In the event sewer service is disconnected by the city at any time for any reason,
the sewer service charge shall be reduced proportionately in the same manner that water service
rates are reduced.
T. Adjustment Of Charge: If a substantial portion of the water utilized by any user is not discharged
into the sewer system, the volume of such water shall be deducted in computing the sewer use
charge, provided a separate meter is installed to measure such volume or where it is not
practicable to enter the portion of the water not discharged into the sewerage system, such
adjustment may be made as shall be fair and equitable in order to determine the amount of such
service charge or usage fee. The user desiring to install such separate meter shall make
application and payment for the meter to the city and engage, at his own expense, a plumber to
effect the necessary piping changes and install the couplings so the meter can be set.
U. Charges For Noncity Water Users And Necessary Metering: In the event any lot, parcel of land,
building or premises discharging sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids into the
sanitary sewer system of the city, either directly or indirectly, is supplied in whole or in part with
water not obtained from the city, the owner, lessee or occupant of such property shall cause to be
installed within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof, necessary metering equipment as
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 99/444
approved by the city to measure the quantity of water pumped or used, and the sewer usage
charge shall be based on the quantity of water so measured. Whenever the owner, lessee or
occupant fails to install such metering equipment, or where it is not practicable to measure the
water consumed on any premises by a meter or meters, the city shall cause to be determined in
such manner and by such methods as may be practicable, considering conditions and attendant
circumstances in each case, the estimated volume of water from private sources which discharge
into the sanitary sewer system of the city, and such estimate shall be used in lieu of the meter
volume of water from private sources to determine the sewage usage charge thereon and therefor.
V. Fixing Unit Costs For Sewer Charges: The city council shall by resolution determine and fix the unit
costs for use of the city sewer system on the basis of flow (including infiltration/inflow), BOD,
suspended solids and any other pollutant, taking into consideration the cost of treatment of such
sewage, and may increase or decrease such unit cost as often and in such amounts as may
reasonably be required to accomplish the purposes of this section. In setting unit costs to an
individual user, the city council may make allowance for the recovery of unreimbursed city
expenses related to the facilities provided with service.
W. Sewer Bill To Go With Water Bill: The amounts due to the city for sewer charges will be computed
in accordance with the provisions of this section and statements will be rendered at the same time
and on the same bill with the city water statement. If a property supplies its own water, a bill will be
rendered for sewer services only.
X. Alternate Methods: In the event a general municipal user is not supplied with city water or the water
so used is not measured, the user charge shall be fixed and determined by the city in such
methods as they may find just, equitable and practicable.
Y. Industrial Pretreatment Charge:
1. An individual pretreatment charge is hereby imposed upon all industrial units subject to local
industrial permit requirements. The industrial pretreatment charge shall be the amount
necessary to recover administrative costs associated with permitting and monitoring the
discharge of industrial wastewater into the city wastewater disposal system. The city may adopt
charges and fees which may include:
a. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city pretreatment program;
b. Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures;
c. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
d. Fees for permit application;
e. Fees for filing appeals; and
f. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
Z. Industrial Fee(s):
1. Industrial fee(s) for debt retirement, administration, operation, maintenance and replacement of
the wastewater collection, conveyance and treatment facilities shall be determined as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 100/444
a. Industrial fee(s) shall be the sum of the products obtained by multiplying the unit costs as
determined above by the user's actual flow, BOD and suspended solids during the billing
period. However, in no case shall the charge be less than that determined by applying the
prevailing domestic flow rate charge to the user's actual flow. In addition to the charges
provided for herein, the city may impose a surcharge on any industrial user pursuant to the
requirements hereinbefore or based on some other pollutant loading factor which requires
special treatment at the wastewater treatment plant.
AA. Measurement Of Strength And Volume:
1. Installation:
a. When required by the city, each industrial user shall install suitable measuring, sampling and
analyzing devices in compliance with the sewer use ordinance, as required hereinbefore.
b. The city shall not require installation of such devices where the city determines that such
industrial user has concentrations of BOD and suspended solids no greater than normal
domestic strength wastewater (NDSW) and a satisfactory method and access exist for
sampling and determining the total daily sewage flow. In such cases, the charges to those
industrial users shall be based on the flow rate as determined and on BOD and suspended
solids loads equal to the NDSW.
2. Reporting: Each industrial user required by the city to install and maintain sewerage monitoring
facilities shall submit to the city a monthly report of daily flow, BOD and suspended solids, on a
form approved by the city. This report shall be used for billing purposes and shall be submitted
prior to the tenth day of the subsequent month, or as directed by the city.
3. Sampling Frequency:
a. BOD and suspended solids results and other parameters required by the permit that are
reported to the city, shall be representative of the normal wastewater discharged to the sewer
system. BOD and suspended solids tests and other parameters shall be done at least
monthly. If this sampling frequency does not provide a true representation of the waste
discharged, the city may require a more frequent sampling frequency. A more frequent
sampling frequency may also be required to comply with any state or federal requirements.
b. In the event that BOD is not representative of the organic strength of the waste, the city may
require monitoring for both chemical oxygen demand (COD) and BOD. The city may charge
on the basis of COD. The COD loading would be reduced by the POTW influent BOD to COD
ratio before application of any unit BOD charges.
4. Inspection And Sampling:
a. The city shall have the right to periodically or continuously inspect the monitoring facilities, to
measure, sample and analyze the user's flow and to analyze the samples obtained by the
industrial user. In the event of any discrepancy between the flows or loads determined by the
city and the industrial user, the values determined by the city shall be used.
b. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of sewage concentration shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination
Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said manhole.
All testing costs are the responsibility of the user. Tests are to be conducted by a state certified
laboratory. In the event that no special manhole is available, the control manhole shall be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 101/444
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected.
c. A twenty four (24) hour composite sample of the sewage shall be taken by the city at least
twice each year on those customers being assessed a surcharge. Additional sampling by the
city will be taken upon written request by the user, with the cost of said sampling and testing to
be borne by the user.
BB. Control Structure, Necessary Equipment For Industrial Wastes: When required by the city, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure and
equipment, when required, shall be constructed at the owner's expense in accordance with plans
approved by the city and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
CC. Proper Control Structures And Methods: All measurements, tests and analyses of the
characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be
determined in accordance with 40 CFR 136 (guidelines establishing test procedures for analysis
of pollutants); the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And
Wastewater", and shall be determined at the control structure provided, or upon suitable
samples taken at said control structure in the event that no special structure has been required,
the control structure shall be construed to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer from the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and
to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved
will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether
a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended
solids analyses are obtained from a 24 hour composite of all outfalls whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
DD. Access To Monitoring Facilities And Periodic Testing Of Effluent: The city may conduct such tests
as are necessary to enforce this regulation, and employees of the city may enter upon any
property for the purpose of taking samples, obtaining information, or conducting surveys or
investigations relating to such enforcement. Entry shall be made during operating hours unless
circumstances require otherwise in all cases where tests are conducted by the city for the purpose
of checking to determine if a previously found violation of this section has been corrected, the cost
of such tests shall be charged to the user or added to the user's sewer charge. In those cases
where the City determines that the nature or volume of a particular user's sewage requires more
frequent than normal testing, the City may charge such user for the tests, after giving the user ten
(10) days' written notice of its intention to do so and the cost thereof shall be added to the user's
sewer charge. In any case where industrial wastes are discharged to a public sewer, the City may
require the user at his own expense to test his discharge on a regular basis and to report the test
results to the City within a reasonable time. All such tests shall be as ordered by the City and shall
be conducted by a State certified laboratory and in accordance with the standards set out
hereinbefore.
FF. Severability: If any provisions, paragraph, word, section or subsection of this
article is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 102/444
provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and subsections shall not be affected
and shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.31 - 4.69: RESERVED:
Article V. Recycling And Solid Waste Utilities
4.70: SEPARATION AND COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS FROM
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS:
A. Source Separation Of Recyclables: It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of a residential
dwelling unit having recyclable materials which accumulate on the premises to separate recyclable
material from solid waste, place the recyclable items in a City approved recycling container,
segregate recyclable material as to type, and set the recyclable material out for collection in a
manner designated by the City.
B. Recycling Collection: The City shall ensure that a service is available for the collection of recyclable
items from all residential dwelling units. The City shall provide owners and occupants of residential
dwelling units with information regarding authorized recycling procedures. (Ord. 99, 6th Series, eff.
8-21-2017)
4.71: COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE FROM RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS:
A. Collection Of Solid Waste Material: It shall be the duty of every residential dwelling unit to place
solid waste materials in a City garbage bag or within a City provided solid waste container and set
the solid waste materials out for collection behind the curbline of the street or avenue abutting their
property. The City may designate alley pickup in certain areas where street pickup would be
deemed too dangerous to the garbage hauler. In no event shall containers be placed in the street
or on the sidewalk or in any manner placed where the containers will interfere with vehicle or
pedestrian traffic. Containers can be placed no earlier than six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of the afternoon
preceding the collection day and must be removed by six o'clock (6:00) P.M. the day of collection.
Solid waste shall not be piled in the solid waste container so as to prohibit closure of the lid of the
container.
B. Solid Waste Collections: The City shall ensure that a service is available for collection of solid
waste materials from residential dwelling units. The City shall provide owners and occupants of
units with information regarding authorized solid waste procedures.
C. Containers: The City of Little Falls may provide a container or containers for solid waste collection
to each residential dwelling unit. Garbage containers will be watertight and constructed to industry
standards of a solid and durable grade of plastic.
Residents shall keep containers clean and free from accumulation of any substance remaining
attached to the inside of the container which would attract or breed flies, mosquitoes or other insects.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 103/444
The area surrounding garbage containers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The
contents of all receptacles shall be protected so the wind cannot scatter the contents over the streets,
alleys or other property within the City. All containers shall be securely closed in a manner as to
prevent the scattering of the contents and to make them inaccessible to insects, rodents and other
animals. (Ord. 99, 6th Series, eff. 8-21-2017)
4.72: SCAVENGING:
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not authorized by the City to remove, take for salvage or
destroy any recyclable or solid waste items that have been set out for collection. (Ord. 99, 6th Series,
eff. 8-21-2017)
4.73: FEES, DELINQUENCIES, CHARGES AND APPEALS:
A. Fees: The City Council shall establish, by resolution, fees on all residential dwelling units within the
City for the costs of the solid waste program and for the costs of the recycling program, including
administration, promotion, coordination, billing and provisions of containers.
B. Payment Of Fees: Solid waste and/or recycling fees shall be placed on the Municipal utility account
of all residential dwelling units, and all are payable in the manner established for all utilities.
C. Recalculation Of Fees: If an owner or person responsible for paying the solid waste and/or
recycling fees questions the correctness of such fees, such person may have the determination of
the fee reviewed by request to the City Administrator. Such request shall be made within thirty (30)
days of the mailing of the bill in question. The City Administrator or their designee shall have the
authority to recompute the charges.
D. Appeal: The owner or person responsible for paying the solid waste and/or recycling fees shall
have the right to appeal the decision of the City Administrator or their designee to the City Council.
An appeal shall be made within ten (10) days after notification of such decision. The City Council
shall either affirm, modify or overrule the decision and shall state the reason for such action.
E. Fee For Replacement Of Containers: The City may supply containers to residential dwelling units
for use in solid waste collection and separating of recyclable materials. The containers are and
shall remain the property of the City. The City shall replace such containers when rendered
unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear. When replacement is necessary due to other
causes, the owner or occupant shall be charged the cost of such containers, together with the
administrative and delivery fees incurred by the City. (Ord. 99, 6th Series, eff. 8-21-2017)
4.74 - 4.79: RESERVED:
Article VI. Telecommunications Regulations
4.80: TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 104/444
A. Permit Required: A company may not construct, install, repair, remove or relocate
telecommunications facilities, or related services, or any part thereof, in, on, over, under or along
public ground without first obtaining a permit from the City.
B. Application: Application for a permit shall be made to the City Administrator.
C. Issuance Of Permit: If the City Administrator determines that the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this article, the City Administrator may issue a permit to the company. An applicant
may contest a permit denial or the conditions of approval by written notice to the City Administrator
requesting a City Council review within fourteen (14) days of the City Administrator's action. The
City Council shall hear any contest of the City Administrator's actions under this article within forty
five (45) days of the City Administrator's receipt of the contest notice. Nothing in this article
precludes the City from requiring a franchise agreement with the applicant, as allowed by law, in
addition to the issuance of a permit set forth herein.
D. Permit Fee: The application must be accompanied by the permit fee set by the City Council by
resolution.
E. Security For Completion Of Work: Prior to commencement of work, the company must deposit with
the City security in the form of certified check, letter of credit or construction bond, in a sufficient
amount as determined by the City for the completion of the work. The securities will be held until
the work is completed plus a period of two (2) months thereafter to guarantee that restoration work
has been satisfactorily completed. Upon application of the company, providing such information as
the City may require, if two (2) or more work projects are to be constructed during a calendar year,
the City may accept, in lieu of separate security for each project, a single security for multiple
projects in such form and amount as determined, in the discretion of the City, to be sufficient to
assure completion of all projects which may be in progress at any one time during that calendar
year and to guarantee that restoration work will be satisfactorily completed. The security will then
be returned to the company with interest as required by law and then interest at the applicable
statutory rate.
F. Inspection Of Work: When the work is completed, the company must request an inspection by the
City. The City will determine if the work has been satisfactorily completed and provide the company
with a written report of the inspection and approval. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.81: RESTORATION AND RELOCATION:
A. Restoration: Upon completion of the work, the company must restore the general area of the work,
including paving and its foundation, to the same condition that existed prior to commencement of
the work and must exercise reasonable care to maintain the same condition for two (2) years
thereafter. The work must be completed as promptly as weather permits. If the company does not
promptly perform and complete the work, remove all dirt, rubbish, equipment and material, and
restore the public ground to the same condition, the city may put it in the same condition at the
expense of the company. The company must, upon demand, pay to the city the direct and indirect
cost of the work done for or performed by the city, including, but not limited to, the city's
administrative costs. To recover its costs, the city will first draw on the security posted by the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 105/444
company and then recover the balance of the costs incurred from the company directly by written
demand. This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available to the city.
B. Company Initiated Relocation: The company must give the city written notice prior to a company
initiated relocation of facilities. Company initiated relocation must be at the company's expense
and must be approved by the city, such approval is not to be unreasonably withheld.
C. City Required Relocation: The company must promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for
seasonal working conditions, permanently relocate its facilities whenever the city requires such
relocation.
D. Relocation Where Public Ground Vacated: The vacation of public ground does not deprive the
company of the right to operate and maintain its facilities in the city. If the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the company, the company must pay the relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings
are initiated by the city or other persons, the company must pay the relocation costs, unless
otherwise agreed to by the city, company and other persons. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.82: COMPANY DEFAULT:
A. Notice: If the company is in default in the performance of the work authorized by the permit,
including, but not limited to, restoration requirements, for more than thirty (30) days after receiving
written notice from the city of default, the city may terminate the rights of the company under the
permit. The notice of default must be in writing and specify the provisions of the permit under which
the default is claimed and state the grounds of the claim. The notice must be served on the
company by personally delivering it to an officer thereof at its principal place of business in the
state, or by certified mail to that address.
B. City Action On Default: If the company is in default in the performance of the work authorized by the
permit, the city may, after the above notice to the company and failure of the company to cure the
default, take such action as may be reasonably necessary to abate the condition caused by the
default. The company must reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs, including costs of
collection and attorney fees incurred as a result of the company default. The security posted under
subsection 4.80E of this chapter will be applied by the city first toward payment for such
reimbursement. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.83: INDEMNIFICATION:
A. Scope: The company will indemnify, keep and hold the city, its elected officials, officers, employees
and agents free and harmless from any and all claims and actions on account of injury or death of
persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, installation, maintenance, repair,
removal, relocation or operation of the facilities affecting public ground, unless such injury or
damage is the result of the negligence of the city, its elected officials, employees, officers or
agents. The city will notify the company of claims or actions and provide a reasonable opportunity
for the company to accept and undertake the defense.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 106/444
B. Claim Defense: If a claim or action is brought against the city under circumstances where
indemnification applies, the company, at its sole expense, shall defend the city if written notice of
the claim or action is given to the company within a period wherein the company is not prejudiced
in the defense of such claim or action by lack of such notice. If the company undertakes the
defense, the company shall have complete control of such claim or action, but it may not settle
without the consent of the city, which shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to
third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the city. In defending any
action on behalf of the city, the company is entitled to assert every defense or immunity that the
city could assert in its own behalf. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.84: OTHER CONDITIONS OF USE:
A. Use Of Public Grounds: Facilities must be located, constructed, installed, maintained or relocated
so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary traffic, travel and
use of public ground. The facilities are subject to additional conditions of the permit as established
by the city administrator, including, but not limited to: 1) the right of inspection by the city at
reasonable times and places; 2) the obligation to relocate the facilities pursuant to subsections
4.81C and D of this chapter; and 3) compliance with all applicable regulations imposed by the
Minnesota public utilities commission and other state and federal laws, including prompt
compliance with the requirements of the gopher state one call program, Minnesota statutes
chapter 216D.
B. Location: The facilities must be placed in a location agreed to by the city. The company shall give
the city forty five (45) days' advanced written notice of the company's proposed location of facilities
within the public ground. No later than forty five (45) days after the city's receipt of the company's
written notice, the city will notify the company in writing if the city rejects the company's proposed
location, the city shall propose alternative locations. The city does not waive or forfeit its right to
reject the location of facilities by failure to respond within the forty five (45) days.
C. Emergency Work: A company may open and disturb the surface of public ground without a permit
where an emergency exists requiring the immediate repair of its facilities. In such event, the
company must request a permit not later than the second working day thereafter and comply with
the applicable conditions of the permit. In no event may the company undertake such an activity
which will result in the closing of a street or alley without prior notification to the city.
D. Street Improvements, Paving Or Resurfacing: The city will give the company written notice of plans
for street improvements where permanent paving or resurfacing is involved. The notice must
contain: 1) the nature and character of the improvements; 2) the streets upon which the
improvements are to be made; 3) the extent of the improvements, the time when the city will start
the work; and 4) if more than one street is involved, the sequence in which the work is to proceed.
E. Company Protection Of Facilities: The company must take reasonable measures to prevent the
facilities from causing damage to persons or property. The company must take reasonable
measures to protect its facilities from damage that could be inflicted on the facilities by persons,
property or the elements. The company must take specific protective measures when the city
performs work near the facilities.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 107/444
F. Prior Service Connections: In cases where the city is undertaking the paving or resurfacing of
streets and the facilities are located under such street, the company may be required to install
service connections prior to the paving or resurfacing, if it is apparent that service will be required
during the five (5) year period following the paving or resurfacing. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-
2016)
4.85: EFFECTIVE DATE AND APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING FACILITIES:
Companies with facilities, in, on, over, under or along public ground on the effective date hereof must
take prompt action to comply with this article and the permits authorized by this article. A company,
however, is not required to reapply for a permit obtained from the city prior to the effective date hereof.
A company is not required to pay the difference between the permit fee of a previously obtained and
the equivalent newly obtained permit under this article. All other provisions of this article apply to
existing facilities. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.86: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIREMENTS:
By receiving a permit pursuant to this article, the company accepts and agrees to comply with all of
the requirements of this article. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.87: PUBLIC GROUND OTHER THAN RIGHT OF WAY:
Nothing in this article is intended to grant to the company authority beyond that given by Minnesota
statutes section 222.37 for use of the public rights of way for construction and operation of facilities. If
the city allows the company to use its non-right of way public ground, the terms of this article apply to
the extent they are consistent with the contract, statutory and common law rights the city owns in such
property. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.88: REGULATIONS; PERMIT SCHEDULE:
The city administrator is authorized and directed to prepare suitable regulations and schedules for the
administration of permits issued under this article. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
4.89 - 4.98: RESERVED:
Article VII. Violation
4.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Every person who violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (Ord. 84, 6th Series, eff. 3-21-2016)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 108/444
Chapter 5
CONSTRUCTION LICENSING, PERMITS AND
REGULATIONS
Chapter 5
CONSTRUCTION LICENSING, PERMITS AND
REGULATIONS
5.01: BUILDING CODE:
A. Code Adopted By Reference: The Minnesota building code, as adopted by the commissioner of
labor and industry, pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 326B, including all amendments, rules
and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota
commissioner of labor and industry, through the building codes and standards unit, is hereby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters unless specifically adopted in this
section. The Minnesota state building code is hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set out
herein.
B. Application, Administration And Enforcement: The application, administration and enforcement of
the code shall be in accordance with the Minnesota state building code. The code shall be
enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by Minnesota statutes chapter 326B.121,
subdivision 2(d), when so established by this section.
The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the building department. This code
shall be enforced by the Minnesota certified building official designated by this city of Little Falls to
administer the code under Minnesota statutes chapter 326B.133, subdivision 1.
C. Permits And Fees: The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in
Minnesota rules chapter 1300. Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in
such amounts as the city council may set by resolution. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be
collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with Minnesota
statutes chapter 326B.148.
1. Fees For Work Without Permit: If work for which a permit is required per section 5.02 of this
chapter has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be
made before a permit may be issued for the work. An investigation fee shall be collected and is
in addition to the required permit fees, but it may not exceed the permit fee.
2. Refunds: The building official may authorize refunding of fees paid for a building permit if the
permit's scope of work has not commenced prior to the refund, based on the following
guidelines:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 109/444
a. No refund can be made for maintaining permits for roofing, siding, windows, doors, or other
minor projects that are charged a fixed fee.
b. Not more than seventy five percent (75%) of the permit fee paid will be refunded when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with the Minnesota state building
code. The plan review fee will not be refunded after the building official has completed the
plan review.
c. Not more than ninety percent (90%) of a plan review fee paid will be refunded when an
application for permit is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review is started.
d. State surcharge fees will not be refunded.
e. Refunds may be authorized by the building official upon written application filed by the original
applicant no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of the payment.
3. Expired Permits: Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by the
permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180)
days after the time work is commenced. Before work can be continued on any expired permit, a
new permit shall first be obtained, based on the following guidelines:
a. All permit renewals ("reactivation" and "reissues") will be charged one hundred percent
(100%) of the surcharge fees and shall use the current fee schedule to calculate surcharge
fees.
b. Renewal is fifty percent (50%) of the building permit portion of the fee, provided no changes
have been made or will be made in the original approved construction documents. This
includes plumbing and mechanical portions of the building permit.
c. Plan review submittals can be renewed ("reactivated") at twenty five percent (25%) of the fee.
d. When only a final inspection remains on an expired permit and the permit applicant provides a
written justification, the building official may further reduce permit renewal ("reissue") fee to
twenty five percent (25%) of the building permit portion of the fee and no plan review fee.
e. The renewed building permit has the same duration limits of expiration as the original building
permit.
D. Organization And Enforcement: The organization of the building department and enforcement of
the code is established by subsection 2.03A and section 1.03 of this code. (Ord. 18, 6th Series, eff.
11-16-2009)
5.02: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert
or demolish any building or structure, or any part or portion thereof, including, but not limited to, the
plumbing, electrical, ventilating, heating or air conditioning systems therein, or cause the same to be
done, without first obtaining a separate building or mechanical permit for each such building, structure
or mechanical components from the city. (Ord. 134, 2nd Series, eff. 10-29-1984)
5.03: FEES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 110/444
A. Permits, Inspection And Fees: Permits, inspections and collection of fees shall be as provided in
chapter 3 of the uniform building code, 1997 edition, except as amended by rule 1305.0800. Fees
for permits under this chapter shall be determined by the council and fixed by its resolution, a copy
of which shall be in the office of the city administrator and uniformly enforced.
B. Surcharge: In addition to the permit fees required by subsection A of this section, the applicant shall
pay a surcharge to be remitted to the Minnesota department of administration as prescribed by
Minnesota statutes section 16B.70. (Ord. 41, 5th Series, eff. 12-3-2001)
5.04: PERMITS AND SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR MOVING BUILDINGS:
A. Definition: "Street" or "streets", as used in this section, means all streets and highways in the city
which are not state trunk highways, county state aid highways or county roads.
B. Moving Permit Required And Application:
1. It is unlawful for any person to move a building on any street without a moving permit from the
city.
2. The application for a moving permit shall state the approximate size and weight of the structure
or building proposed to be moved, together with the places from and to which it is proposed to
move the same, and proposed route to be followed, proposed dates and times of moving and
parking, and the name and address of the proposed mover. Such application shall also state any
municipal utility, street and public property repairs or alterations that will be required by reason of
such movement.
C. Permit And Fee: The moving permit shall state date or dates of moving, hours, routing, movement
and parking. Permits shall be issued only for moving buildings by building movers licensed by the
state. Fees to be charged shall be separate for each of the following: 1) a moving permit fee to
cover use of streets and route approval; and 2) a fee equal to the anticipated amount required to
compensate the city for any municipal utility and public property (other than streets) repairs or
alterations occasioned by such movement. The latter shall be paid in advance.
D. Building Mover Requirements: The building mover shall:
1. Use Designated Streets: Move the building over those streets only which are designated for
such use in the permit.
2. Notify Of Revised Moving Time: Notify the city in writing of any desired change in the date or
times of moving the building from that indicated in the application and conduct moving
operations only on the date and at the times designated in the application or approved in writing
by the city, and notify the police department at least twenty four (24) hours prior to commencing
movement of the building.
3. Notify Of Damage: Notify the city in writing of damage caused to property belonging to the city
within twenty four (24) hours after the damage or injury has occurred.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 111/444
4. Display Lights: Cause warning lights or signals to be displayed during all times on each side of
the building while situated on a public street in such manner as to warn the public of an
obstruction, and at all times erect and maintain barricades across such streets as shall be
necessary and in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the
presence, movement or removal of the building.
5. No Parking: Not park the building on any city street at any time during the moving process.
6. Comply With Governing Law: Comply with the building code, the provisions of the city code and
all other laws.
7. Pay Expense Of Officer: Pay to the city the expense of any traffic officer ordered by the city
administrator to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury.
E. Owner's Permit Required And Application:
1. Permit: It is unlawful for any owner of land in the city to or from which a building is to be moved
to permit such movement without an owner's permit.
2. Application: A person seeking issuance of an owner's permit shall file a written application with
the city. If no moving permit is required under this section, the application shall also include the
address and legal description of the land on which the building is situated, and if within the city,
to which it is proposed to be moved, the route, including identification of streets or roads over
which it is to be moved, the distance, the proposed date of movement, and such other
information as the city shall require for the determination to be made hereunder. The application
shall not be accepted for filing unless accompanied by the following:
a. Evidence that all real estate taxes and special assessments against the building and land
from which it is to be removed are paid in full.
b. A written statement, bill of sale or other written evidence that the applicant is entitled to move
the building.
c. Written evidence of arrangements with all public utility companies whose wires, lamps or
poles are required to be removed, for the removal thereof by the applicant.
d. Payment of the permit fee.
e. If the building is to be located within the city after its movement, a survey by a licensed
surveyor of the land to which the building is to be moved, including the location of the building
in relation to the boundaries of the land.
f. If the building is to be located within the city after its movement, photographs of: 1) two (2) or
more views of the building to be moved; 2) the lot on which the building is to be located; and
3) the lands and structures thereon adjacent to the lot on which the building is to be located.
3. Council; Public Hearing:
a. Where applicant requests the moving of a building to a location within the city, the council
shall hold a public hearing on whether a permit shall be issued not later than sixty (60) days
after the application has been accepted for filing. Notice, including the time, date, place and
purpose of the hearing shall be given by publication and by mailing to the owners of real
property situated within three hundred feet (300') of the land to which the building is to be
moved at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice containing the same
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 112/444
information shall be posted at the city administrative offices not less than ten (10) days prior to
the date of the hearing.
b. Not later than five (5) days after conclusion of the hearing the council shall either deny the
permit in writing stating one or more of the grounds stated in subsection I of this section, or
authorize issuance of a permit.
4. Owner Responsibilities: The owner shall:
a. Clear Premises: Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grades at
the original building site, if within the city, so that the premises are left in a safe, neat and
sanitary condition. All foundation structures shall be removed to a depth of eighteen inches
(18") below the finished grade of the earth.
b. Remove Service Connections: Cause any sewer lines to be plugged, shut off or removed, if
the original site is within the city, in such manner as may be required by the city.
c. Completion Of Remodeling: If the building is relocated in the city, complete, within ninety (90)
days after removal, all remodeling, additions or repairs as indicated in the application, in any
document filed in support thereof, or in any building permit issued in connection therewith.
d. Take all reasonable precautions to secure the building and to reduce danger to any member
of the public until the building is set on its foundation and any remodeling, additions or repairs,
described in the application, have been completed, including, but not limited to: 1) locking all
doors and windows; 2) providing sufficient support or bracing so as to stabilize the building to
prevent it or any part thereof from sliding, slipping, falling or moving; and 3) erecting and
maintaining a security fence or wall, the base of which shall be no higher than four inches (4"),
and the top of which shall be at least four feet (4') above the surface of the ground and which
shall enclose the entire building as well as the excavation for the foundation.
F. Fees And Deposits: Upon completion of the moving of a building pursuant to a permit, the amount
which the applicant has deposited in conjunction with the filing of the application shall be returned
to him, less all amounts which any holder of a permit shall or may become liable to the city and
which the city may retain under any provision of this section. The permit fee paid upon filing of the
application shall not be returned.
G. Conditional Permits: Any permit granted under the terms of this section may have attached thereto
written conditions which shall be strictly adhered to by the permittee.
H. Building Permits And Certificates Of Occupancy:
1. Whenever an application is made to move a building which would not, after moving, comply with
all then current building codes, or if changes are required or contemplated contemporaneously
with such application, a separate building permit shall also be applied for.
2. No moved building, whether or not a separate building permit is required under subsection H1 of
this section, shall be occupied before the city makes its final inspection, and issues a certificate
of occupancy.
I. Denial Of A Permit: Any permit under this section shall be denied upon a finding of any one of the
following:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 113/444
1. Applicant has not complied with any requirement of this section;
2. Persons or property in the city would be endangered by moving the building, because of shape,
size, route, or for any other reason;
3. The building is in such state of deterioration or disrepair, or is otherwise so structurally unsafe
that it would constitute a danger to persons or property in the city;
4. The building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the location to
which the building is to be moved is in the city;
5. The equipment for moving the building is unsafe and persons and property would be
endangered by its use;
6. The building or its use would not be in compliance with zoning, building codes or other
provisions of this code, if the location to which the building is to be moved is in the city; or
7. If the location to which the building is to be moved is in the city, the building is in substantial
variance with either the established or the expected pattern of building development within the
neighborhood to which the building is to be moved. Comparative age, bulk, architectural style
and quality of construction of both the building to be moved and the buildings existing in the
neighborhood shall be considered in determining whether a building is in substantial variance. If
the building to be moved is more than ten (10) years older than the oldest building situated on
the lands abutting the land to which the building is to be moved, such fact shall be evidence that
the building to be moved is in substantial variance.
J. Building Permit And Code Compliance: Before any building is moved from one location to another
within the city, or from a point of origin without the city to a destination within the city, regardless of
the route of movement, it shall be inspected and a building permit shall have been issued for at
least the work necessary to bring it into full compliance with the state building code. (Ord. 134, 2nd
Series, eff. 10-29-1984; amd. 1992 Code)
5.05: MAINTENANCE OF EXTERIOR OF ALL STRUCTURES:
(Rep. by Ord. 74, 6th Series, eff. 5-4-2015)
5.06: DEMOLITION IN HISTORIC AREAS OR OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES:
A. Purpose: This section is established to protect historic resources from destruction by providing the
heritage preservation commission and the city council with authority to identify historic resources
and to review and approve or deny all proposed demolitions of property within ninety (90) days.
B. Identification Of Historic Resources: Properties are designated as historic resources if they are
listed on the national register of historic places, or are located in a national, or Little Falls historic,
or conservation district, or designated as a Little Falls preservation landmark, or such other
property as the city council may determine, referring to sources of information reasonably believed
to be relevant to such determination.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 114/444
C. Review Of Demolition Permits: The city shall review all applications for a demolition permit to
determine whether the affected property has been identified as a historic resource. If the property
has not been identified as a historic resource, the demolition permit shall be approved. If the city
determines that the property is a historic resource, the heritage preservation commission may
withhold a demolition permit for a period of up to ninety (90) days. The property owner may appeal
any decision to withhold a demolition permit to the city council, who shall first hold a public hearing.
D. Mitigation Plan: The heritage preservation commission may require a mitigation plan as a condition
of any approval for demolition of a historic resource. Such plan may include the documentation of
the property by measured drawings, photographic recording, historic research or other means
appropriate to the significance of the property. Such plan also may include the salvage and
preservation of specified building materials, architectural details, ornaments, fixtures and similar
items for use in restoration elsewhere. (Ord. 43, 5th Series, eff. 1-28-2002)
5.07 - 5.19: RESERVED:
5.20: HOUSING CODE:
The current edition of the uniform housing code, published by the International Conference Of Building
Officials, as it may hereafter be supplemented, amended or replaced, is hereby adopted by reference
as though set forth verbatim herein. One copy of said code shall be marked "City Of Little Falls -
Official Copy" and kept on file in the office of the building official and open to inspection and use by the
public. (Ord. 100, 3rd Series, eff. 1-28-1991; amd. 1992 Code)
5.21 - 5.29: RESERVED:
5.30: SIGN REGULATIONS:
A. Findings, Purpose, Effect And Definitions:
1. Findings: The city council hereby finds as follows:
a. Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and quality of the environment.
b. Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of
messages.
c. Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and detriments to property values,
thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
d. The city's zoning regulations have included the regulation of signs in an effort to provide
adequate means of expression and to promote the economic viability of the business
community, while protecting the city and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size,
location and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and
threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community. The regulations of the physical
characteristics of signs within the city have had a positive impact on traffic safety and the
appearance of the community.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 115/444
2. Purpose And Intent: It is not the purpose or intent of this section to regulate the message
displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this section to regulate any building
design or any display not defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a
building. The purpose and intent of this section is to:
a. Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of
signs within the city in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
b. Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the city by preventing visual
clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the community.
c. Improve the visual appearance of the city while providing for effective means of
communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and the city's goals of public safety
and aesthetics.
d. Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth herein under the
zoning authority of the city.
3. Effect: A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the city if it is in
conformance with the provisions of these regulations. The effect of this section, as more
specifically set forth herein, is to:
a. Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more limited variety of signs in
other zones, subject to the standards set forth in this section.
b. Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal use of a site in all zones when
in compliance with the requirements of this section or when required by federal, state or local
law.
c. Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other physical characteristics
negatively affect the environment and where the communication can be accomplished by
means having a lesser impact on the environment and the public health, safety and welfare.
d. Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this section.
4. Severability: If any subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this section is for any reason held
to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section.
The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this section in each subsection,
sentence, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections,
sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.
5. Definitions: The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
A-FRAME SIGN: A movable freestanding sign hinged at the top, or attached in a way that forms
a shape similar to the letter "A" when viewed from the side. Also known as a sandwich board.
This would also include a springboard sign.
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which has been removed or
whose display surface remains blank for a period of one year or more. Signs applicable to a
business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such
business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of one
year or more. Any sign remaining after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be
abandoned. Signs which are present because of being legally established nonconforming signs
or signs which have required a conditional use permit or a variance shall also be subject to this
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 116/444
definition.
AWNING: A rooflike cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass designed and intended for
protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment and which projects from a wall or
roof of a structure primarily over a window, walk or the like. Any part of an awning, which also
projects over a door, shall be counted as an awning.
AWNING SIGN: A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion attached directly to the
awning material.
BALLOON SIGN: A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material supported by helium,
hot or pressurized air which is greater than twenty four inches (24") in diameter.
BANNER: A sign constructed of cloth, paper, plastic or other material upon which copy is written
and supported either between poles or fastened to buildings or other structures and that is
supported or anchored on two (2) or more edges or at three (3) or more corners. Banners also
include such signs which are anchored along one edge, or two (2) corners, with weights installed
that substantially reduce the reaction of the sign to wind.
BENCH SIGN: A sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or a similar type of outdoor
furniture or seating, placed usually on or adjacent to a public right of way.
BUILDING: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING SIGN: Any sign attached to or supported by any structure used or intended for
supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or
sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: Any district zoned primarily for business use as identified on the city of
Little Falls official zoning map.
CANOPY: A rooflike cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a support, which provides
shelter over a doorway.
CANOPY SIGN: Any sign that is a part of or attached to a canopy, made of fabric, plastic, or
structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A canopy sign is not a marquee and is
different from service area canopy signs.
COMMERCIAL SPEECH: Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity, service or
entertainment.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is
taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects,
engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and/or the owners, financial
supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the
structure or project.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign which exclusively contains language that is intended to facilitate
the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles into, out of and around the site on which the sign
is located.
DISPLAY SURFACE: The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 117/444
displaying the advertising or other commercial or noncommercial message.
ELECTRICAL SIGN: A sign that is powered by electricity.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY (EMD): A sign capable of displaying words, symbols,
figures, or images that can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote or automatic
means.
ELEVATION: The view of the side, front or rear of a given structure(s).
ERECT: Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing, affixing, attaching,
creating, painting, drawing, engraving or any other way of bringing into being or establishing.
EXTERIOR SIGN: A sign on the outside of a building, structure or outdoor display area.
FLAG: Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one edge or no more than two (2)
corners of the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material by
atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns, symbols, emblems,
insignia, or other symbolic devices or text. If any dimension of a flag is more than three (3) times
as long as any other dimension, it shall be regulated as a banner for the purposes of this
section.
FLASHING SIGN: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign, which exhibits changing light or color
effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent illumination, which includes the illusion of
intermittent flashing light by means of animation. Also any mode of lighting, which resembles
zooming, twinkling, or sparkling.
FREESTANDING SIGN: Any sign, which has supporting framework that is placed on, or
anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or other structure.
FRONT FOOT: The measurement of the frontage of a lot abutting a public street. In cases where
a lot abuts two (2) public streets, the longest side of the lot will be used in determining the front
footage of a lot.
FRONTAGE: The line of contact of a property with the public right of way.
GRADE: Shall be construed to be the final ground elevation after construction. Earth mounding
for landscaping, berming and/or screening is not part of the final grade for sign height
computation.
GROUND SIGN: Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground or mounted on
a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a total height not exceeding eight feet (8').
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The height of the sign, for freestanding signs, shall be computed as the
vertical distance measured from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign. For signs attached to buildings, the height shall be measured
from the lowest attached component of the sign to the highest attached component.
ILLUMINATED SIGN: Any sign illuminated by a source of light which is directly cast upon the
exterior surface or face of the sign and intended to illuminate the sign by reflection or which is
illuminated from within or behind the sign so as to reflect or emanate light through the sign.
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT: Any district zoned for industrial use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 118/444
INTERIOR SIGN: A sign which is located within the interior of any building, or within an enclosed
lobby or court of any building.
ISSUING AUTHORITY: The city of Little Falls.
LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGN: Any sign and its support structure lawfully
erected prior to the effective date hereof which fails to conform to the requirements of this
section. A sign which was erected in accordance with a variance granted prior to the adoption of
this section and which does not comply with this section shall be deemed to be a legal
nonconforming sign. A sign which was unlawfully erected shall be deemed to be an illegal sign.
MARQUEE: Any permanent rooflike structure projecting beyond a theater building or extending
along and projecting beyond the wall of that building, generally designed and constructed to
provide protection from the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or attached in any manner,
on a marquee.
MONUMENT SIGN: Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground or mounted
on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a height exceeding eight feet (8'), subject
to height limitations of the zoning district in which it is located.
MURAL: An image painted or applied on the exterior of a building wall(s) or other permanent
structure and for which no more than five percent (5%) of the total area covered by the mural, or
one hundred (100) square feet (whichever is less), consists of text.
NONCOMMERCIAL SPEECH: Dissemination of message not classified as commercial speech
which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning political, religious, social, ideological,
public service and informational topics.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign which is lawfully existing on the effective date hereof, but
does not conform to this section.
PARAPET (WALL): That portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
PENNANTS: Pieces of cloth, paper, plastic or similar material intended to be individually
supported or attached to each other by means of rope, string or other material, and intended to
be hung on buildings or other structures or between poles, and does not include any written or
graphical, or other form of copy.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer
or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining
chassis or support is converted to another sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the
ground since this characteristic is based on the design of such a sign. A sign mounted on a
vehicle identifying a business when the vehicle is being used in the normal day to day operation
of that business is not subject to the regulations set forth in this section.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The building in which the principal primary use of the property, which
may contain one or more lots is conducted. Buildings with multiple principal uses shall not
constitute multiple principal buildings (i.e., 3 separate uses in a building is equal to 1 building).
Storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory buildings shall not be considered
principal buildings.
PRINCIPAL ENTRANCE: The main doorways, lobby, or access leading or entering into a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 119/444
building or structure.
PROPERTY: Any lot or parcel of land which has been legally created and has been assigned a
separate parcel identification number.
PUBLIC ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: The right of way for a public roadway.
PYLON SIGN: Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s) anchored in the
ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by pole(s) or beam(s) and with
the area below the sign face open.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: Any district zoned for residential uses.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A piece of land or real estate, consisting of one or more lots or
parcels, where a residential dwelling and its associated accessory buildings or structures are
located.
ROOF: The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a building or structure
makeup of which conforms to the roof structures, roof construction and roof covering sections of
the state adopted building code.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof or parapet of a
building or structure, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest
portion of the roof.
SETBACK, FRONT: The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the public right of way
and a structure on the premises. In instances in which a property fronts on more than one street,
front setbacks are required on all street frontages.
SETBACK, REAR: The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the property line
opposite the principal street frontage and a structure on the premises.
SETBACK, SIDE: The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the side lot line and a
structure on the premises.
SHIMMERING SIGNS: A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted visual image.
SIGN: Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, reading matter or representation in the nature
of advertisement, announcement, message or visual communication, other than a "flag" or
"mural" as defined in this section whether painted, posted, printed, affixed, engraved or
constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires, and structures, which is
displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
SIGN FACE: The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is
exhibited.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing and framework
which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
SITE: A plot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, which are
intended, designated, and/or approved to function as an integrated unit.
SPRINGBOARD: See definition of A-Frame Sign.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 120/444
TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE: The maximum combined area of all signs allowed on a specific
property.
VISIBLE: Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether legible or not)
without visual aid.
WALL: Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building or structure
and which has a slope of sixty degrees (60) or greater with the horizontal plane.
WALL SIGN: Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two feet (2') of a wall, painted on
the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or
structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.
B. Administration:
1. Permit Application: No sign whose highest attached part is greater than seven feet (7') above
the nearest adjacent ground surface, except as otherwise specified herein, shall be erected,
altered, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the city without first securing a permit from the
city. On any residentially zoned property, illuminated signs may be allowed for up to forty five
(45) consecutive days in any twelve (12) month period only after securing a permit from the city.
Lighting associated with such signs shall be rated at no greater than nine hundred (900) lumens
(approximately equivalent to a 60 watt incandescent light bulb) and must be diffused or shielded
so as to prevent direct viewing from adjacent properties or the public right of way. Such signs
may be permitted to be flashing, provided the flashing does not occur more frequently than once
per 0.5 second. The content of the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining
whether to approve or deny a sign permit. Applications for a permit may be for specific signs or
may be in the form of an overall signage plan for the property and shall be in writing addressed
to the issuing authority on a form provided by the City.
If the proposed sign(s) is along a State trunk highway or interstate highway, the applicant may
be required to provide proof that the applicant has obtained a permit from the State of Minnesota
for the sign(s); and
The issuing authority shall approve or deny the sign permit in an expedited manner consistent
with the time lines required in Minnesota Statutes 15.99, or successor statute.
2. Permit Exemptions: The following signs shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
These exemptions, however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the
responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this
section or any other law or ordinance relating to maintenance, repair and removal.
a. Individual signs not exceeding one-half (0.5) square foot in any zoning district. Such signage
shall not be counted against any overall square footage requirement applicable to a property.
(Ord. 81, 6th Series, eff. 11-16-2015)
b. Individual signs, in the Multiple-Family Residential R-3, Central Business District B-1 and
Noncentral Business District B-2, or Industrial District I-1, or located on public property with
the approval of the appropriate public agency or body, which are: (Ord. 100, 6th Series, eff. 9-
5-2017)
(1) Located no closer than one hundred feet (100') to the edge or curb of any road within a
public roadway right-of-way; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 121/444
(2) Not greater than three (3) square feet in size and with any letters or numbers not greater
than six inches (6") in height; or
(3) Not greater than six (6) square feet in size and with any letters or numbers not greater than
three inches (3") in height.
c. Signs erected within a public road right-of-way that are approved by the governmental agency
with authority over the right-of-way.
d. The changing of the display surface on a sign(s), or complete replacement of a sign(s), when
such change or replacement would be consistent with a previously issued permit or a sign
considered to be a legal nonconformity and would not require compliance with applicable
building codes, unless such sign(s) has been deemed abandoned. (Ord. 81, 6th Series, eff.
11-16-2015)
e. Flags, subject to the following (any flags in excess of these amounts shall be regulated as a
sign):
Zoning District
Maximum Size,
Any 1 Flag
Maximum
Size,
Cumulative
Per Site
Central Business District B-1, Noncentral
Business District B-2, Industrial District I-1
300 square feet, 600 square feet
with conditional use permit
None
All other zoning districts 40 square feet 50 square
feet
(Ord. 100, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
f. Interior signs.
g. Signs which are integrally attached to or part of:
(1) Waste roll-offs, dumpsters, garbage cans, portable storage units or other similar equipment
owned and maintained by a commercial business for the purpose of waste collection or
temporary storage;
(2) Personal property or motor vehicles such as, but not limited to, passenger vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, trucks, semitractors and trailers, recreational vehicles, fish
houses, boats, boat lifts, and trailers;
(3) Construction materials or equipment.
h. Signs which are affixed on City owned property, which have been approved by the City
Council or their designee.
i. Murals located on a building used primarily for commercial or industrial purposes which are
maintained by the property owner or his/her designee.
j. Signs which are affixed on property owned by a County, State or Federal governmental body
or a public school district unless specifically prohibited by this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 122/444
k. Signs required by law.
l. Headstones, gravestones, grave markers or other similar signs attached to, or adjacent to, a
burial plot, columbarium, mausoleum or the like.
3. Fees: Sign permit fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
4. Repairs: Any sign located in the City which may now be or hereafter become out of order, rotten
or unsafe, and every sign which shall hereafter be erected, altered, resurfaced, reconstructed or
moved contrary to the provisions of this section, shall be removed or otherwise properly secured
in accordance with the terms of this section by the owners thereof or by the owners of the
grounds on which said sign shall stand, upon receipt of proper notice so to do, given by the
issuing authority. No rotten or other unsafe sign shall be repaired or rebuilt except in accordance
with the provisions of this section and upon a permit issued by the issuing authority.
5. Removal: Signs which may be or may hereafter become rotted, unsafe or unsightly shall be
repaired or removed by the owner or lessee of the property upon which the sign stands upon
reasonable notice by the City. The owner, lessee or manager of any sign that contacts the
ground and the owner of the land on which the same is located shall keep grass, weeds and
other growth cut and shall remove all debris and rubbish from the area beneath the sign. If the
owner, lessee or manager of the property fails to act in accordance with this paragraph, the City
may seek injunctive relief through a motion for summary enforcement, or obtain an
administrative search and seizure warrant for removal of the sign in question. All costs incurred
for removal may be charged to the owner of the sign and/or property owner and if unpaid,
certified to the Morrison County auditor as a lien against the property on which the sign was
located.
C. Violations:
1. Violations; Separate Offense: (See section 5.99 of this chapter.) Each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D. General Provisions:
1. Size: No individual sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area. A-frame signs
shall not exceed four feet (4') in height and two feet (2') in width. All signs on the property shall
be included in the square footage measurement with the exception of A-frame signs and signs
otherwise exempted by this section. There shall be no more than one A-frame sign allowed per
principal building. Any A-frame or directional signs placed on public roadway right-of-way shall
require the owner of the sign to provide insurance to the City in an amount and in such form as
required by this Code. (Ord. 81, 6th Series, eff. 11-16-2015)
2. Regulations:
a. General: Except as hereinafter provided, no signs shall be erected or maintained at any angle
to a building or structure which sign extends or projects over the street or highway. No sign
shall be erected or maintained at any angle to a building or structure which sign extends or
projects over the alleyway more than four feet (4') and if such sign extends out more than six
inches (6") from a wall or facade shall be a minimum of seventeen feet (17') above the ground.
No sign shall be erected or maintained at any angle to a building or structure which sign shall
extend or project more than five feet (5') over the sidewalk and if such sign extends out more
than six inches (6") from a wall or facade shall be a minimum of seven feet (7') from the
ground. (Ord. 12, 7th Series, eff. 11-19-2018)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 123/444
b. Exceptions: The provisions of this subsection do not prohibit:
(1) The erection and maintenance of signs, either illuminated or nonilluminated, which are on
the sides of a marquee which are firmly attached to and a part of a theater or other building,
providing such signs are an integral part of the marquee and do not project above or below
the marquee; or
(2) The erection and maintenance of signs, not illuminated, which are attached to the marquee
and which do not project more than sixteen inches (16") above the marquee; or
(3) Traffic, directional, parking and snow removal signs erected by governmental authority.
3. Below Marquee: No sign, either illuminated or nonilluminated, may project below a marquee.
4. Electrical Signs: Electrical signs must be installed in accordance with the current Electrical Code
and all necessary electrical and building permits must be obtained prior to placement.
5. Unauthorized Signs: The following signs are unauthorized signs:
a. Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles any
official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or emergency vehicle signal, or which
attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic control device, roadway, intersection or any railroad sign or
signal.
b. Bench signs, except as provided by section 5.33 of this chapter.
c. Roof signs.
d. Signs painted, attached, engraved, etched or in any other manner affixed to public utility
poles, bridges, towers, streetlights, or similar public structures except as otherwise provided
herein. (Ord. 81, 6th Series, eff. 11-16-2015)
6. Setbacks: Signs shall conform to building yard regulations for the zoning district in which the
signs are located, except as otherwise specified in this section. Setbacks shall be measured to
the outermost portion of the sign.
Residential B-1 B-2 Industrial
Front yard lot line 5' 0' 10' 10'
Side yard lot line 5' 0' 10' 10'
Rear yard lot line 5' 0' 10' 10'
Rear yard lot line abutting R District n/a 10' 10' 20'
(Ord. 12, 7th Series, eff. 11-19-2018)
7. Area: The area within the frame shall be used to calculate the square footage except that the
width of a frame exceeding twelve inches (12") shall constitute sign face, and if such letters or
graphics be mounted directly on a wall or fascia or in such way as to be without a frame, the
dimensions for calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six inches (6") beyond
the periphery formed around such letters or graphics in a plane figure bounded by straight lines
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 124/444
connecting the outermost points thereof, unless exact dimensions can be provided by the
applicant. Symbols, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of graphics painted on or attached
to walls, awnings, freestanding structures, or suspended by balloons are considered a sign and
are included in calculating the overall square footage. The area of a sign with more than one
visible sign face will be calculated as the sum of the area of each sign face divided by two (2).
8. Canopies, Marquees And Fixed Awnings: Canopies, marquees and fixed awnings are an
integral part of the structure to which they are attached. They are allowed in the Business and
Industrial Districts if they meet the following requirements and the applicable square footage
requirements:
a. An awning, canopy or marquee may not project into the public right-of-way nearer than thirty
inches (30") to the roadway curb or curb line;
b. Awnings, may have no part of the structure other than supports nearer the ground surface
than seven feet (7');
c. The architectural style of the awning, canopy or marquee may be consistent with the building
being served;
d. Awnings, canopy or marquees projecting into the required yards may not be enclosed except
with a transparent material permitting through vision; and
e. Awnings, canopies or marquees built over the public right-of-way must be included in a liability
insurance policy holding the City free of all responsibility.
9. Illumination: External illumination for signs shall be constructed and maintained so that the
source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or residential property.
10. Retroactive Effect: This section shall apply to all sign applications applied for and/or pending
prior to its enactment.
11. Noncommercial Speech: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the
noncommercial speech exemption provided by Minnesota Statutes section 211B.045 (or
successor statute) is hereby incorporated by reference, which shall also include the period of
time thirteen (13) weeks prior to any special election until ten (10) days following the special
election.
E. Specific Regulations By Zoning District:
1. Residential Districts (2 Dwelling Units Or Less): Within any residential zoning district, where a
property contains two (2) dwelling units or less, nonexempt signs are allowed as follows
(whether or not a permit is required):
a. Maximum sign area for a single sign: Eight (8) square feet.
b. Cumulative maximum sign area for all nonexempt signs: Sixteen (16) square feet.
c. Maximum height of any sign: Four feet (4').
2. Residential Districts (3 Dwelling Units Or More): Within any residential zoning district, where a
property contains three (3) or more dwelling units nonexempt signs are allowed as follows
(whether or not a permit is required):
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 125/444
a. Within thirty feet (30') of a traveled public road right-of-way: One sign up to thirty two (32)
square feet in size, which may be externally illuminated, with a maximum height of eight feet
(8') (properties which front upon more than 1 street may have up to 1 such sign per street
frontage); and
b. For all other signs not allowed under subsection E2a of this section:
(1) Maximum height of any sign: Four feet (4').
(2) Maximum sign area for a single sign: Eight (8) square feet.
(3) Cumulative maximum sign area per parcel:
Up to 80 feet frontage 16 square feet
81 - 150 feet frontage 24 square feet
151 - 300 feet frontage 32 square feet
Greater than 300 feet frontage 48 square feet
The following types of signs are not permitted in residential zoning districts:
A-frame signs.
Awning signs.
Backlit awning signs.
Balloon signs.
Canopy signs.
Electronic message display signs.
Flashing signs.
Illuminated signs, except where specifically allowed.
Marquee signs.
Murals.
Portable signs.
Shimmering signs. (Ord. 81, 6th Series, eff. 11-16-2015)
3. Permitted Nonresidential Uses In Residential Districts: Within any residential zoning district,
where a property contains legal nonresidential uses, nonexempt signs are allowed as follows
(whether or not a permit is required):
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 126/444
Nonresidential Uses
In Residential
Zoning Districts
Maximum
Sign
Area Of
Single
Sign Per
Surface
Maximum
Sign
Height
Cumulative
Maximum Sign
Area Of All
Nonexempt Signs
One and Two Family Residential R-1, R-2,
Country Homes R-1C (150' frontage or less)
32 sq . ft.
8' 32 sq . ft.
Multiple Family Residential R-3 and
Manufactured Homes Residential District R-4
(150' frontage or less)
40 sq . ft.
8' 40 sq . ft.
One and Two Family Residential R-1, R-2, and
Country Homes R-1C (150' to 300' frontage)
32 sq . ft.
8' 40 sq . ft.
Multiple Family Residential R-3 and
Manufactured Homes Residential District R-4
(150' to 300' frontage)
40 sq . ft.
10' 40 sq . ft.
One and Two Family Residential R-1, R-2 and
Country Homes R-1C (greater than 300'
frontage)
40 sq . ft.
8' 40 sq . ft.
Multiple Family Residential R-3 and
Manufactured Homes Residential District R-4
(greater than 300' frontage)
48 sq . ft.
15' 100 sq . ft.
4. Business Districts: Within any business zoning district, nonexempt signs are allowed as follows
(whether or not a permit is required):
Business
Zoning
Districts
Maximum Sign
Area Of Single
Sign Per Surface
Maximum
Sign
Height
Cumulative Maximum
Sign Area Of
All Nonexempt Signs
Central
Business
District B-
1
100 sq. ft. 20' 50 sq. ft. or 2 sq. ft. per
front foot of lot which
abuts a public right-ofway,
whichever is
greater1
Noncentral
Business
District B-
2
300 sq. ft. when attached flat against a
building wall or when located within 100' of
the right-of-way of U.S. Highway 10 or
State Highway 371. Otherwise, 150 sq. ft.
30' 50 sq. ft. or 3 sq. ft. per
front foot of lot which
abuts a public right-ofway,
whichever is
greater, but not to
exceed 1,200 sq. ft.1
Note:
1. For buildings where more than 2 sides abut a public right-of-way or which can be accessed
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 127/444
from a parking lot, seating area or secondary entrance available to customers on a side not
abutting a public right-of-way, an additional 50 square feet of signage shall be allowed beyond
what would otherwise be allowed.
The following types of signs are not permitted in Central Business Zoning District B-1:
Electronic message display signs.
5. Industrial District: Within any industrial zoning district, nonexempt signs are allowed as follows
(whether or not a permit is required):
Industrial
Zoning
Districts
Maximum Sign
Area Of Single
Sign Per Surface
Maximum
Sign
Height
Cumulative
Maximum
Sign Area Of
All Nonexempt
Signs
Industrial
I-1
300 sq. ft. when attached flat against a building
wall or when located within 100' of the right-ofway
of U.S. Highway 10 or State Highway 371.
Otherwise, 150 sq. ft.
30' 4 sq. ft. per front foot
of building plus 1 sq.
ft. per front foot of
property not
occupied by the
building
(Ord. 100, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
F. Nonconforming Uses:
1. Nonconforming Signs, Compliance: It is recognized that signs exist within the zoning districts
which were lawful before this section was enacted, or for which there are insufficient records to
determine their lawfulness at the time they were erected, which would be prohibited, regulated or
restricted under the terms of this section or future amendments. It is the intent of this section that
nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as
grounds for adding other signs or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. It is further the
intent of this section to permit legal nonconforming signs and signs for which there are
insufficient records to determine their lawfulness at the time they were erected, existing on the
effective date hereof or amendments thereto, to continue as legal nonconforming signs provided
such signs are safe, are maintained so as not to be unsightly, and have not been abandoned or
removed subject to the following provisions:
a. No sign shall be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity.
b. Should such sign or sign structure be destroyed by any means to an extent greater than fifty
percent (50%) of its replacement cost and the sign is not replaced, or has not had a complete
application submitted for a permit to replace the sign, within one hundred eighty (180) days of
when the sign was damaged, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this section.
c. Should such sign or sign structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it
shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located after it is
moved.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 128/444
d. No existing sign devoted to a use not permitted by the zoning code in the zoning district in
which it is located shall be enlarged, extended or moved except in changing the sign to a sign
permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.
e. When a structure loses its nonconforming status all signs devoted to the structure shall be
removed and all signs painted directly on the structure shall be repainted in a neutral color or
a color which will harmonize with the structure.
G. Noncommercial Speech:
1. Substitution Clause: The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this section may
substitute noncommercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or noncommercial copy. This
substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of
this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial
speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial
message. The provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.
H. Enforcement:
1. Administration: Provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the zoning
administrator or his/her designee, who shall be appointed by the city council, and may have
other municipal duties. His/her duties shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Determine that all sign permits comply with the terms of this section.
b. Conduct site inspections to determine compliance with the terms of this section.
c. Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses, or other
matters to the designated official bodies.
2. Appeals: The city council constitutes the board of appeals and shall determine, in harmony with
the general purpose of this section and the city's comprehensive plan, by resolution, all appeals
from any order, requirement, permit or decision made by the zoning administrator under this
subsection, and from any interpretation of the text of this section.
At any time within forty five (45) days after the decision of the zoning administrator under the
provisions of this section, except in connection with prosecutions for violations thereof, the
applicant or other person or officer of the city affected thereby may appeal to the city council by
filing a written notice stating the grounds appealed from and stating the specific grounds upon
which the appeal is made. The city council will act upon the appeal within thirty (30) days of
receipt of said notice. (Ord. 81, 6th Series, eff. 11-16-2015)
5.31: SIGN REGULATIONS, HISTORIC AREAS:
(Rep. by Ord. 42, 6th Series, eff. 7-2-2012)
5.32: SIGN REGULATIONS, NONHISTORIC ZONING DISTRICTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 42, 6th Series, eff. 7-2-2012)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 129/444
5.33: ADVERTISING BENCHES, NONHISTORIC AREAS:
A. Location: The city hereby grants, in areas outside a designated national register of historic property,
or a national historic district or a heritage preservation district, a nonexclusive right, privilege,
franchise and permission, at the grantee's expense, to install, place and maintain "advertising
benches" (a.k.a. "courtesy benches") convenient to shoppers and pedestrians on a portion of the
public street between the curb and the property line, and private property as negotiated with the
property owner.
B. Maintenance: The maintenance of all benches by the grantee includes, but is not limited to, general
upkeep and repair, painting, weed control and snow removal.
C. Construction And Design: Prior to the placement of any advertising benches by a grantee, the
materials, construction and design of such benches shall be approved by the city.
D. Location, Placement: Required: The location and placement of any benches shall be made only
after approval by the city. Any proposed location and placement of any bench shall be submitted
by the grantee to the city and shall be subject to the restrictions found in this section.
E. Removal Of Benches: The grantee agrees to remove said benches from any location, public or
private, where placed, when required to do so by the city. The grantee shall have thirty (30) days to
remove any particular bench or benches. (Ord. 114, 4th Series, eff. 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 35, 5th
Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
F. Advertisement Regulations:
1. No bench shall advertise or promote the sale or usage of any alcohol or alcohol related product
or tobacco or tobacco related product. No bench shall bear the name of any alcohol or alcohol
related product, or any tobacco or tobacco related product, or any trademark or brand name of
such product.
2. The grantee shall have the right to place and maintain on its benches display advertising and
material, subject to the limitations of subsection F1 of this section, and shall retain all revenue
received therefrom, except as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 42, 6th Series, eff. 7-2-2012)
G. Indemnity: The grantee agrees to defend, save harmless and indemnify the city, its officers, agents
and employees from any claims, demand, action, liability, damage or judgment which may arise or
accrue out of the operation, maintenance and use of said benches, including, but not limited to, all
liability for infringement of trademarks, trade names, copyrights, invasion of rights or privacy,
defamation, illegal competition or unfair trade practices.
H. Liability Insurance: The grantee shall procure, maintain and deposit with the city certificates
evidencing insurance policies from responsible insurance companies covering public liability and
property damage insurance for the protection of patrons and other users of said advertising
benches. The policy shall name the city as an additional insured in order to protect the city from
any loss arising out of the placement and use of said benches. The amount of indemnity in such
public liability insurance policies shall not be less than seven hundred fifty thousand dollars
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 130/444
($750,000.00) per occurrence for injuries or death for any number of claims arising out of a single
occurrence. The amount of indemnity for property damage in such insurance policies shall not be
less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). Such policies shall also contain a provision
requiring the insurer to notify the city at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of such policy
either by cancellation or limitation.
I. Fee: The annual "advertising bench" fee is established by resolution.
J. Disclaimer: The grantee shall receive written permission from all private property owners
concerning the location of a bench on their property and on public rights of way adjacent to their
property.
K. Nonassignability: The grantee shall not assign, transfer, convey, pledge, sublet or otherwise
dispose of the nonexclusive franchise granted pursuant to this section without prior approval of the
city.
L. Termination: Any franchise hereby granted shall continue in effect for one year periods until revoked
or terminated by written notification by the city or the grantee. In the event that the franchise is
terminated, the grantee shall have ninety (90) days to remove said benches. (Ord. 114, 4th Series,
eff. 5-11-1998; amd. Ord. 35, 5th Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
5.34 - 5.39: RESERVED:
5.40: SWIMMING POOL MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS:
A. Control:
1. A "swimming pool" shall, for the purpose of this section, be construed to mean any pool, tank,
depression or excavation, or other structure which shall cause the retaining of water over a
greater depth than eighteen inches (18"), and having a larger plane surface of water greater
than fifty (50) square feet, and which shall be designed or used for swimming, dipping or
immersion purposes by men, women or children.
2. No swimming pool shall be constructed, erected or maintained unless a permit for the same
shall have been issued by the building official. An application for such permit shall be made on
such form as may be furnished by the city, and shall be accompanied by complete plans and
specifications for the pool, showing complete compliance with the requirements of this section,
including the plan for the disposal of water, the type and location of fencing and a survey or map
showing the location thereof with respect to the boundary lines of the land of the applicant, and
final inspection and approval of all pools hereafter constructed shall be withheld until all
requirements of this subsection shall be complied with, and thereafter said pool shall be
maintained in accordance with the requirements of this section. Permits may be issued only
upon application by the owner of the land or his duly authorized agent, and the said authority of
the agent shall be in writing and attached to the application.
3. No swimming pool shall be built, constructed or maintained except of materials having adequate
strength to retain the water designed to be contained therein. Each pool shall be designed with
sound engineering practices.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 131/444
4. Water overflowing from the swimming pool and when the pool is emptied, the water therefrom
shall be disposed of on the owner's land and shall be prevented from overflowing over or into the
land of adjoining property owners, or over or into any abutting street.
5. Every swimming pool shall be completely enclosed with fencing of a height of not less than four
feet (4'), with openings, holes or gaps therein no larger than four inches (4") in any dimension,
except for doors or gates; provided, however, that if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the
horizontal dimension shall not exceed four inches (4"); and provided, further, that a dwelling
house or an accessory building may be used as a part of such enclosure. All gates or doors
opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device
designed to keep, and capable of keeping, such door or gate securely closed at all times when
not in actual use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling occupied by human beings
and forming a part of the enclosure hereinbefore required need not be so equipped. All gates
shall be self-closing and self-latching, and equipped with latches at the top of gates or otherwise
inaccessible to small children.
6. Should the owner abandon the swimming pool, he shall arrange to remove the depression and
return the surface of the ground to its original grade and approximately the same condition as
before the pool was constructed, and he shall further notify the city administrator of the
abandonment so that an inspection of the site may be made and the records of the permit be
marked accordingly.
7. Every swimming pool shall be constructed ten feet (10') distant from any lot line.
8. Any lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect
light away from any adjoining premises.
B. Enforcement: All permits issued hereunder shall remain in full force and effect until revoked by the
council or surrendered by the applicant therefor, and the council may revoke any permit issued
hereunder and require the removal of a pool upon a showing that the pool fails to meet any of the
requirements of this section.
C. Prior Construction: The owner of any land upon which a swimming pool shall be constructed prior
to the date of the adoption hereof, whether pursuant to permit duly issued by the council or not,
shall, within ninety (90) days after the effective date hereof, comply with the requirements of
subsection A of this section, and thereafter, it shall be unlawful to maintain any swimming pool
which does not meet the requirements of this section.
D. Modifications:
1. The council may make modifications in individual cases, upon a showing of good cause, with
respect to the height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gates or latches, or the necessity
therefor, provided the degree of protection is not reduced thereby.
2. The council may permit other protective devices or structures to be used so long as the degree
of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection
afforded by the fence, gate and latch described herein.
3. Upon the application of a property owner, the council may grant an extension of time for
compliance, in individual cases, upon the showing of good cause. Such extension of time shall
not exceed thirty (30) days at a time. (Ord. 617, eff. 9-2-1958; amd. 1992 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 132/444
5.41 - 5.98: RESERVED:
5.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure
is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, except as otherwise stated in specific provisions
hereof. (Ord. 134, 2nd Series, eff. 10-29-1984)
Chapter 6
BUSINESS REGULATION AND LICENSING
Chapter 6
BUSINESS REGULATION AND LICENSING
6.01: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following
words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT: Any person making an application for a license under this chapter.
BILLABLE TRANSACTION: Every reportable transaction conducted by a pawnbroker is a "billable
transaction", except renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously
reported, voided transactions and confiscations.
BOND: A corporate surety document in the form and with the provisions acceptable and specifically
approved by the city.
BUSINESS: Any activity, occupation, sale of goods or services, or transaction that is either licensed or
regulated, or both licensed and regulated, by the terms and conditions of this chapter.
BUSINESS SOLICITATION: An attempt by a solicitor, engaging in transactions of the same kind, to
sell or distribute for a consideration any goods or services primarily for personal, family or household
purposes, when either the solicitor or person acting for him contacts the solicitee by telephone or in
person, other than at the established place of business of solicitor, except: a) an attempted solicitation
in which the solicitee personally knows the identity of the solicitor, the name of the business firm or
organization he represents, and the identity or kind of goods, services or things of value offered; or b)
an attempted solicitation in which the solicitee has first initiated the contact with the solicitor; or c) an
attempted solicitation of a newspaper subscription in which the solicitor is a minor child engaged in
both the delivery and sale of the newspaper; or d) an attempted solicitation for the sale of products of
a farm, garden or orchard.
CONTRIBUTION SOLICITATION: An attempt by a solicitor to obtain money from a solicitee for any
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 133/444
cause or purpose, when either the solicitor or person acting for him contacts the solicitee by telephone
or in person other than at the established place of meeting, business, service or activity of the
organization represented by the solicitor, except: a) an attempted solicitation in which the solicitee
personally knows the identity of the solicitor, the name of the organization he represents, and the
identity of the services performed or offered by the organization; or b) an attempted solicitation in
which the solicitee has first initiated the contact with the solicitor or the organization represented by
him.
ESTABLISHED PLACE: Real estate in the city owned, leased on a month to month or term certain,
longer than thirty (30) days. The term includes a booth, compartment or area leased or assigned
during and for the length of an event or occasion.
FIREWORKS: Any fireworks that cannot be sold under state law pursuant to Minnesota statutes
sections 624.20 through 624.25 are not considered "fireworks" for the purposes of this chapter since
they cannot be sold, possessed or used in the city in any manner. For the purposes of this chapter,
"fireworks" shall mean those types of fireworks that are now legal to sell, possess and use under state
law, which are: wire or wood sparklers of not more than one hundred grams (100 g) of mixture per
item, other sparking items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain seventy five grams
(75 g) or less of chemical mixture per tube or a total of two hundred grams (200 g) or less for multiple
tubes, snakes and glow worms, smoke devices, or trick noisemakers which include paper streamers,
party poppers, string poppers, snappers and drop pops, each consisting of not more than twenty five
hundredths (25/100) grain of explosive mixture.
FOOD/BEVERAGE VENDOR: Any person who sells food or beverages for periods of less than five
(5) days annually at a single location, or as a peddler. A person selling food or beverages on property
located outside of the arts and crafts district established under subsection 6.28C of this chapter shall
not be considered a "food/beverage vendor". A person selling merchandise on property owned by
them or leased by them under a lease of at least thirty (30) days' duration, which property is within the
arts and crafts district established under subsection 6.28C of this chapter, shall not be considered a
"food/beverage vendor" if such food or beverages are similar to the type or kind of food or beverages
ordinarily sold at such location.
GOODS: Any tangible thing of value, but not including money, things in action or intangible personal
property, other than merchandise certificates or coupons as herein described. The term includes such
chattels as are furnished or used at the time of sale or subsequently in the modernization,
rehabilitation, repair, alteration, improvement or construction of real property so as to become a part
thereof, whether or not severable therefrom. The term also includes merchandise certificates or
coupons, issued by a retail seller, not redeemable in cash and to be used in their face amount in lieu
of cash, in exchange for goods or services sold by such seller.
ITINERANT MERCHANT: Any person who sells merchandise, either new or used, for periods of less
than five (5) days annually at a single location, or as a peddler. A person selling merchandise on
property owned by them or leased by them under a lease of at least thirty (30) days' duration, which
property is outside of the large scale street and sidewalk event established under subsection 6.28C of
this chapter, shall not be considered an "itinerant merchant". A person selling merchandise on
property owned by them or leased by them under a lease of at least thirty (30) days' duration, which
property is within the large scale street and sidewalk event district established under subsection 6.28C
of this chapter, shall not be considered an "itinerant merchant" if such merchandise is similar to the
type or kind of merchandise ordinarily sold at such location.
LARGE SCALE STREET AND SIDEWALK EVENT: A special event held during a period of time
designated in the license under the sponsorship of a nonprofit organization which requires the full or
partial obstruction of streets or sidewalks, or parks or municipal parking lots, to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic and attracts an unusual number of visitors to the city, requiring special efforts by the city to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 134/444
control traffic and protect the public.
LARGE SCALE STREET AND SIDEWALK EVENT PERIOD: The period of time designated within the
license application for the large scale street and sidewalk event.
LICENSE: A document issued by the city to an applicant permitting him to carry on and transact a
business.
LICENSE FEE: The money paid to the city pursuant to an application and prior to issuance of a
license to transact and carry on a business.
LICENSEE: An applicant who, pursuant to his application, holds a valid, current, unexpired and
unrevoked license from the city for carrying on a business.
MINOR: Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of eighteen (18) years.
MOVABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile, or
other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not fixed address storefront or other permanent type
of structure authorized for sales transactions.
OPERATOR: The person or persons who are the proprietors of a restaurant or deli, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, licensee or otherwise.
PAWNBROKER: Any natural person, partnership or corporation, either as principal, or agent or
employee thereof, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing,
or who deals in the purchasing of personal property, or other valuable thing on condition of selling the
same back again at a stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal
property, taking possession of the property, or any part thereof, so mortgaged. To the extent that a
pawnbroker's business includes buying personal property previously used, rented or leased, or selling
it on consignment, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES: All vehicles and trailers designed or modified to allow sleeping
accommodations within them, including, but not limited to, motor homes, campers, camper trailers,
travel campers, live in vans, sleeper vans, conversion vans and buses.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION: Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in which merchandise
is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade, or by which a pawn is redeemed, or for
which a unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their point of sale software, or an item
is confiscated by law enforcement, is reportable except:
A. The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer
or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of said
merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of such purchase or consignment
which describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner which relates it to that
transaction record.
B. Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received by a pawn or purchase, and for
which all applicable hold and/or redemption periods have expired.
C. Items purchased from a Minnesota city, county or other political subdivision's law enforcement
agency as an alternative to disposing of unclaimed, impounded, seized or confiscated items
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 135/444
through public auction or sale, as allowed by state statute or local ordinance.
RESTAURANT OR DELI: Every building, structure, vehicle, sidewalk cart, or any part thereof, used
as, maintained as, or advertised as, or held out to be a place where meals, lunches or food are served
or prepared for service elsewhere, except schools, churches and organizations not liable for payment
of state sales tax.
SALE: Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.
SERVICES: Work, labor or services of any kind.
SOLICITEE: The person solicited.
SOLICITOR: Any person making the solicitation, including such common terms as "peddler",
"transient merchant" and "canvasser".
TOBACCO OR TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance or item containing tobacco leaf, including, but
not limited to, cigarettes; cigars; pipe tobacco; snuff; fine cut or other chewing tobacco; cheroots;
stogies; perique; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco; snuff
flowers; cavendish; shorts; plug and twist tobacco; dipping tobaccos; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings
and sweepings of tobacco; and other kind and forms of tobacco leaf prepared in such manner as to be
suitable for chewing, sniffing or smoking.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, or other type of device, which dispenses
tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other
form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco, tobacco
product or tobacco related device. (1976 Code; amd. Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984; Ord. 136,
2nd Series, eff. 12-3-1984; 1992 Code; Ord. 53, 4th Series, eff. 2-13-1995; Ord. 65, 4th Series, eff.
12-18-1995; Ord. 75, 4th Series, eff. 7-1-1996; Ord. 102, 4th Series, eff. 1-1-1998; Ord. 144, 4th
Series, eff. 8-23-1999; Ord. 69, 5th Series, eff. 6-9-2003; Ord. 98, 5th Series, eff. 5-17-2004; Ord. 104,
5th Series, eff. 10-18-2004; Ord. 136, 5th Series, eff. 2-26-2007; Ord. 21, 6th Series, eff. 7-1-2011;
Ord. 44, 6th Series, eff. 10-15-2012)
6.02: APPLICATIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
All applications shall be made as follows:
A. Form Of Application; Information: All applications shall be made at the office of the city
administrator upon forms that have been formulated by the city for such purposes, and which shall
request such information as the city deems necessary to process the application. (1976 Code;
amd. 1992 Code)
B. (Rep. by 1992 Code)
C. (Rep. by 1992 Code)
D. False Statements:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 136/444
1. It is unlawful for any applicant to intentionally make a false statement or omission upon any
application form.
2. Any false statement in such application, or any wilful omission to state any information called for
on such application form shall, upon discovery of such falsehood, work an automatic refusal of
license, or if already issued, shall render any license or permit issued pursuant thereto, void, and
of no effect to protect the applicant from prosecution for violation of this chapter, or any part
hereof. (1976 Code)
E. Investigation; Fee: The city administrator shall, upon receipt of each application completed in
accordance herewith, forthwith investigate the truth of the statements made therein by conducting
a background investigation check, including, but not limited to, local criminal check, driving record,
criminal history check, and the moral character and business reputation of each applicant for a
license. The council shall not consider an application before such investigation has been
completed. The fee for said investigation shall be fixed and determined by the city council, adopted
by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Said application and/or investigation fees may be amended
by the council by resolution. (Ord. 104, 5th Series, eff. 10-18-2004)
F. Renewals: Applications for renewal licenses may be made in such abbreviated form as the council
may by resolution adopt. (1976 Code)
6.03: ACTION ON APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. Granting: The council may grant any application for the period of the remainder of the then current
calendar year or for the entire ensuing license year. All applications, including proposed license
periods, must be consistent with this chapter. (1976 Code)
B. Issuing: If an application is granted, the city administrator shall forthwith issue a license pursuant
thereto in the form prescribed by the council upon proof of ownership, payment of the appropriate
license fee, and approval of the bond or insurance as to form and surety or carrier, if required. All
licenses shall be on a calendar year basis beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Unless
otherwise herein specified, license fees shall be prorated on the basis of one-twelfth (1/12) for each
calendar month, or part thereof remaining in the then current license year. Licenses shall be valid
only at one location and on the premises therein described. In order to effectuate the change in
license year, the city administrator is hereby authorized to credit the applicant for any unearned
portion of a license fee, or charge a prorated amount only. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984)
C. Transfer: A license shall be transferable between persons upon consent of the council and
payment of the investigation fee. No license shall be transferable to a different location without
prior consent of the council and upon payment of the fee for a duplicate license. It is unlawful to
make any transfer in violation of this subsection.
D. Termination: Licenses shall terminate only by expiration or revocation.
E. Refusal And Revocation: The council may, for any reasonable cause, refuse to grant any
application, or revoke any license. No license shall be granted to a person of questionable moral
character or business reputation. Before revocation of any license, the council shall give notice to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 137/444
the licensee and grant such licensee opportunity to be heard. Notice to be given and exact time of
hearing shall be stated in the resolution calling for such hearing.
F. Duplicate License: Duplicates of all original licenses may be issued by the city administrator, without
action by the council, upon licensee's affidavit that the original has been lost, and upon payment of
a fee set by resolution. All duplicate licenses shall be clearly marked "Duplicate". (1976 Code;
amd. 1992 Code)
6.04: CARRYING OR POSTING:
All transient merchants, peddlers and solicitors shall at all times when so engaged, carry their license
on their person. All other licensees shall post their licenses in their place of business near the licensed
activity; provided, however, that in the case of machine or other device licensing, the city may provide
a sticker for the current license year, which shall be affixed to each machine or device requiring such
sticker. All licensees shall display their licenses upon demand by any officer or citizen. (1976 Code)
6.05: PENALTY FOR PROPERTY OWNERS:
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any real property owned or controlled by him to be
used, without a license, for any business for which a license is required by this chapter. (1976 Code)
6.06: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE:
The conduct of agents and employees of a person to whom a license or permit is issued shall be
deemed the conduct of the licensee himself. (1976 Code)
6.07: POSTING AND DISTRIBUTING PRINTED MATTER:
A. Posting: It is unlawful for any person to attach any printed matter of any kind to any public or private
building, bridge, fence, railing, utility pole or billboard, or any other public property, or paint any
advertising matter or sign upon any sidewalk without first having obtained a license therefor from
the city.
B. License Fee: No fee shall be charged for such license.
C. Prohibitions: It is unlawful for any person to attach any printed matter to a vehicle not owned or
controlled by him without the permission of the owner, or insert printed matter in such vehicle
without such permission.
D. Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to posting notices required by law, or to
the distribution of newspapers, or to churches, lodges, schools or other recognized nonprofit
organizations and colleges distributing bills advertising meetings or athletic or other events, or to
any fair association distributing its own advertising matter. (1976 Code; amd. 1992 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 138/444
6.08: CONDITIONAL LICENSES:
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the council may, upon a finding of the necessity
therefor, place such conditions and restrictions upon a license as it, in its discretion, may deem
reasonable and justified. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984)
6.09: LICENSE DENIAL AND FIXING RATES:
A. Right To Deny: The council reserves to itself the right to deny any application for a license to
operate any business licensed or regulated under this chapter where such business involves
service to the public, rates charged for service, use of public streets or other public property by the
applicant or the public, or the public health, safety and convenience. The council may also
consider the location of such business in making such determination.
B. Rates: Where, under specific provisions of this chapter, the council has reserved to itself the right to
fix or approve fees, rates or charges of a licensed or regulated business, such rates shall be
uniform for each category or class of service, and no licensee or proprietor of a regulated business
shall claim or demand payment in excess thereof. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984; amd.
1992 Code)
C. Basis For Denial Of License: The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of
a license under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence
of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license. This section
shall not limit the city in its determination of whether a license should be granted or denied. If a
license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the
person was ineligible for the license under this chapter:
1. Age: The license will be denied if the applicant is under the age of eighteen (18), and the activity
of the license applied for requires that the holder of the license be over the age of eighteen (18),
such as the sale of tobacco and tobacco related products.
2. Violations: The applicant has been convicted within the past five (5) years of any violation of
federal, state or local law, or other regulation relating to the activity for which a license is applied
for.
3. Previous Revocation: The applicant has had a license for that activity revoked within the
preceding twelve (12) months of the date of application.
4. Missing, False Or Misleading Information: The applicant fails to provide any information required
on the application, or provides false or misleading information.
5. Prohibited By Law: The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law, or other
regulation, from holding such a license.
6. Delinquent Taxes: The applicant is delinquent in the payment of state, federal or local taxes.
(Ord. 102, 4th Series, eff. 1-1-1998)
6.10: RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 139/444
Applications for renewal of an existing license shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the date
of expiration of the license, and shall contain such information as is required by the city. This time
requirement may be waived by the council for good and sufficient cause. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-
24-1984)
6.11: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever insurance is required by a section of this chapter, after approval by the council, but before
the license shall issue, the applicant shall file with the city administrator a policy or certificate of public
liability insurance and workers' compensation insurance, showing that: a) the limits are at least as high
as required; b) coverage is effective for at least the license term approved; and c) such insurance will
not be cancelled or terminated without thirty (30) days' written notice served upon the city
administrator. Cancellation or termination of such coverage shall be grounds for license revocation.
(Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984; amd. 1992 Code)
6.12: FIXING LICENSE FEES:
Except as otherwise herein provided, all fees for licenses under this chapter shall be fixed and
determined by the council, adopted by resolution, and uniformly enforced. Such license fees may,
from time to time, be amended by the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution setting forth
currently effective license fees shall be kept on file in the office of the city administrator, and open to
inspection during regular business hours. For the purpose of fixing such fees, the council may
subdivide and categorize licenses under a specific license requirement; provided, that any such
subdivision or categorization shall be included in the resolution authorized by this section. (Ord. 124,
2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984)
6.13: PROCEDURE AND REMEDIES ON LICENSE VIOLATION:
A. Violation Of Law: The holder of a license issued under this chapter shall be in violation of that
license upon that license holder's violation of any state or federal law, or local ordinance relating to
the activity licensed. The violation may be proved to the city either by a certified copy of a
judgment of conviction in a court of record, or upon evidence presented to the city, following notice
and hearing, proving a violation.
1. Notice: Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation, which shall inform the
alleged violator of his/her rights to be heard on the accusation.
2. Hearings: If a person accused of violating this section so requests within ten (10) days of
issuance of the citation, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be
provided to the accused violator. In the event that no hearing is requested, the city council shall
be presented evidence on the violation and, if a violation is found to exist, may proceed as
provided in this section.
3. Hearing Officer: The city council shall serve as the hearing officer, or a hearing officer shall be
appointed by the city council to hear the matter and make a report on facts and proposed
disposition.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 140/444
4. Decision: If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this section did occur, that decision,
along with the hearing officer's reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed
under this section, shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided the accused
violator. Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not
imposing any penalty, such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquitted
accused violator.
5. Appeals: Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the district court
for the jurisdiction of the city in which the alleged violation occurred.
6. Misdemeanor Prosecution: Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the city from seeking
prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this section.
7. Continued Violation: Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall
constitute a separate offense.
8. Sanctions: In the event that the city council finds that a violation has occurred, the city council
may revoke the license, may suspend the license, may impose administrative fines, and may
impose such other sanctions as a condition for continued licensure as will ensure future
compliance by the licensee with applicable law.
B. Suspension; Public Health Or Domestic Peace: The city may, without notice, suspend a license
prior to hearing in the event that it finds that the public health or domestic peace are eminently
threatened by the actions of a licensee conducted under a license issued under this chapter. In the
event that a license is suspended because of an eminent threat to public health or domestic peace,
the city shall immediately notify the licensee of the suspension and shall allow the licensee to be
heard as provided in this section as soon as practicable. (Ord. 102, 4th Series, eff. 1-1-1998)
6.14 - 6.19: RESERVED:
6.20: DANCES:
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings stated:
PUBLIC DANCE: Any dance wherein the public may participate by payment, directly or indirectly,
of an admission fee or price for dancing, which fee may be in the form of a club membership or
payment of money, directly or indirectly.
PUBLIC DANCING PLACE: Any room, place or space open to public patronage in which dancing,
wherein the public may participate, is carried on and to which admission may be had by the public
by payment, directly or indirectly, of an admission fee or price for dancing.
B. License Required; Appeal: It is unlawful for any person to operate a public dancing place, or hold a
public dance, without a license therefor from the city. The chief of police is authorized to issue
licenses for dances without council action, but his denial may be appealed to the council.
C. License Fee: The license fee shall include the cost of providing attendance of a police officer or
officers.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 141/444
D. Application And License:
1. A verified application for a dance license shall be filed with the chief of police and shall specify
the names and addresses of the person, persons, committee or organization that is to hold the
dance, time and place thereof, and the area of the dance floor.
2. All applications shall be accompanied by affidavits of two (2) residents showing that the
applicant is of good character and reputation in the community in which he lives, that he has not
been convicted of a felony, gross misdemeanor or violation of any public dance laws within the
past five (5) years. No license shall be issued to any person who has been so convicted.
3. No license shall be granted for any place having so called "private apartments" or "private
rooms" furnished or used for any purposes other than a legitimate business purpose which
adjoins such dancing place, or which may be reached by stairs, elevators or passageway
leading from such dancing place. Nor shall a license be granted for any place which is not
properly ventilated and equipped with necessary toilets, washrooms or lighting facilities.
4. At least one officer of the law shall be designated by the chief of police and employed by the city
to be present at every public dance during the entire time said dance is being held. For purposes
of this subsection, the term "officer of the law" means any person who is a full time or part time
peace officer. In the discretion of the council or chief of police, more than one such peace officer
may be required.
5. The dance license shall be posted in the public dancing place and shall state the name of the
licensee, the amount paid therefor, and the time and place licensed. The license shall also state
that the licensee is responsible for the manner of conducting the dance. The hours of the dance
shall be included in the license.
6. No license shall be issued to any applicant under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 124, 2nd
Series, eff. 9-24-1984; amd. 1992 Code)
6.21: SHOWS:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any person to present any public show, movie, caravan, circus,
carnival, theatrical or other performance or exhibition without first having obtained a license
therefor from the city. (1976 Code)
B. (Rep. by Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-10-1984)
C. Exceptions:
1. Performances presented in the local schools, artistic or music teachers and colleges, under the
sponsorship of such schools, artistic or music teachers and colleges, and primarily for the
students thereof only.
2. Performances of athletic, musical or theatrical events sponsored by local schools or colleges
using student talent only.
3. Any performance or event in, or sponsored by, bona fide local church and nonprofit
organizations; provided, that such organization shall be incorporated. (1976 Code; amd. 1992
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 142/444
Code)
6.22: TOBACCO:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, to keep for retail sale, sell at
retail, or otherwise dispose of any tobacco in any form, unless a license therefor shall first be
obtained from the city.
B. Moveable Place Of Business: No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only
fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this section.
C. License Display: All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public or the
licensed premises. Each licensee shall post, in a prominent location, a city approved sign stating
that it is illegal to sell tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices to anyone under the
age of eighteen (18) years, and that the possession and use of such items by minors is illegal
under state law.
D. Vending Machines: It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this section to allow the sale
of tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine,
unless minors are at all times prohibited from entering the licensed establishment.
E. Free Distribution Of Tobacco: No person licensed under this section shall distribute free samples of
tobacco or tobacco related products, nor shall such licensed person distribute tobacco or tobacco
related products in exchange for coupons or "proofs of purchase", or for any consideration other
than money.
F. Free Distribution Of Tobacco Promotional Products Prohibited: No person licensed under this
section shall distribute free items advertising or promoting the use or sale of tobacco or tobacco
related products, or bearing the brand name or trademark of tobacco or tobacco related products,
nor shall such licensed person distribute items advertising or promoting the use or sale of tobacco
or tobacco related products or bearing the brand name or trademark of tobacco or tobacco related
products in exchange for coupons or "proof of purchases", or for any consideration other than
money.
G. Promotion Of Events Prohibited: No person licensed under this section shall promote the sale or
use of tobacco or tobacco related products through the sponsorship of public events or sports
teams.
H. Self-Service Sales Prohibited: No person licensed under this section shall permit the sale of
tobacco or tobacco related products by means of self-service methods whereby the customer does
not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in order to
receive the tobacco or tobacco related product, and whereby there is not a physical exchange of
the tobacco or tobacco related product between the licensee and the licensee's employee and the
customer.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 143/444
I. Administrative Penalties:
1. Licensees: Any licensee found to have violated this section or whose employee shall have
violated this section or state or federal laws relating to the sale and distribution of tobacco, shall
be charged an administrative fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation of this
section; two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second offense at the same licensed premises
within a twenty four (24) month period; and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or
subsequent offense at the same location within a twenty four (24) month period. In addition, after
the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven (7) days.
2. Other Individuals: An individual who is found to have violated this section, or state or federal
laws relating to the sale and distribution of tobacco, shall be charged an administrative penalty of
fifty dollars ($50.00). Failure by the individual to pay the administrative penalty may be cause for
suspension or revocation of the license under which the tobacco was sold or distributed.
3. Misdemeanor: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a
misdemeanor for any violation of this section. (Ord. 102, 4th Series, eff. 1-1-1998)
6.23: TAXICABS:
A. Definitions: The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated:
OPERATOR: Any person owning or having control of the use of one or more taxicabs used for hire
upon the streets or engaged in the business or operation of a taxicab within the city.
STREET: Any street, alley, avenue, bridge, land or public place in the city.
TAXI DRIVER: Any person who drives a taxicab, whether such person be the owner of such
taxicab or employed by a taxicab owner or operator.
TAXICAB: Any motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire,
having a seating capacity of less than seven (7) persons and not operated on a fixed route.
B. License Required: No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by such owner
to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city without being licensed by the city
council, provided that any taxicab license to operate in any other municipality of this state may
carry passengers from said municipality where so licensed to any place or point in the city and may
receive passengers for carriage to such municipality where so licensed, but owners and drivers of
such vehicles shall not be permitted to solicit business in the city or otherwise operate a taxicab on
the streets of the city without being licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
C. License:
1. Application: An application for a license shall be filed with the city administrator upon forms
provided. Said application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:
a. The name and address of the applicant;
b. The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against
the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 144/444
c. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;
d. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant;
e. The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant;
and
f. Such further information as the city council may require.
2. Public Hearing: Upon the filing of an application, the council may, at its option, fix a time and
place for a public hearing thereon.
3. Issuance Of License: If the council finds that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform such
public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated
by the city council, the city council shall issue a license stating the name and address of the
applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under said license and the date of issuance;
otherwise, the application shall be denied.
4. Council Consideration: In making the above findings, the city council shall consider that:
a. "Fit" includes whether the applicant and drivers for the applicant's company have not had their
driving privileges suspended, revoked, or canceled within one year of the date of application,
have not been convicted of any crime directly relating to the safe operation of a taxicab, as
defined by Minnesota statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 2, or have shown sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the occupation of taxicab driver, as
defined by Minnesota statutes, section 364.03, subdivision 3;
b. "Willing" includes the applicant will make available taxicab service throughout the city; and
c. "Able" includes the applicant has access to financial resources to obtain the necessary
vehicle(s), equipment, and insurance to provide the taxicab service proposed.
d. Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections, the city's determination of whether an applicant is
"fit, willing and able" may not be based on information unrelated to the applicant or the
applicant's business. Information that is unrelated to the applicant or the applicant's business
includes, but is not limited to, the state of the market for taxi services and another provider or
providers.
5. Fee: No license shall be issued or continued in operation unless the owner thereof has paid an
annual license fee as established by the council by resolution.
6. Liability Insurance Required: No license shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is
in full force and effect a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to
do business in the state of Minnesota for each vehicle authorized in the amount of three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limits. Such insurance shall cover all
passengers carried by the insured licensee and shall be for public taxicab purposes. Said policy
or certificate of the insurer showing issuance of the policy shall be filed in the office of the city
administrator. The required insurance policy shall be endorsed to provide that the coverage
afforded under the contract will not be canceled or allowed to expire until at least thirty (30) days
prior written notice has been given to the city.
7. Mechanical Condition: Before issuing a taxicab license, the applicant shall present to the city a
certificate signed by a person who is competent and experienced in the operation and
maintenance of motor vehicles that the taxicab conveyance is in good mechanical condition. It
shall be a continuing requirement for such licenses that each taxicab licensed hereunder be in a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 145/444
thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers and be clean and of good
appearance. Other certification, examination and tests of licensed taxicabs may be ordered by
the council from time to time. In lieu of such certificate, the council may accept the report of the
chief of police relative thereto.
8. Prohibition Of Use: In the event a taxicab is found not to be in satisfactory condition as
prescribed by this section, the council may summarily prohibit the use of said taxicab until such
time as the taxicab is in compliance. Such a prohibition shall be in writing and shall set forth the
specific deficiencies of the taxicab, the corrective action required and the necessity of further
satisfactory examination of the taxicab before it can be placed in operation as a taxicab.
9. Restrictions: No person, either the operator or employee of such operator, shall drive a taxicab
in the city without first having been licensed in accordance with the state law.
D. Drivers: All taxicab drivers shall be clean and courteous at all times and shall be fully attired with
suitable clothing and footwear.
E. Transfer: No license may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise transferred, without the
consent of the city council.
F. Suspension And Revocation Of License: A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked or suspended by the city council if the licensee has:
1. Violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
2. Discontinued operations for more than forty five (45) days;
3. Violated any ordinance or code of the city or the laws of the United States or the state of
Minnesota, with said violations making it illegal or unsafe for the licensee to offer public
transportation.
Prior to the suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given notice of the proposed action
to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard thereon. (Ord. 44, 6th Series, eff. 10-15-
2012)
6.24: GARBAGE AND REFUSE HAULERS:
A. Definitions: The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the meanings stated:
GARBAGE: All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but
excluding human excreta, sewage and other water carried wastes.
OTHER REFUSE: Ashes, glass, crockery, cans, paper, boxes, rags and similar nonputrescible
wastes, but excluding sand, earth, brick, stone, concrete, trees, tree branches and wood.
B. License Required: It is unlawful for any person to haul garbage or other refuse for hire without a
license therefor from the city, or to haul garbage or other refuse from his own residence or
business property other than as herein excepted. (1976 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 146/444
C. (Rep. by Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-10-1984)
D. Exception: Nothing in this section shall prevent persons from hauling garbage or other refuse from
their own residences or business properties, provided the following rules are observed: 1) all
garbage is hauled in containers that are watertight on all sides and the bottom and with tightfitting
covers on top; 2) all other refuse is hauled in vehicles leakproof for the type of cargo being hauled,
and completely covered or enclosed by canvas or other means of material so as to completely
eliminate the possibility of loss of cargo; and 3) all garbage and other refuse shall be dumped or
unloaded only at an authorized disposal site.
E. Rules And Regulations: Each licensee shall conform to all reasonable rules and regulations for the
hauling of garbage or refuse as may from time to time be provided by the council. The city
administrator shall notify each such licensee in writing whenever the council makes any such rules
or regulations and the same may be made by a motion or resolution of the council. (1976 Code)
6.25: PLUMBERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 33, 6th Series, eff. 12-5-2011)
6.26: GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES:
A. License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to advertise or conduct
any sale of goods, wares or merchandise, at retail, which is represented as a bankrupt, insolvent,
assignee, adjusters, trustees, executors, administrators, receivers, wholesalers, jobbers,
manufacturers, liquidators, closing stock, fire or water damage, closing out, going out of business,
or any other sale which is by representation or advertisement intended to lead the public to believe
that the person, firm or corporation conducting such sale will not continue in the same business
after all of the goods, wares or merchandise offered for sale have been sold, without first filing with
the chief of police the inventory hereinafter provided for, and obtaining from the city administrator a
license to conduct such a sale, to be known as a going out of business sale license. Such licenses
shall be issued by the city administrator upon production of:
1. A receipt from the city administrator showing payment of the proper license fees as hereinafter
provided; and
2. An acknowledgment from the chief of police that a satisfactory inventory has been filed. (Ord.
619, eff. 10-14-1958)
B. (Rep. by Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-10-1984)
C. Inventory:
1. The inventory required in subsection A of this section to be filed with the chief of police shall
contain:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 147/444
a. A listing of all goods, wares and merchandise which have been in stock for a period of fifteen
(15) days or longer prior to the filing of the inventory, together with the wholesale price thereof.
b. A listing of all goods, wares and merchandise received in stock within the fifteen (15) days
immediately preceding the filing of the inventory, together with the wholesale price thereof.
c. A list of all goods, wares and merchandise which have been ordered and will be placed in
stock during the sale, together with the wholesale price thereof.
d. A statement of the method by which the applicant for the license or the true owner of the
goods, wares and merchandise if a different person, acquired title to the same.
e. A statement of the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal thereof by means of a going
out of business sale. The wholesale prices of goods, ware and merchandise listed in the
foregoing inventory shall be held confidential and shall not be disclosed to any city employee
or other person not directly involved in the licensing process.
2. The inventory shall be signed by the person seeking the license, or by his or its authorized
resident agent, and such inventory shall be accompanied by the oath of the person seeking the
license, or by his or its authorized resident agent, that the statements contained in the inventory
are true and correct. A copy of the inventory without wholesale prices shall be posted by the
licensee in a conspicuous place in his or its business establishment. It shall be unlawful to sell,
offer or expose for sale at any such going out of business sale, any goods, wares or
merchandise which are not included in the inventory submitted. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, or corporation conducting a licensed going out of business sale to add any goods,
wares or merchandise to the stock during the continuance of the sale except goods, wares or
merchandise inventoried as on order. Each act of selling, offering or exposing for sale of any
goods, wares or merchandise not included in the inventory submitted, shall constitute a separate
offense under this section. The person, firm or corporation conducting a going out of business
sale under a license granted pursuant to the terms of this section shall keep an accurate record
of the goods, wares and merchandise sold, from which record the chief of police may determine
the kind and quantity sold.
D. Investigation Of Extraordinary Or Large Inventory: At any time when it appears to the chief of police
from the inventory submitted by an applicant for a going out of business sale license that an
extraordinarily or unusually large amount of goods, wares or merchandise are on order in
comparison with goods on hand, the chief of police shall not acknowledge to the city administrator
that a satisfactory inventory has been received, as provided in subsection A of this section, but
shall, in lieu thereof, deliver the inventory submitted to the city administrator with the instruction
that the said inventory be submitted to the council for approval prior to the issuance of a license.
The city administrator shall forthwith deliver the said inventory to the chairperson of the license
committee of the council. The license committee shall forthwith contact the applicant for a going
out of business sale license and shall determine whether the goods, wares or merchandise on
order substantially exceed the normal and usual amount of "on order" goods, wares and
merchandise of this particular business at the particular time of the year when the going out of
business sale license is applied for, and whether a substantial portion of the goods, wares or
merchandise on order has been ordered especially for the going out of business sale to be
conducted. In the event the license committee determines that a substantial portion of the goods,
wares or merchandise on order exceeds normal and usual business requirements and has been
ordered especially for the going out of business sale to be conducted, the license committee shall
recommend to the council that the inventory be disapproved and the city administrator be
instructed to reject the application for a going out of business sale license. Otherwise, the license
committee shall recommend to the council that the inventory be approved and that the city
administrator be instructed to issue the going out of business sale license applied for.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 148/444
E. Regulation Of Sale: The chief of police may, in his discretion, verify the details of the inventory filed
for the purpose of obtaining a going out of business sale license, and he may check and verify the
items of goods, wares and merchandise sold during such sale. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to whom a going out of business sale license has been issued to fail or refuse
to give to the chief of police or any person designated by him any facts or records necessary for a
proper check or verification of the inventory filed or goods, wares and merchandise sold during the
going out of business sale.
F. Not Applicable To Certain Sales: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the advertisement
or conduct of sales by sheriffs, constables, marshals or other public or court officers in
performance of their official duties as such, or to trustees in bankruptcy, or any other person or
persons acting under the direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling merchandise in
the course of their official duties.
G. Food Items Exempt: The provisions of this section shall not apply to perishable items of food sold
by any person, firm or corporation during a going out of business sale otherwise properly licensed
under the terms of this section.
H. Revocation Of License: The council may suspend or revoke any going out of business sale license
for any violation of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 619, eff. 10-14-1958)
I. Extension Of License: If at any time during the period for which a going out of business sale license
has been issued, a sworn application is filed with the city administrator indicating that all of the
goods, wares or merchandise listed in the original inventory have not been sold, and that the
licensee has in good faith attempted to sell or otherwise dispose of all the goods, wares or
merchandise listed in the original inventory during the period for which the going out of business
sale license has been originally issued, together with an inventory of the goods, wares or
merchandise which remain, the council may extend the license for an additional period not to
exceed thirty (30) days and upon payment of an additional license fee, the license shall continue in
effect as authorized. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984)
J. Consignment Sales: No going out of business sale license shall be issued to any applicant who
shall list in the inventory submitted pursuant to subsections A and B of this section, goods, wares
or merchandise "on order" on a consignment sale basis or other similar basis where the title to
goods, wares or merchandise is in a person other than the applicant for a going out of business
sale license, and the goods, wares or merchandise may be returned to such other person, if not
sold, without loss to the applicant.
K. Existing Sales: The provisions of this section shall not apply to going out of business sales already
in progress on the date this section becomes effective.
L. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or
by imprisonment for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days. (Ord. 619, eff. 10-14-1958)
6.27: SIDEWALK CAFES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 149/444
A. License Required: Any establishment in the city which is licensed by the appropriate health
inspection department to sell food for consumption on designated premises may apply to the city
council for a special license to conduct a portion of such licensed business in a sidewalk cafe on a
part of the public way immediately adjoining the licensed premises. Before such license is issued,
a public hearing before the city council and the planning commission or the heritage preservation
commission, if the request is in the Little Falls historic district or for property designated as heritage
preservation site, shall be held and such license shall conform with subsection B of this section
and any other conditions as so required by the city council.
B. Restrictions:
1. Each license issued pursuant to this section shall specify the area in which such a cafe may be
operated; provided, that no sale or service shall be permitted in any portion of the street
designated for vehicular travel.
2. The license does not authorize any permanent installation to be placed on or in the way, or
permit the placing or leaving on the sidewalk of any tables, chairs, furnishings or other
equipment during any periods of time such cafe is not open and being operated.
3. Sidewalks will be required to be cleaned daily by the license holder and outside trash disposal
and electricity will be provided from within the establishment.
4. A scaled diagram will be required to be submitted with information as requested on the
application, including, but not limited to, the dimension of the sidewalk cafe area, position of
tables, fixtures and anything else to be placed on the sidewalk, and the width of the sidewalk
remaining for pedestrian use.
5. Any requests for a sidewalk cafe license for establishments will be limited to placement of tables
and other items immediately adjacent to their premises only; provided, that a minimum of five
feet (5') of sidewalk width remains for pedestrians.
6. No such license shall authorize a sidewalk cafe at any location where the same is prohibited by
state law, or the city code, or for the arts and craft fair, except as provided herein.
7. Except as specifically provided herein, the ownership, operation and maintenance of a sidewalk
cafe shall be subject to all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
8. No sidewalk cafe license shall be issued to any establishment holding any "on" or "off sale"
liquor, wine or beer license.
C. Special License Procedures:
1. An applicant for a license under this section shall file an application on forms provided by the
city administrator.
2. The city administrator shall also notify the manager of city services, police chief, fire chief, the
appropriate health inspector and the Minnesota department of transportation, should the
sidewalk cafe be on a trunk highway, of such application and they shall make each report to the
city administrator and make such recommendations within seven (7) days as they deem
appropriate.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 150/444
3. The recommendation of these department heads and appropriate bodies will be necessary
before such application shall be reported to the planning commission, or heritage preservation
commission and city council for their action.
D. Insurance Required:
1. No license authorized by this section shall be effective until the applicant therefor has filed with
the city administrator evidence of insurance insuring the applicant against liability imposed by
law arising out of ownership, maintenance or operation of such sidewalk cafe in amounts of at
least one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for the injury or death of one person,
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the injury or death of two (2) persons, and ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for damage to property.
2. The city shall be named as an additional insured by the licensee insured in the policy providing
such insurance, and such policy shall further provide that it may not be cancelled except upon
ten (10) days written notice filed with the city administrator.
3. No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be valid at any time the
insurance required herein is not maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the city
administrator. (Ord. 8, 4th Series, 7-19-1993)
6.28: LARGE SCALE STREET AND SIDEWALK EVENTS LICENSES AND
REGULATED PARKING:
A. Purpose: In order to regulate the assembly of large numbers of people for a large scale street and
sidewalk event, whose presence in the city can reasonably be anticipated to exceed the ordinary
capability of the health, sanitary, fire, police, transportation and utility services provided by the city,
the city hereby establishes the following regulations.
B. License Required:
1. It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant to offer for sale, trade or barter any goods within
the city during the large scale street and sidewalk event period without an appropriate license as
outlined herein.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to sponsor or promote sales by unlicensed
itinerant merchants within the city during the large scale street and sidewalk event period without
an appropriate license as outlined herein.
3. It shall be unlawful for any food/beverage vendor to offer for sale, trade or barter any food or
beverages within the city during the large scale street and sidewalk event period without an
appropriate license as outlined herein.
4. It shall be unlawful for an unlicensed itinerant merchant to sell goods within the city during the
large scale street and sidewalk event period.
C. Sponsorship License:
1. Large scale street and sidewalk events shall be organized and sponsored by nonprofit
organizations under one or more licenses issued by the city council. Application for a large scale
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 151/444
street and sidewalk event license shall be made at least thirty (30) days prior to the large scale
street and sidewalk event period. The city council may grant one or more large scale street and
sidewalk event sponsorship licenses annually. In granting a license, the city council shall
consider the ability of the applicant to manage the event, and whether the benefit to the public in
granting the license outweighs the public inconvenience associated with the event. Any
application may be denied if the city council finds that the inconvenience to the public outweighs
the public benefit expected to be realized from the event.
2. Included in the application for a sponsorship license shall be such information as the city council
may require, including, but not limited to, the expected number of itinerant merchants, the
number of individuals expected to attend the large scale street and sidewalk event, plans for
sanitary facilities, security officers and emergency services access. The application shall include
a plan for allocating itinerant merchants and food/beverage vendor licenses between public and
private property. The application shall include information on projected costs and expenses for
the large scale street and sidewalk event. The application shall include a map establishing a
large scale street and sidewalk event district and showing the boundaries of the district within
which the event will be held. The application shall include a plan for allocating itinerant merchant
licenses between public and private property, and at least ten percent (10%) of the total itinerant
merchant and food/beverage vendors licenses shall be designated for private property. The city
council may require diversion of traffic or closing of streets as a condition of granting the license.
The application shall state objective criteria for selecting itinerant merchants and food/beverage
vendors to participate in the event.
3. The city council shall require, as a condition of covering the sponsor's activities naming the city
as an additional insured in such amount as the city council may require.
4. The city council may require, as a condition of granting a sponsorship license, that the
sponsoring organization reimburse the city for costs of sanitation, traffic control, security and
other costs incurred by the city.
5. The sponsoring organization may charge a reasonable fee as a condition of participating in the
large scale street and sidewalk event. The sponsoring organization may designate where the
itinerant merchants and food/beverage vendors shall set up their booths within the large scale
street and sidewalk event district.
6. In the event that one or more organizations file applications for large scale street and sidewalk
events during the same time or for the same area, or an organization files an application for a
large scale street and sidewalk event during the time another organization has been granted
such a license, the city shall require the applicants to coordinate plans for designating districts,
restricting sales by itinerant merchants, sharing costs of the events and such other issues as the
city may deem appropriate. In the event that the organizations are unable to coordinate their
plans the city council may, in its discretion, rescind or deny one or more of the applications, or
impose such additional conditions on the license as are appropriate to provide for the public
welfare, safety and convenience.
7. The city may, as part of the license, permit the complete or partial obstruction of city streets,
sidewalks, parks and/or parking lots during the large scale street and sidewalk event period.
D. Use Of City Parks, Parking Lots And Property: During the large scale street and sidewalk event
period, the city may permit one or more groups to have exclusive control of city parks, parking lots
and charge a fee for the use thereof. Facilitation of the large scale street and sidewalk event and
local nonprofit groups shall receive first consideration for such use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 152/444
E. Itinerant Merchant License: An organization holding a sponsorship license shall make application at
least thirty (30) days prior to the large scale street and sidewalk event time for itinerant merchant
licenses for all itinerant merchants participating in the large scale street and sidewalk event. The
city council shall by resolution set the number of itinerant merchant licenses issued annually under
the sponsorship license. The sponsoring organization may make selections from those individuals
desiring an itinerant merchant license based upon objective criteria designed to promote the
sponsoring organization's goals for the large scale street and sidewalk event. The application for
an itinerant merchant license shall contain the name, address, social security or tax identification
number and sales tax number of the applicant and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be
set by the city council by resolution.
F. Food/Beverage Vendor License: An organization holding a sponsorship license shall make
application at least thirty (30) days prior to the large scale street and sidewalk event period for
food/beverage vendor licenses for all food/beverage vendors participating in the event. The
sponsoring organization may make selections from those individuals desiring a food/beverage
vendor license based upon objective criteria designed to promote the sponsoring organization's
goals for the large scale street and sidewalk event. The application for a food/beverage vendor
license shall be accompanied by such fees as may be set by the city council by resolution.
G. License Must Be Conspicuously Posted: The approved itinerant merchant license or food/beverage
vendor license must be posted in plain view at each individual vendor's area, together with any
licenses or permits issued by the Minnesota department of public health or Morrison County public
health.
H. Violators May Be Expelled: Itinerant merchants and food/beverage vendors violating the provisions
of this chapter may be expelled from the event, or from the city for the duration of the large scale
street and sidewalk event period.
I. Parking Of Recreational Vehicles: The city council may by resolution set a restricted parking
distance for recreational vehicles parked on any public street or public parking lot, except in those
areas specifically designated for recreational vehicles during the large scale street and sidewalk
event period. (Ord. 69, 5th Series, eff. 6-9-2003)
6.29: RESERVED:
6.30: JUNK DEALERS, SECONDHAND STORES AND PAWNSHOPS:
A. License Required: It is unlawful for any person to be engaged in the business of pawnbroker,
secondhand store or junk dealer without having a license therefor from the city. (1976 Code; amd.
1992 Code)
B. Business Location: A license under this section authorizes the licensee to carry on its business only
at the permanent place of business designated in the license, however, upon written request, the
police chief or his/her designee, may approve an off site locked and secured storage facility. The
licensee shall permit inspection of the facility in accordance with this section. All provisions of this
section regarding record keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its contents. Property shall
be stored in compliance with all provisions in this code. The licensee must either own the building
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 153/444
in which the business is conducted, and any approved off site storage facility, or have a lease on
the business premises that extends for more than six (6) months.
C. License Fees: The annual license fees for license issued under this section shall be set by city
council resolution.
1. Billable Transaction License Fee: The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of
processing transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined by the city council,
and shall be reviewed and adjusted, if necessary, annually. Licensees shall be notified in writing
thirty (30) days before any adjustment is implemented. These fees will be set by resolution.
2. Monthly Billing: Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due and payable within
thirty (30) days. Failure to do so is a violation of this chapter.
D. Application:
1. New Applicant: Every new applicant must provide all the following information:
a. If the applicant is a natural person.
b. The name, place and date of birth, street resident address, phone number of applicant.
c. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or resident alien.
d. Whether the applicant has ever been known by a name other than the applicant's name, and
if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and places used.
e. The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a designation, name or style other
than the name of the applicant and a certified copy of the certificate as required by Minnesota
statutes section 333.01.
f. The street address at which the applicant has lived during the preceding five (5) years.
g. The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has been
engaged during the last five (5) years and the name and address of the applicant's employer
and partner, if any, in the preceding five (5) years.
h. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, crime or violation of any
ordinance, other than a traffic ordinance. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the
time, place and offense of all such convictions.
i. The physical description of the applicant.
j. Applicant's current personal financial statement and true copies of the applicant's federal and
state tax returns for the two (2) years prior to the application.
k. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manger or other person in
charge of the business and all the information concerning each of them is required as outlined
in subsections D1a through D1i of this section.
2. Partnership: Every new partnership must provide all the following information:
a. The names and addresses of all general and limited partners, and all information concerning
each general partner in subsection D1a of this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 154/444
b. The name of the managing partner and the interest of each partner in the licensed business.
c. A true copy of partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the partnership
is required to file a certificate as to trade name pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 333.01,
a certified copy of such certificate must be attached to the application.
d. A true copy of the federal and state tax returns for partnership for the two (2) years prior to
application.
e. If the applicant does not manage the business, the name of the manager or other person in
charge of the business and all information concerning each of them is required in subsections
D1a through D1i of this section.
3. Corporation Or Other Organization: If the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the
following information must be provided:
a. The name of the corporation or business firm, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation.
b. True copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of incorporation or association agreement
and bylaws shall be attached to the application if the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by Minnesota statutes section 303.06, must be attached.
c. The name of the manager or other person in charge of the business and all information
concerning each manager, proprietor, or agent required in subsections D1a through D1i of this
section.
d. A list of all such persons who control or own an interest in excess of five percent (5%) in such
organization or business firm who are officers of the corporation or business firm, and all
information concerning said persons required in subsection D1 of this section, except the
requirements of subsection D1e of this section shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is
publicly traded on a stock exchange and is applying for a license to be owned and operated by
it.
4. All Applicants: All applicants must provide all the following information:
a. Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or secondhand
goods dealer license from any other governmental unit.
b. Whether the applicant has previously been denied, or had revoked or suspended, a
pawnbroker, precious metal dealer or secondhand dealer license from any other governmental
unit.
c. The location of the business premises.
d. If the applicant does not own the business premises, a true and complete copy of the
executed lease.
e. The legal description of the premises to be leased.
f. Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises
to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid.
g. Whenever the application is for the premises either planned or under construction or
undergoing substantial alteration, the applicant must be accompanied by a set of preliminary
plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be licensed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 155/444
h. Such other information as the city council or issuing authority may require.
5. New Manager: When a licensee places a manager in charge of a business, or if the name of the
manager in charge of a licensed business changes, the licensee must complete and submit the
appropriate application within fourteen (14) days. The application must include all appropriate
information required in this section:
a. Cost Of Investigation: Upon completion of an investigation of a new manager, the licensee
must pay an amount equal to the cost of the investigation to assure compliance with this
chapter. If the investigation process is conducted solely within the state, the fee shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00). If the investigation is conducted outside the state, the issuing
authority may recover the actual investigation costs not exceeding ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00).
6. Application Execution: All applicants for a license under this section must be signed and sworn
to under oath or affirmation by the applicant. If the application is that of a natural person, it must
be signed and sworn to by such person; if that of a corporation, by an officer thereof; if that of a
partnership, by one of the general partners; and if that of an unincorporated association, by the
manager or managing officer thereof.
7. Investigation: The police department must investigate into the truthfulness of statements set
forth in the application and shall endorse the findings thereon. The applicant must furnish to the
police department such evidence as the inspector may reasonably require in support of the
statements set forth in the application.
8. Public Hearing: The council may request a public hearing.
9. Person Ineligible For License: No license under this section shall be issued to an applicant who
is a natural person; a partnership, if such application has any general partner or managing
partner; a corporation or other organization, if such applicant has any manager, proprietor or
agent in charge of the business to be licensed; or if the applicant:
a. Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;
b. Has been convicted of a crime directly related to the occupation licensed as prescribed by
Minnesota statues section 364.03, subdivision 2, and has not shown competent evidence of
sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under this
chapter as prescribed by Minnesota statutes section 364.03, subdivision 3; or
c. Is not of good moral character or repute.
E. Requirements:
1. Bond Required: Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00) bond on the forms provided by the licensing authority. All bonds must be
conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in relation to pawnbrokers, and will conduct
business in conformity thereto, and that the principal will account for and deliver to any person
legally entitled any goods which have come into the principal's hand through the principal's
business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value in money to the
person. The bond shall contain a provision that no bond may be canceled except upon thirty (30)
days' written notice to the city, which shall be served upon the licensing authority.
2. Records Required: At the time of any reportable transaction, other than renewals, extensions,
redemptions or confiscations, every licensee must immediately record in English the following
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 156/444
information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record
approved by the police department:
a. A complete and accurate description of each item, including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name or other identifying mark on
such an item.
b. The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon or pledged therefor.
c. The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including monthly and annual
interest rates, and all pawn fees and charges.
d. Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee, and the unique alpha
and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the
licensee records.
e. Full name, current address, current residence telephone number, date of birth and accurate
description of the person from whom the item of the property was received, including sex,
height, weight, race, color of eyes and color of hair.
f. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of
the seller:
(1) Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
(2) Current valid Minnesota identification card.
(3) Current valid photo identification card issued by another state or province of Canada.
g. The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
h. Effective sixty (60) days from the date of notification by the police department of acceptable
video standards, license must also take a digital color photograph or digital color video
recording of:
(1) Each customer involved in a billable transaction.
(2) Every item pawned or sold that does not have a unique serial identification number
permanently engraved or affixed.
If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches (2") in length by two inches (2") in
width, and must be maintained in such a manner that the photograph can be readily
matched and correlated with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. Such
photographs must be available to the police chief or his/her designee, upon request. The
major portion of the photograph must include an identifiable facial image of the person who
pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be accurately depicted. The licensee
must inform the person that he or she is being photographed by displaying a sign of
sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises. If a digital photo is taken, the digital
video camera must focus on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an
identifiable image of that person's face. Items photographed by digital video must be
accurately depicted. Digital video photographs must be electronically referenced by time
and date so they can be readily matched or correlated with all other records of the
transaction to which they relate. The licensee must inform the person he or she is being
videotaped by displaying a sign of sufficient size n a conspicuous place on the premises.
The license must keep the digital recordings for six (6) months.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 157/444
i. For renewals, extensions, redemptions and confiscations, the licensee shall provide the
original transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and the type of transaction.
j. The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection by the police department or
department of licenses and consumer services. Data entries shall be retained for at least three
(3) years from the date of the transaction. Entries of required digital images shall be retained a
minimum of ninety (90) days.
3. Receipt Required: Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified in every
reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt for three (3) years. The
receipt must include at least the following information:
a. The name, address and telephone number of the licensed business.
b. The date and time the item was received by the licensee.
c. Whether the item was pawned or sold, or the nature of the transaction.
d. An accurate description of each item received, including, but not limited to, any trademark,
identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on
such an item.
e. The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee that conducted the transaction.
f. The amount advanced or paid.
g. The monthly and annual interest rates, including all pawn fees and charges.
h. The full name, current residence address, current phone number and date of birth of the
pledger or seller.
i. The identification number and state of issue from any of the following forms of identification of
the seller:
(1) Current valid Minnesota driver's license.
(2) Current valid Minnesota identification card.
(3) Current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by another state or
province of Canada.
j. Description of the pledger or seller, including sex, approximate height, weight, race, color of
eyes and color of hair.
k. The signature of the pledger or seller.
l. All printed statements as required by Minnesota statutes section 325J.04, subdivision 2, or any
other applicable statutes.
F. Daily Reports To Police Department:
1. Automated Pawn System: Effective no later than sixty (60) days after the police department
provides licensees with the current version of the automated pawn system interchange file
specification, licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the police department daily
in the following manner:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 158/444
Licensees must provide to the police department all reportable transaction information by
transferring it from their computer to the automated pawn system via modem using the current
version of the automated pawn system interchange file specification. All required records must
be transmitted completely and accurately after the close of the business each day in accordance
with standards and procedures established by the issuing authority. Any transaction that does
not meet the automated pawn system interchange file specification must be corrected and
resubmitted the next business day. Licensee must display a sign of sufficient size, in a
conspicuous place in the premises, which informs patrons that all transactions are reported to
the police department daily.
2. Billable Transaction Fees: Licensees will be charged for each billable transaction reported to the
police department.
a. If licensee is unable to successfully transfer the reports by modem, the licensee must provide
the police department, upon request, printed copies of all reportable transactions along with
the videotapes for that date, by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon the next business day.
b. If the problem is determined to be the licensee's system and is not corrected by the close of
the first business day following the failure, the licensee must continue to provide the required
reports as detailed in subsection F2a of this section, and shall be charged a twenty five dollar
($25.00) reporting failure penalty, daily, until the error is corrected.
c. If the problem is determined to be outside the licensees system, the licensee must continue to
provide the required reports as detailed in subsection F2a of this section, and resubmit all
such transactions via modem when the error is corrected.
d. If licensee is unable to capture, digitize or transmit the photographs required in subsection
E2h of this section, the licensee must immediately take all required photographs with a still
camera, cross reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and make the pictures
available to the police department upon request. This would be in the event that the required
digital system has failed and must be approved by the chief.
e. Regardless of the cause or origin of the technical problems that prevented the licensee from
uploading their reportable transactions, upon correction of the problem, the licensee shall
upload every reportable transaction from every day the problem had existed.
f. Notwithstanding subsections F2a through c of this section, the police department may, upon
presentation of extenuating circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting
penalty.
G. Redemption And Holding Period:
1. Redemption Period: Any person pledging, pawning or depositing an item for security must have
a minimum of sixty (60) days from the date of that transaction to redeem the item before it may
be forfeited and sold. During the sixty (60) day holding period, items may not be removed from
the licensed location, except as provided in subsection E2j of this section.
2. Holding Period: Any item purchased or accepted in a trade by a licensee must not be sold or
otherwise transferred for thirty (30) days from the date of the transaction. An individual may
redeem an item seventy two (72) hours after the item was received on deposit, excluding
Sundays and legal holidays.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 159/444
H. Hold, Confiscation And Inspection:
1. Investigative Hold: Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a licensee not
to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold
shall be confirmed in writing by the originating agency within seventy two (72) hours and will
remain in effect for fifteen (15) days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative
order has been canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued, pursuant to subsection
H2 of this section, whichever comes first.
2. Order To Hold: Whenever the chief of police, or his/her designee, notifies a licensee not to sell
an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be
released by the chief, or his/her designee. The order to hold shall expire ninety (90) days from
the date it is placed, unless the police chief or his/her designee determines the hold is still
necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
3. Order To Confiscate: If any item is identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case, the chief or
his/her designee may:
a. Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to a written order from the chief
or the chief's designee; or
b. Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in subsection H2 of this section and
leave it in the shop.
When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide identification upon request of
the licensee, and shall provide the licensee the name and phone number of the confiscating
agency and investigator, and the case number related to the confiscation. When an order to
hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the police chief or his/her designee shall so notify the
licensee.
4. Inspection Of Items: At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow law
enforcement officials to enter the premises where the licensed business is located, including all
off site storage facilities, as authorized in subsection B of this section, during normal business
hours, except in an emergency, for the purpose of inspecting such premises and inspecting
items, wares and merchandise, and records therein, to verify compliance with this section and
other applicable laws.
I. Prohibited Acts:
1. Underage: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years may pawn or sell or attempt to pawn
or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive any goods from a person under
the age of eighteen (18) years.
2. Unsound Mind Or Intoxicated: No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound
mind or an intoxicated person.
3. Identification Of Seller: No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a valid driver's license, a valid state of Minnesota identification card,
or current valid photo driver's license or identification card issued by the state or providence of
residency of the person from whom the item was received.
4. Altered Identification: No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an altered or
obliterated serial number or operation identification number, or any item of property that has had
its serial number removed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 160/444
5. Property Of Another: No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit any article of
property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or deposit the
property of another, whether with permission or without, nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell,
consign, leave or deposit any article of property in which another has a security interest, with a
licensee.
6. False Or Fictitious Identification: No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave or
deposit any article of property with a licensee shall give a false or fictitious name; nor give a
false date of birth; nor give a false or out of date address of residence or telephone number; nor
present a false or altered identification, or the identification of another, to a licensee.
J. Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: Any license under this section may be denied, suspended or
revoked for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Zoning: The proposed use does not comply with the any applicable zoning code.
2. Health, Building And Maintenance Codes: The proposed use does not comply with any health,
building, building maintenance or other provisions of this code or state law.
3. Violation Of City Code: The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or more
provisions of this chapter or this code.
4. Noncitizens: The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien, or upon whom
it is impractical or impossible to conduct a background or financial investigation due to
unavailability of information.
5. Fraud Misrepresentation Or Bribery: Fraud, misrepresentation or bribery in securing or renewing
a license.
6. Fraud, Misrepresentation Or False Statements: Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements
made in the application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant's business.
7. Theft, Damage Or Trespass To Property, Sale Of Control Substances Or Illegal Business:
Violation within the preceding five (5) years, of any law relating to theft, damage or trespass to
property, sale of a controlled substance, or operation of an illegal business.
8. The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not qualify for a license under the
terms of this section.
K. Secondhand Clothing Sales: This section shall not apply to those individuals engaged primarily in
the business of selling secondhand clothes. (Ord. 136, 5th Series, eff. 2-26-2007)
6.31: KENNELS:
A. Licensing Required: It is unlawful for any person to maintain or keep more than two (2) dogs over
two (2) months of age without first having obtained a kennel license therefor from the city.
B. Restriction: No kennel shall be licensed at a location other than within a commercial or industrial
zone of the city. (Ord. 109, 3rd Series, eff. 7-15-1991)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 161/444
6.32: (Rep. by Ord. 133, 2nd Series, eff. 10-15-1984)
6.33: (Rep. by Ord. 133, 2nd Series, eff. 10-15-1984)
6.34: SOLICITORS:
A. Prohibited Solicitation Practices:
1. It is unlawful for any solicitor to engage in solicitation for any unlawful business or organizational
purpose or activity.
2. It is unlawful for any solicitor to practice harassment, nuisance, theft, deceit, or menacing,
troublesome or otherwise unlawful activities during the course of solicitation.
3. It is unlawful for any solicitor to enter, or attempt to gain entrance to, residential premises
displaying at such entrance a sign at least three and three-fourths inches (33/4") long and three
and three-fourths inches (33/4") high, with the words "Peddlers And Solicitors Prohibited" or
"Solicitors Prohibited", in type not smaller than forty eight (48) point. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff.
9-24-1984; amd. Ord. 144, 4th Series, eff. 8-23-1999)
4. It is unlawful for any solicitor to refuse to leave any premises when requested by the owner,
lessee or person in charge thereof. (Ord. 144, 4th Series, eff. 8-23-1999)
5. It is unlawful for any person to engage in contribution solicitation without completion of licensing
or registration as herein provided.
6. It is unlawful for any person to engage in business solicitation without a license as herein
provided. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984)
7. It is unlawful for any person to engage in business solicitation between the hours of six o'clock
(6:00) P.M., or one-half (1/2) hour before sunset, whichever occurs first, and nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. Solicitation on Sundays and holidays is prohibited. (Ord. 146, 5th Series, eff. 10-8-2007)
B. Application: Applications for licensing or registration shall contain the name and address of the
solicitor, the name and address of the business or organization for which solicitations are sought
and such other information as may reasonably be required by the council as a condition to
registration or licensing or to permit investigation into the applicant's background and past
solicitation practices.
C. Investigation, Approval Or Disapproval:
1. All applications for licensing or registration shall be immediately referred to the chief of police,
and by him, or other person acting in his stead, investigated as to the truth thereof. The chief of
police shall have five (5) business days within which to investigate and make a recommendation
thereon.
2. If he finds no past history of the applicant indicating violations similar to those declared unlawful
in this section, he shall recommend issuing a license or approving registration, as the case may
be, and the city administrator shall forthwith advise the applicant. The city administrator shall
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 162/444
issue a license, upon payment of the fee therefor, to the approved applicant for business
solicitation and shall approve the completion of registration by the applicant for a contribution
solicitor.
3. If the chief of police finds a past history of the applicant indicating violations similar to those
declared unlawful in this section, he shall recommend denial of the license or registration. In all
matters of recommended denial, the applicant shall be forthwith advised thereof, and the
application shall be referred to the council and considered by it at its next regular or special
meeting occurring more than ten (10) days thereafter. The applicant shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard at such meeting.
D. Duration Of Contribution Solicitation Registration: Registration of contribution solicitation shall
expire sixty (60) days after registration is approved. (Ord. 124, 2nd Series, eff. 9-24-1984; amd.
Ord. 144, 4th Series, eff. 8-23-1999)
6.35: (Rep. by 1992 Code)
6.36: LODGING TAX:
A. Amount Of Tax: A tax of three percent (3%) is hereby imposed on the gross receipts from the
furnishing for consideration of lodging at a hotel, motel, rooming house, tourist court or resort,
within the city, other than the renting or leasing of it for a continuous period of thirty (30) days or
more.
B. Persons Liable For Lodging Tax: All persons furnishing for consideration lodging at a hotel, motel,
rooming house, tourist court or resort within the city, other than the renting or leasing of it for thirty
(30) days, are liable to the city for payment of the lodging tax established hereby.
C. Payment Of Tax: All persons liable for payment of the lodging tax shall remit amounts due to the
city at least monthly. Remittance of amounts due shall be accompanied by such information as the
city administrator may require showing calculations of the amount due. All persons liable for
payment of the lodging tax shall maintain books and records of their activities which shall be
available for inspection by the city at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice.
D. Disposition Of Proceeds: Disposition of proceeds of the lodging tax shall be made pursuant to
Minnesota statutes section 469.190, subdivision 3, as amended. The city council may, at its
discretion, seek such counsel or advice as it deems appropriate in disposition of the proceeds.
(Ord. 107, 3rd Series, eff. 7-1-1991)
6.37: RESTAURANT SALES TAX:
A. Amount Of Tax: A tax of one-half percent (1/2%) is hereby imposed on the gross receipts from the
retail sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages, which is subject to state sales tax, sold by the
operator of a restaurant or deli, within the city of Little Falls.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 163/444
B. Persons Liable For Restaurant Sales Tax: All operators of restaurants or delis, who are otherwise
liable for payment of state sales tax on sales of food and nonalcoholic beverages within the city of
Little Falls, are liable to the city of Little Falls for payment of the restaurant sales tax established
hereby.
C. Payment Of Tax: All operators of a restaurant or deli liable for payment of the restaurant sales tax
shall remit amounts due to the city of Little Falls at least monthly. Remittance of amounts due shall
be accompanied by such information as the city administrator may require showing calculations of
the amount due. All operators of a restaurant or deli liable for payment of the restaurant sales tax
shall maintain books and records of their activities, which shall be available for inspection by the
city of Little Falls at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice.
D. Disposition Of Proceeds: Disposition of proceeds of the restaurant sales tax shall be for tourism
purposes, including operating and maintaining the activities and programs of the tourism and
convention bureau. (Ord. 75, 4th Series, eff. 7-1-1996; amd. Ord. 21, 6th Series, eff. 7-1-2011)
6.38: FIREWORKS:
A. License Required: No person or retail establishment shall sell or offer to sell any fireworks without
first having obtained a license to do so from the city.
1. A license application shall be on a form prepared by the city, shall only reference one proposed
location for fireworks sales, and shall include:
a. The name and address of the licensee.
b. The proposed location where fireworks are to be sold.
c. The name and address of the owner of the premises in which the fireworks will be sold, and
the legal relationship between the owner and applicant.
d. A sketch of the sale location showing where the fireworks shall be displayed, the proposed
amount of fireworks on the premises at any one time and all relevant information regarding fire
safety on the premises.
2. A license application may be denied if it presents a possible fire hazard as determined by the
city, will result in violations of this chapter or state law, or the application is incomplete or
inaccurate.
3. The term of the license shall be one year and the license fee shall be established by city council
resolution. A license fee shall be due upon any renewal.
B. Violation: It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell fireworks:
1. To any minor. It is the responsibility of the licensee to check photo identification.
2. By any other means, or to any other person, prohibited by federal, state or other local law, city
code provision, or other regulation.
3. In any zoning district other than commercial or industrial, unless the proposed licensee operates
a retail business that either predates the city zoning ordinance or has a conditional use to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 164/444
conduct retail sales.
4. Within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a school when in session, or church buildings or
residential premises.
5. Without a valid city license.
6. Without general liability insurance in an amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00),
each occurrence, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate.
C. Responsibility: All licensees shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the
sale of fireworks on the licensed premises, and for purposes of this section, the sale of such an
item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder.
D. Administrative Fees: All administrative fees imposed by this section are deemed payable within
sixty (60) days of the date of citation, or no later than thirty (30) days after the date of any written
decision determining that a violation has occurred for an appeal. Failure to pay any administrative
fee imposed within the time limits set herein will result in a license suspension until the date of the
payment. (Ord. 98, 5th Series, eff. 5-17-2004)
6.39 - 6.98: RESERVED:
6.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, subparagraph or provision of this chapter when he
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (1976 Code)
Chapter 7
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter 7
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS1
7.01: TRAFFIC AND PARKING CONTROL:
A. Council Action: No device, sign or signal shall be erected or maintained for traffic or parking control
unless the Council shall first have approved and directed the same, except as otherwise provided
in this section; provided, that when traffic and parking control is marked or signposted, such
marking or signposting shall attest to Council action thereon.
B. Temporarily Or Experimentally Restricting Or Directing Traffic And Parking; Curb Painting:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 165/444
1. When clearly marked, barricaded or signposted, traffic and parking may be temporarily restricted
and controlled for any public or private use. The Chief of Police is authorized to temporarily
restrict and control traffic and parking in accordance herewith.
2. Restricted or prohibited use of parking and traffic lanes may be designated by painting the same
upon streets and curbs. Such work shall be done by the Street Department under the direct
supervision of the Chief of Police and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
chapters 8 and 9 of this Code.
3. It is unlawful to use traffic or parking lanes contrary to signposting or marking authorized and
described in this section.
4. Temporary or experimental restrictions may be placed on traffic and parking by agreement
between the Street Department and the Chief of Police when an extra hazardous or unusual
condition is observed or arises. It is unlawful to violate any restriction or direction when the same
has been duly marked, barricaded or signposted. (Ord. 126, 2nd Series, eff. 10-1-1984)
C. Parking Restrictions: No person shall park a motor vehicle for more than three (3) consecutive
hours on the following streets: 1) Broadway Avenue from Wood Street to Third Street Southeast;
2) Kidder Street from First Avenue Southeast to First Avenue Northeast; 3) First Street from
Second Avenue Southeast to First Avenue Northeast; 4) Second Street from First Avenue
Southeast to First Avenue Northeast; 5) First Avenue Southeast from Kidder Street to Second
Street Northeast; 6) First Avenue Northeast from Kidder Street to Second Street Northeast, at the
times specified herein. This parking restriction shall be in full force from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. every day, except Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 53, 3rd Series, eff.
7-11-1988)
7.02: SCOPE AND ORDERS OF PEACE OFFICER:
A. Scope: The provisions of this chapter and chapters 8 and 9 of this code relate exclusively to the
streets, alleys and private roads in the city, and the operation and parking of vehicles upon such
streets, alleys and private roads.
B. Failure To Comply: It is a misdemeanor for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic. (1976 Code)
7.03: APPLICATION:
A. The provisions of this chapter and chapters 8 and 9 of this code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
upon the streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles, including, but not limited to, those owned
or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, city, town, district or any other political
subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exemptions as set forth in this chapter and
chapters 8 and 9 of this code, with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
B. Every person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon a roadway,
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and chapters 8 and 9 of this code applicable to the
driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 166/444
Provisions specifically referring to bicycles shall be in addition to other provisions of these chapters
applying to vehicles. (1976 Code)
7.04: ICE AND SNOW ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS:
(Rep. by Ord. 60, 6th Series, eff. 7-21-2014)
7.05: REGULATIONS OF TREES AND OTHER OBJECTS IN STREETS, ALLEYS,
BOULEVARDS AND OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
A. City To Control Tree Planting (Standards): The city shall have control and supervision of planting
shrubs and trees upon, or overhanging, all the streets or other public property. The city may
establish and enforce uniform standards relating to the kinds and types of trees to be planted and
the placement thereof. Such standards shall be on file in the office of the public works director and
may be revised from time to time by action of the city council upon the recommendation of the
public works director.
B. Permit To Remove Trees: It is a misdemeanor for any person to remove any tree which is upon city
property, including rights of way, without first procuring from the city a permit in writing to do so.
(Ord. 60, 6th Series, eff. 7-21-2014)
7.06: CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF
ROADWAY SURFACING, SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER:
A. Owner Responsible: It is the primary responsibility of the owner of property upon which there is
abutting any sidewalk to keep and maintain such sidewalk in safe and serviceable condition.
B. Reconstruction And Repair: All construction, reconstruction or repair of roadway surfacing, sidewalk
and curb and gutter improvements, including curb cuts, shall be strictly in accordance with
specifications and standards on file in the engineering department and open to inspection and
copying there.
C. Reconstruction And Repair Of Sidewalks:
1. Notice; No Emergency: Where, in the opinion of the city administrator, no emergency exists,
notice of the required repair or reconstruction of a sidewalk shall be given to the owner of the
abutting property. Such notice shall require completion of the work within ninety (90) days, and
shall be mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such on the records of the county officer
who mails tax statements.
2. Notice; Emergency: Where, in the opinion of the city administrator, an emergency exists, notice
of the required repair or reconstruction of a sidewalk shall be given to the owner of the abutting
property. Such notice shall require completion of the work within ten (10) days, and shall be
mailed to the owner or owners shown to be such on the records of the county officer who mails
tax statements.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 167/444
3. Failure Of Owner To Reconstruct Or Make Repairs: If the owner of the abutting property fails to
make repairs or accomplish reconstruction of a sidewalk as herein required, the building official
shall report such failure to the Council and the Council may order such work to be done under its
direction and the cost thereof assessed to the abutting property owner as any other special
assessment.
D. Methods Of Procedure:
1. Abutting or affected property owners may contract for, construct or reconstruct roadway
surfacing, sidewalk or curb and gutter in accordance with this section, if advance payment is
made therefor or arrangements for payment considered adequate by the City are completed in
advance; and/or
2. With or without petition by the methods set forth in the Local Improvement Code of Minnesota
Statutes, presently beginning with section 429.011, as the same may from time to time be
amended.
E. Permit Required: It is a misdemeanor to construct a sidewalk, curb and gutter, driveway or roadway
surfacing in any street or other public property in the City without a permit in writing from the
building official. Application for such permit shall be made on forms approved and provided by the
City, and shall sufficiently describe the contemplated improvements, the contemplated date of
beginning of work, and the length of time required to complete the same; provided, that no permit
shall be required for any such improvement ordered installed by the Council. All applications shall
be referred by the building official to the Engineering Department and no permit shall be issued
until approval has been received from such department. All such applications shall contain an
agreement by the applicant to be bound by this chapter and plans and specifications consistent
with the provisions of this chapter and good engineering practices shall also accompany the
application. A permit from the City shall not relieve the holder from damages to the person or
property of another caused by such work.
F. Inspection: The building official shall inspect such improvements as deemed necessary or
advisable. Any work not done according to the applicable specifications and standards shall be
removed and corrected at the expense of the permit holder. Any work done hereunder may be
stopped by the building official if found to be unsatisfactory or not in accordance with the
specifications and standards, but this shall not place a continuing burden upon the City to inspect
or supervise such work. (1976 Code; amd. 1992 Code)
7.07: RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS:
Street openings, closings and excavations, placement and maintenance of utilities shall be governed
by the following provisions:
A. Election To Manage The Public Right-Of-Way: In accordance with the authority granted to the City
under State and Federal statutory, administrative and common law, the City hereby elects,
pursuant to this section, to manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction. This section shall not be
construed as granting any right-of-way user a right to construct facilities on land dedicated to public
use as a park, recreational area or City facility. This section shall not be construed to supersede
rules or regulations of other governmental entities controlling rights-of-way within the City.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 168/444
B. Definitions: The definitions included in Minnesota Statutes section 237.162, and Minnesota Rule
7819.0100, subparagraphs 1 through 25, are hereby adopted by reference and are incorporated
into this chapter as if set out in full.
C. Street Openings And Closings; Permit Required: No person or public right-of-way user may
obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having obtained the appropriate permit from the
City. The City may issue the following types of permits:
1. Excavation Permit: An excavation permit is required to excavate that part of the right-of-way
described in such permit and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein. A permit is not required to excavate a hole for utility poles.
2. Obstruction Permit: An obstruction permit is required to hinder free and open passage over the
specified portion of right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way for
more than eight (8) hours, to the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction
permit is not required if a public right-of-way user already possesses a valid excavation permit
for the same project. (Ord. 34, 5th Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
3. Small Wireless Facility Permit: A small wireless facility permit is required by an applicant to erect
or install a wireless support structure, to collocate a small wireless facility or to otherwise install a
small wireless facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the extent and for the
direction specified therein. (Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-18-2017)
D. Delay Penalty: In accordance with Minnesota Rule 7819.1000, subparagraph 3, the City shall
establish and impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by
City Council resolution.
E. Permit Display: Permits issued under this section shall be conspicuously displayed or otherwise
available at all times at the indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the City.
F. Permit Applications: Application for a permit is made to the City. Right-of-way permit applications
shall contain, and will be considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the
following provisions:
1. Registration: Registration with the City pursuant to this chapter;
2. Contents Of Application: Submission of a completed permit application form, including all
required attachments to said permits, and scaled drawings showing the location and area of the
proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed facilities of the utility
applying for the permit;
3. Payment: Payment of money due the City for:
a. Permit fees and any applicable degradation fees;
b. Prior obstructions or excavations;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 169/444
c. Any undisputed loss, damage or expense suffered by the City because of applicant's prior
excavations or obstructions of the rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the City.
4. Joint Applicants: Registrants may jointly apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-ofway
at the same place and time, in which case a single permit fee shall apply. It is the
responsibility of the joint applicants to determine the portion of the fee each will pay and to
include that information on the application. (Ord. 34, 5th Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
5. Action On Small Wireless Facility Permit Application:
a. Deadline For Action: The City shall approve or deny a small wireless facility permit application
within ninety (90) days after filing of such application. The small wireless facility permit, and
any associated building permit application, shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within the review periods established in this section.
b. Consolidated Applications: An applicant may file a consolidated small wireless facility permit
application addressing the proposed collocation of up to fifteen (15) small wireless facilities, or
a greater number if agreed to by the Public Works Director, provided that all small wireless
facilities in the application:
(1) Are located within a two (2) mile radius;
(2) Consist of substantially similar equipment; and
(3) Are to be placed on similar type of wireless support structures.
In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the City may approve some
small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use denial of one or more permits as a
basis to deny all small wireless facilities in the application.
6. Tolling Of Deadline: The ninety (90) day deadline on a small wireless facility permit application
may be tolled if:
a. The City receives applications from one or more applicants seeking approval of permits for
more than thirty (30) small wireless facilities within a seven-day period. In such case, the City
may extend the deadline for all such applications by thirty (30) days by informing the affected
applicants in writing of such extension;
b. The applicant fails to submit all required documents or information and the City provides
written notice of incompleteness to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
application. Upon submission of additional documents or information, the City shall have ten
(10) days to notify the applicant in writing of any still-missing information; or
c. The City and small wireless facility applicant agree in writing to toll the review period. (Ord. 4,
7th Series, eff. 12-18-2017)
G. Issuance Of Permit; Conditions:
1. Permit Issuance: If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this chapter, the City shall
issue a permit.
2. Reasonable Conditions: The City may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the
permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to protect the health, safety and welfare
or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, including the recovery of any
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 170/444
unusual management costs not recovered through the standard permit fee, including the cost of
assigning a police officer to provide traffic management, or the cost of assigning a field observer.
3. Routine Obstructions And Excavations: The City may approve a permit plan which, among other
conditions, allows for routine excavations and obstructions without separate notice and separate
compensation for projects.
4. Small Wireless Facility Conditions: In addition to subsection G2 of this section, the erection or
installation of a wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or other
installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way, shall be subject to the following
conditions:
a. A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on the particular wireless support structure,
under those attachment specifications, and at the height indicated in the applicable permit
application.
b. No new wireless support structure installed within the right-of-way shall exceed forty feet (40')
in height without the City's written authorization, provided that the City may impose a lower
height limit in the applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to protect
the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that an applicant may replace an
existing wireless support structure exceeding forty feet (40') in height with a structure of the
same height subject to such conditions or requirements as may be improved in the applicable
permit.
c. No wireless facility may extend more than ten feet (10') above its wireless support structure.
d. Where an applicant proposed to install a new wireless support structure in the right-of-way,
the City may improve separation requirements between such structure and any existing
wireless support structure or other facilities in and around the right-of-way.
e. Where an applicant proposed collocation on a decorative wireless support structure, sign, or
other structure not intended to support small wireless facilities, the City may impose
reasonable requirements to accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended
purpose of such structure.
f. The small wireless facility shall have limited exposed cabling and mounting hardware. It shall
also match the wireless support structure it is attached to in color and as close as practicable
in material and design.
g. The small wireless facility shall not interfere with public safety wireless telecommunications.
h. Small wireless facilities in the right-of-way shall be removed and relocated at the City's
request and at no cost to the City when the Public Works Director determines that removal
and relocation is necessary to prevent interference with:
(1) Present or future City use of the right-of-way for a public project;
(2) The public health, safety or welfare; or
(3) The safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.
i. A small wireless facility attached to an existing wireless support structure shall not block light
emanating from the wireless support structure and shall not otherwise interfere with the
original use of the wireless support structure.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 171/444
j. Ground-mounted equipment associated with the small wireless facility is prohibited unless the
applicant can show that ground-mounted equipment is necessary for the operation of the
small wireless facility. If ground-mounted equipment is necessary, it shall comply with the
provisions of section 11.06 of this Code, and shall also meet the following standards:
(1) Ground-mounted equipment shall be placed below grade unless not technically feasible;
(2) Ground-mounted equipment shall not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation and shall not
interfere with vehicle and pedestrian intersection sight lines;
(3) Ground-mounted equipment shall not create a safety hazard;
(4) If placed above-grade, ground-mounted equipment shall be separated from the nearest
ground-mounted equipment on the same block by a minimum of three hundred thirty feet
(330') unless the equipment is placed underground or unless waived by the Public Works
Director;
(5) If placed above grade, ground-mounted equipment shall be limited to three feet (3') in
height and twenty eight (28) cubic feet in cumulative size.
k. Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support structure, the City may impose
reasonable restocking, replacement or relocation requirements on the replacement of such
structure.
l. New wireless support structures erected for the siting of small wireless facilities in the right-ofway
adjacent to any residential zoning district established in chapter 11 of this Code or any
Historic Preservation District established by Federal, State or City ordinances, require a
conditional use permit in accordance with the requirements and procedures established in
chapter 11 of this Code.
5. Small Wireless Facility Exemptions: No small wireless facility permit is required to conduct the
following activities in the right-of-way:
a. Routine maintenance of a small wireless facility.
b. Replacement of a small wireless facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight,
height, and wind or structural loading than the small wireless facility being replaced.
c. Maintenance, operation or replacement of a small wireless facility that is suspended on a
cable or cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with National Fire Codes.
If any of the above activities will obstruct the right-of-way, the small wireless facility permit
holder shall provide notification to the City at least ten (10) days in advance of such activity.
6. Small Wireless Facility Agreement: A small wireless facility shall only be collocated on a
wireless support structure owned or controlled by the City, or any other City asset in the right-ofway,
after the applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation agreement
with the City. The standard collocation agreement may require the payment of the following:
a. Up to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year for rent to collocate on the City's structure.
b. Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for maintenance associated with the collocation.
c. A monthly fee for electrical service as follows:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 172/444
(1) Seventy three dollars ($73.00) per month per radio node less than or equal to one hundred
(100) maximum watts;
(2) One hundred eighty two dollars ($182.00) per radio node over one hundred (100)
maximum watts; or
(3) The actual costs of electricity, if the actual costs exceed the foregoing.
The standard collocation agreement shall be in addition to and not in lieu of, the required
small wireless facility permit, provided, however, that the applicant shall not be additionally
required to obtain a license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless
facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing agreement between the
City and the applicant. (Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-18-2017)
H. Registration Requirement:
1. Registration: As of the effective date hereof, any public right-of-way user which owns or controls
a facility within any public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, shall register with the City.
Registration shall be deemed completed upon the public right-of-way user submitting to the City
the information specified in this subsection.
2. Information Required: The information provided to the City at the time of registration shall
include, but not be limited to:
a. Each registrant's name, Gopher One Call registration certificate number, address, and e-mail
address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers, current information regarding
how to contact a local representative in an emergency, including name, address and e-mail
address, shall be provided at the time of registration. A local representative or designee shall
be accessible for consultation at all times.
b. A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:
(1) Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued to the registrant by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the
City;
(2) Verifying that the registrant is insured against claims for personal injury, including death, as
well as claims for property damage arising out of the: a) use and occupancy of the right-ofway
by the registrant, its officers, agents and employees; and b) placement and use of
facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents and
employees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability arising from completed
operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property;
(3) Either naming the City as an additional insured as to whom the coverage required herein is
in force and applicable and for whom defense will be provided as to all such coverage, or
otherwise providing evidence satisfactory to the Director that the City is fully covered and
will be defended through registrant's insurance for all actions included in Minnesota Rule
7819.1250;
(4) Requiring that the City be notified thirty (30) days in advance of cancellation of the policy or
material modification of a coverage term;
(5) Indicating comprehensive liability coverage, automobile liability coverage, workers'
compensation and umbrella coverage in the amount of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00).
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 173/444
c. The City may require a copy of the actual insurance policies if necessary to ensure the City
that the policy provides adequate third party claim coverage and City indemnity and defense
coverage for all actions included in the indemnity required by Minnesota Rules part
7819.1250.
d. Such evidence as the Director may require to determine that the registrant is authorized to do
business in the State. (Ord. 34, 5th Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
e. A copy of the applicant's order granting a certificate of authority from the Minnesota Public
Utilities Commission or other authorization or approval from the applicable State or Federal
agency, where the applicant is lawfully required to have such authorization or approval from
said commission, or other State or Federal agency. (Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-18-2017)
3. Notice Of Changes: The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current by
providing to the City information of changes within thirty (30) days following the date on which
the registrant has knowledge of any change.
4. Existing Franchise Agreements: To the extent that the above requirements are dealt with in an
existing franchise agreement or ordinance with a permit applicant, the terms of the franchise
agreement or ordinance shall govern.
I. Reporting Obligations: Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and by February 1 of each
year, file with the City a construction and maintenance plan for underground facilities. Such plan
shall list all known future projects that would require excavation of the right-of-way. The plan shall
contain an estimated beginning and end date for the excavation; and, to the extent known, a
general description of the affected right-of-way. The City shall prepare a composite list of all
projects that have not been filed as trade secrets under State law, including projects planned by
the City, which list will be available for inspection.
J. Permit Fees:
1. Excavation Fees: The City shall establish the excavation permit fee annually by resolution which
shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
a. The City management costs;
b. Degradation fee in lieu of restoration, if applicable.
2. Obstruction Permit Fee: The City shall establish the obstruction permit fee which shall be in an
amount sufficient to recover the City management costs. (Ord. 34, 5th Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
3. Small Wireless Facility Permit: The City shall establish the permit fee annually by resolution
which shall be an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:
a. Management costs.
b. Engineering, make-ready and construction costs associated with the collocation of small
wireless facilities.
4. Nonrefundable: Permit fees that were paid for a permit that the City has revoked are not
refundable.
5. Application To Franchise: Unless otherwise agreed to in a franchise, management costs may be
charged separately from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 174/444
the franchise. Franchise fees may not exceed amounts set by State law.
6. Payment Of Permit Fees: No excavation permit, obstruction permit or small wireless facility
permit shall be issued without payment of the applicable fees being paid at the time of issuance.
(Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-18-2017)
K. Right-Of-Way Patching And Restoration:
1. Restoration Standards: Restoration of an excavation shall comply with the requirements of
Minnesota Statutes and with Minnesota Rules.
2. Timing: The work to be done under the excavation permit, and the patching and restoration of
the right-of-way as required herein, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit,
increased by as many days as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the
control of the permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonable and a permit extension or
a new permit is granted.
3. Patch And Restoration: Permittee shall restore the public right-of-way and assume all costs
therefor, unless the permittee obtains a degradation permit. The City, at its own option, may be
responsible for any paving.
a. Permittee Restoration: If the permittee restores the right-of-way, the City may require, at the
time of application for an excavation permit, a performance bond in an amount, as determined
by the City, to cover the cost of repair and restoration. The permittee shall determine the type
of security it will provide in accordance with the provisions of Minnesota Rule 7819.3000. If
twenty four (24) months after completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the City
determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the posted security will be
released.
b. City Restoration: If the City restores the right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the costs thereof
within thirty (30) days of billing. If following such restoration, the roadway surface, boulevard,
sidewalk, curb or related infrastructure settles due to permittee's improper backfilling, the
permittee shall, at its option, either correct the defect or pay to the City, within thirty (30) days,
all costs associated with correcting the defective work.
c. Degradation Fee In Lieu Of Restoration: In lieu of right-of-way restoration, a permittee may
elect to pay a degradation fee. However, the permittee shall remain responsible for replacing
and compacting the subgrade and aggregate base material in the excavation and the
degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.
4. Standards: The permittee shall perform backfilling, patching and restoration according to the
standards contained in Minnesota Rule 7819.1100, or other successor rule by the Minnesota
Public Utilities Commission.
5. Duty To Correct Defects: The permittee shall correct defects in patching or restoration of the
public right-of-way. The obligation to correct defects in turf establishment is limited to twelve (12)
months following its completion. The permittee shall, upon written notification from the City,
correct all noncomplying restoration work, to the extent necessary under State law and
Minnesota Rules part 7819.1100. The correction work shall be completed within ten (10)
calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the City, not including days during which work
cannot be done due to circumstances constituting force majeure or of unseasonable or
inclement weather.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 175/444
6. Failure To Restore: If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the
condition required by this section, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration
required by the City, the City at its option may do such work. In that event, the permittee shall
pay to the City, within thirty (30) days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way. If permittee
fails to pay as required, the City may proceed at law or equity to collect the amount owed.
L. Supplemental Applications And Permit Extensions: No public right-of-way user may excavate or
obstruct the right-of-way beyond the date or area specified in the permit, unless such public rightof-
way user: 1) makes a supplementary application for another right-of-way permit; and 2) a new
permit or permit extension is granted. An extension of time or area can, at the discretion of the
City, be granted orally and without application or a separate permit fee.
1. Limitation On Area: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the area of the right-of-way specified in
the permit. No permittee may do any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as
provided herein. Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must, before working in that greater area:
a. Make application for a permit extension; and
b. Be granted a new permit or permit extension. The City may orally waive the requirement for a
permit extension or the payment of an additional fee.
2. Limitation On Dates: A right-of-way permit is valid only for the dates specified in the permit. No
permittee may begin its work before the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue
working after the end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it must
apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the new permit or an
extension of the old permit before working after the end date of the previous permit. A
supplemental application must be submitted before the permit end date. The City may orally
waive the requirement for a permit extension or the payment of an additional fee.
M. Denial Of Permit:
1. Health, Safety And Welfare: The City may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this section, or if the City determines that the denial is necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.
2. Limitation Of Space: To protect health, safety and welfare, or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use, the City may prohibit right-of-way users from a particular rightof-
way after taking into consideration the public's needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of
existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future City plans for public improvements and
development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest. (Ord. 34, 5th
Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
3. Procedural Requirements: The denial or revocation of a permit must be made in writing and
must document the basis for the denial. The City must notify the applicant or right-of-way user in
writing within three (3) business days of the decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application
is denied, the right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the City and
resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
notice of denial, no additional application fees shall be imposed. The City must approve or deny
the resubmitted application within thirty (30) days after submission. (Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-
18-2017)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 176/444
N. Inspection:
1. Notice Of Completion: When the work under any permit hereunder is completed, the permittee
shall, at the option of the City, furnish a completion certificate in accordance with Minnesota Rule
7819.1300. The permittee shall, if required by the city and not already provided through another
filing made within one year of completion of the project, submit to the city as built drawings
showing any deviations from the permit approved plan that are greater than plus or minus two
feet (.2').
2. Site Inspection: Permittee shall make the work site available to city personnel and to all others
as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.
O. Authority Of City: At the time of inspection, the city may order the immediate cessation of any work
which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety or well being of the public. The city may
issue an order to the permittee for any work which does not conform to the terms of the permit or
other applicable standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the
violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten (10) days after issuance of the order,
the permittee shall present proof to the city that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has
not been presented within the required time, the city may revoke the permit.
P. Mapping Data:
1. Information Required: All permittees shall, if required by the city, provide mapping information in
accordance with Minnesota rules, as follows:
a. The location of registrants' mains, cables, conduits, switches and related equipment and
facilities, with the location identified based on:
(1) Offsets from property lines, and distances from the centerline of the public right of way as
determined by the city; or
(2) Coordinates derived from the coordinate system being used by the city; or
(3) Any other system agreed upon by the registrant and the city;
b. The type and size of the equipment;
c. A description of aboveground appurtenances;
d. A legend explaining symbols, characters, abbreviations, scale and other data shown on the
map; and
e. The location of any facilities to be abandoned, if applicable, in conformance with Minnesota
statutes. A right of way user is not required to provide or convey mapping information or data
in a format or manner that is different from what is currently utilized and maintained by that
user, but may be charged the cost of converting the information to the city format.
2. Submittal Requirements: Within six (6) months after the effective date hereof and upon request
by the city, all registrants which own or control facilities within public rights of way within the city
on the effective date hereof shall submit detailed mapping data in accordance with this
subsection for all facilities and equipment located within the public right of way. Following initial
mapping, all registrants shall submit detailed mapping data by April 1 of every year for all new
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 177/444
facilities located within public rights of way in the city during the preceding year.
At the request of any public right of way user, information required by the city which qualifies as
"trade secret" data under Minnesota data practices act shall be protected accordingly.
Q. Work Done Without Permit:
1. Emergency Situations: Each person with facilities in the right of way shall reasonably notify the
city of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The owner of the
facilities may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
Within three (3) business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest of the requirements
necessary to bring itself into compliance with this section for the actions it took in response to
the emergency.
The permitting requirements shall not apply if the repair is made within the hole of the permitted
excavation.
2. Nonemergency Situations: Except in an emergency, any public right of way user who, without
first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or excavates a right of way must
subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty pay double the normal fee for said permit, pay
double all the other fees required by this code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct
any damage to the right of way and comply with all of the requirements of this section.
3. Work Done According To Maintenance Plan: A permit is not required for routine maintenance
work done according to a plan filed previously with and approved by the city.
R. Revocation Of Permits:
1. Substantial Breach: The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke any right of way
permit, without a fee refund, if there is a substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any
statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. The violation of any material provision of the right of way permit;
b. An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of the right of way permit, or the
perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;
c. Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a right of way permit;
d. The failure to complete the work in a timely manner, unless a permit extension is obtained, or
unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond the permittee's control; or
e. The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that does not conform to a condition indicated
on an order issued pursuant to this chapter.
2. Written Notice Of Breach: If the city determines that the permittee has committed a substantial
breach of a term or condition of any statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the
permit, the city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation. The
demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation of the permit. A
substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at its discretion, to place additional or
revised conditions on the permit to mitigate and remedy the breach.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 178/444
3. Response To Notice Of Breach: Within a reasonable amount of time after receiving notification
of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan, acceptable to the city, that will cure the
breach. Permittee's failure to so contact the city, or the permittee's failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the approved plan, shall be
cause for immediate revocation of the permit.
4. Reimbursement Of City Costs: If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the city
for the city's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection.
S. Installation Requirements, Location Of Facilities:
1. Applicable Law: The installation, placement, location and relocation of facilities must comply with
other applicable law, including Minnesota rules 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and 7819.5100.
2. Corridors: The city may assign specific corridors within the right of way, or any particular
segment thereof as may be necessary, for each type of facility that is or, pursuant to current
technology, the city expects will someday be located within the right of way. All excavation,
obstruction or other permits issued by the city involving the installation or replacement of
facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the facilities at issue. Existing facilities located
outside of a corridor are not required to relocate into the corridor.
3. Relocation Of Facilities: A permittee shall promptly, and at its own expense, with due regard to
seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate any facility in the public right of
way when it is necessary to prevent interference, and not merely for the convenience of the city,
in connection with:
a. A present or future city use of the public right of way for a public project;
b. The public health or safety; or
c. The safety and convenience of travel over the public right of way. The permittee shall restore
any public rights of way in accordance with this section.
T. Damage To Other Facilities: When the city does public right of way work and finds it necessary to
maintain, support or move facilities to protect from damage, the city shall notify the local
representative as early as is reasonably possible. The facility owner or excavator will be
responsible for protection of the facility as provided by Minnesota statutes.
U. Right Of Way Vacation:
1. Reservation Of Right By Easement: If the city vacates a public right of way which contains the
equipment or facilities of a public right of way user and the vacation does not require the
relocation of the equipment or facilities, the city shall reserve an easement for utilities.
2. Relocation Of Facilities: If the vacation requires the relocation of the public right of way user's
equipment or facility and the vacation proceedings are initiated for a public project, the public
right of way user shall pay the relocation costs. If the vacation proceedings are for other than a
public project, the initiating person or persons shall pay the relocation costs.
V. Indemnification And Liability:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 179/444
1. Limitation Of Liability: Upon the issuance of a public right of way permit, the city does not
assume any liability:
a. For injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of service claims by any party; or
b. For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance or
operation of equipment or facilities by registrants or permittees or activities of registrants or
permittees.
2. Indemnification: A registrant or permittee shall indemnify, keep and hold the city, its officials,
employees and agents, free and harmless from any and all costs, liabilities and claims for
damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair
or operation of its equipment and facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a public
right of way, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or
prohibited by a public right of way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own
negligence, except for claims arising out of or alleging the city's negligence in issuing the permit
or in failing to properly or adequately inspect or enforce compliance with a term, condition or
purpose of a permit. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity
otherwise available to the registrant, permittee or city, and the registrant or permittee, in
defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense
or immunity that the city could assert on its own behalf.
W. Abandoned Facilities:
1. Notification: A permittee shall notify the city when facilities are, or are intended to be,
abandoned. If the abandonment is related to the cessation of service in the city by the right of
way user, the city may require the right of way user to post a bond in an amount sufficient to
reimburse the city for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the equipment and
facilities if the right of way user fails to do so.
2. Removal Of Abandoned Facilities: Any public right of way user who has abandoned facilities in
any right of way shall remove them if required because they interfere with other right of way
repairs, excavation or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city. (Ord. 34, 5th
Series, eff. 5-21-2001)
7.08: OBSTRUCTIONS IN STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY;
SPECIAL EVENTS:
A. Obstructions: It is a misdemeanor for any person to place, deposit, display or offer for sale, any
fence, goods or other obstructions upon any street or other public property, except as permitted
herein. Where necessitated for the purpose of construction on abutting property or for sidewalk
cafe use, a written permit may be obtained, which shall be approved and endorsed by the manager
of city services, chief of police and the fire chief, and all of the terms and conditions of such permit,
including precautionary measures for the protection of the public, shall be strictly complied with.
When in connection with special events licensed under this section, a permittee may erect a booth
or stand and display goods, food or beverages for sale along or on the public sidewalk or other
public property, but all conditions of the permit issued by the licensed sponsor of special events
shall be strictly complied with. (Ord. 71, 3rd Series, eff. 9-3-1989; amd. Ord. 14, 4th Series, eff. 7-
19-1993)
B. Fires: It is a misdemeanor for any person to build or maintain a fire upon a roadway. (1976 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 180/444
C. (Rep. by 1992 Code)
D. Special Events: The Council may grant a license to a nonprofit organization or abutting property
owner allowing it to sponsor a special event. A nonprofit organization or abutting property owner
may apply for up to three (3) special event licenses per calendar year, each license for not more
than three (3) days. Application for the license shall be in such form as is prescribed by the City
Administrator and shall provide the following information: dates of the event; areas to be utilized;
price charged for permits, and shall be accompanied by a fee, said fee shall be determined from
time to time by resolution of the City Council. Prior to granting a license, the application shall be
reviewed and approved by the Manager of City Services and the Police Chief. The applicant shall
provide insurance coverage for its activities and those of its permittees in an amount and in such
form as is acceptable to the City. The applicant shall make arrangements for removal of trash and
debris following the special event acceptable to the City. The license shall allow the holder to issue
permits allowing vendors to sell and display goods, food and drink on sidewalks and public
property within the area covered by the license. The licensee may charge such fee for a permit as
it deems appropriate, and may allocate space between applicants as it deems appropriate. The
licensee may impose conditions upon the permit consistent with the public safety and
convenience. (Ord. 79, 5th Series, eff. 8-4-2003)
7.09 - 7.11: RESERVED:
7.12: LOAD LIMITS:
The Chief of Police, upon the recommendation of the Engineering Department, may from time to time
impose upon vehicular traffic on any part or all of the streets such load limits as may be necessary or
desirable. Such limits, and the specific extent or weight to which loads are limited, shall be clearly and
legibly signposted thereon. It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on any street in violation
of the limitation so posted. (1976 Code)
7.13: RESERVED:
7.14: CURB AND GUTTER, STREET AND SIDEWALK DEFACEMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to deface any street, sidewalk or curb and gutter for any purposes,
including advertising purposes, except as the same may be done by City employees acting within the
course and scope of their employment; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to
uniformly coloring concrete or other surfacing as such coloring shall be approved by the Public Works
Director/City Engineer. For the purposes of this section, the use of nonpermanent and easily
removable substances including, but not limited to, chalk to temporarily letter, color, decorate or mark
any sidewalk shall not be considered to deface such sidewalk. (Ord. 12, 7th Series, eff. 11-19-2018)
7.15 - 7.17: RESERVED:
7.18: SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, BICYCLES, IN-LINE SKATES
(ROLLERBLADES) AND ROLLER SKATES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 181/444
A. Right-Of-Way; Sidewalks: Whenever a person is riding or using skateboards, scooters, bicycles, inline
skates (rollerblades) or roller skates upon a sidewalk, such person shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing another person. (Ord. 27, 4th Series, eff. 4-4-1994)
B. Unlawful Use: It is unlawful for any person to ride, use or operate skateboards, scooters, bicycles,
in-line skates (rollerblades) or roller skates on a sidewalk within an area zoned Central Business
District B-1. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
7.19 - 7.98: RESERVED:
7.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR OR PETTY MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended
vehicle, within the immediate preceding twelve (12) month period for the third or subsequent time,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
B. As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A of this
section, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. (1976 Code)
Chapter 8
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Chapter 8
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS1
8.01: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
The regulatory provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 169, as such chapter may be from time to
time amended, supplemented or replaced, including the penalty and definition provisions thereof, are
hereby adopted and by reference made a part of this chapter as completely as if set out herein in full
and shall be applicable within the city. (1992 Code)
8.02: VEHICLE OPERATIONS:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 182/444
A. Driver's License Required: No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle upon any street or
highway in the city without having in his possession, as required by the laws of the state2, a valid
driver's license or chauffeur's license.
B. Plates Required: No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle without having thereof proper
motor vehicle license plates as required by the laws of the state3.
C. Consent Required: No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle belonging to another without
the owner's consent. (1992 Code)
8.03: U-TURNS AND TURNABOUTS:
It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle by U-turn or turnabout so as to proceed in the
opposite direction upon any street, except at a street intersection, and then only if the street
intersection is not signposted prohibiting a U-turn or otherwise controlled by a traffic signal; provided,
that any person making a permitted U-turn shall yield the right of way to all other vehicles. (Ord. 51,
4th Series, eff. 2-13-1995)
8.04 - 8.98: RESERVED:
8.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR OR PETTY MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes a violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended
vehicle within the immediate preceding twelve (12) month period for the third or subsequent time,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
B. As to any violations not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A of this
section, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor.
C. As to any violation of a provision adopted by reference, he shall be punished as specified in such
provision so adopted. (1976 Code)
Chapter 9
PARKING REGULATIONS
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 183/444
Chapter 9
PARKING REGULATIONS1
9.01: PRESUMPTION:
As to any vehicle parking in violation of this chapter and chapters 7 and 8 of this code when the driver
thereof is not present, it shall be presumed that the owner parked the same, or that the driver was
acting as the agent of the owner. (1976 Code)
9.02: GENERAL PARKING PROHIBITIONS:
It is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the specific directions of a police officer or traffic control device
in any of the following places:
A. On any boulevard which has been curbed; or
B. Adjacent to or alongside any curb painted yellow; or
C. Adjacent to, alongside or in any area posted as a fire lane. (Ord. 26, 2nd Series, eff. 12-30-1977;
amd. 1992 Code)
9.03: ANGLE PARKING:
Where angle parking has been established and is allowed, as shown by curb marking or signposting,
or both, each vehicle stopped or parked shall be at an angle of approximately forty five degrees (45o)
to sixty degrees (60) with the front wheel touching the curb and within any parking lines painted on
the curb or street; provided, that the front wheel not touching the curb shall be the portion of the
vehicle furthest in the direction of one-way traffic; and it is unlawful to park in violation of this section.
(1976 Code)
9.04: PARKING HOURS:
Parking on streets shall be limited as follows:
A. Parking Lots: It is unlawful for any person to stop, park or leave standing any vehicle upon any
street or municipal parking lot for a continuous period in excess of twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 73,
3rd Series, eff. 11-6-1989)
B. Time Limited Parking: he chief of police may, when authorized by the council, designate certain
streets, blocks or portions of streets or blocks as five (5) minute, ten (10) minute, fifteen (15)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 184/444
minute, thirty (30) minute, one hour, two (2) hour, four (4) hour, six (6) hour or eight (8) hour limited
parking zones, and shall mark by appropriate signs any zones so established. Such zones shall be
established whenever necessary for the convenience of the public or to minimize traffic hazards
and preserve a free flow of traffic. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any limited
parking zone between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any
weekday for a longer period than is specified in the signposting of such zone. (1976 Code)
C. Parking Permit: The chief of police is authorized to issue permits allowing parking in a municipal lot
for more than twenty four (24) hours. The permit shall be in such form as the chief of police may
determine. The chief of police shall issue a permit if, upon investigation, it is determined that the
applicant resides near a municipal parking lot and lacks sufficient off street parking; however, the
chief of police may limit the number of vehicles that may be parked by a permit holder. (Ord. 73,
3rd Series, eff. 11-6-1989)
9.05: EMERGENCY:
In order to facilitate movement of traffic and promote public convenience in times of emergency, the
following additional parking restrictions shall be in effect:
A. Emergency Defined: An "emergency" means a condition created on City streets because of the
presence of snow, freezing rain, sleet, ice or snowdrifts thereon, or other natural phenomenon
which create, or are likely to create, hazardous road conditions or impede, or likely to impede, the
free movement of fire, health, police, emergency or other vehicular traffic when the same shall
have been duly declared by the City Engineer, or in his absence, the Chief of Police.
B. Parking Prohibitions: Whenever it becomes necessary to have parked cars removed from the
streets or Municipal parking lots in order to remove the snow or debris therefrom, the Street
Department shall place an adequate number of signs on the streets and avenues from which snow
or debris is to be removed. If snow or debris is to be removed between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., such signs shall be posted at least two (2) hours before the
time of the intended removal of the snow or debris; and if snow or debris is to be removed between
the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., such signs shall be posted not
later than four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the day of such intended removal. Such signs shall read as
follows: "No Parking. Snow (Debris) Removal at o'clock .M.", and the time of snow or debris
removal shall be inserted on said sign. All parked cars shall be removed from the streets and
avenues not later than the time designated on such signs.
C. Authority: The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when he deems it reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict parking of vehicles along any street and any Municipal parking lot in the City.
The Chief of Police shall, at least two (2) hours before the intended prohibition or restriction, post
signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle
in violation thereof. (1976 Code)
9.06: TRUCK PARKING:
A. It is unlawful to park a detached semitrailer upon any street, Municipally owned parking lot, or other
public property. (1976 Code; amd. 1992 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 185/444
B. It is unlawful to park a semitrailer, whether or not attached to a semitruck, or any commercial
vehicle with a licensed gross vehicle weight in excess of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds,
within an area zoned as a residential district, except for the purpose of loading or unloading the
same. (Ord. 94, 4th Series, eff. 8-18-1997)
C. It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle with a licensed gross vehicle weight in excess of twenty
four thousand (24,000) pounds or more between ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. on any weekday, in any area zoned Business Districts B-1 or B-2, but parking of such vehicle
for a period of not more than fifteen (15) minutes shall be permitted in such space for the purpose
of necessary access to abutting property for loading or unloading when such access cannot
reasonably be secured from an alley or from an adjacent street where truck parking is not so
restricted. (Ord. 94, 4th Series, eff. 8-18-1997; amd. Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
D. Parking of commercial vehicles is permitted in duly designated and signposted loading zones, and
in alleys, for a period of up to fifteen (15) minutes; provided, that such alley parking does not
prevent the flow of traffic therein, all of which shall be for the purpose of access to abutting or
adjacent property for loading or unloading. (1976 Code; amd. 1992 Code)
9.07: IMPOUNDING AND REMOVING VEHICLES:
When any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or Municipally owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to require the driver or other
person in charge of such vehicle to remove the same to a position in compliance with this chapter.
When any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street or Municipally owned parking lot in
violation of any parking regulation, such officer is hereby authorized to impound such unlawfully
parked vehicle and to provide for the removal thereof and to remove the same to a convenient garage
or other facility, or place of safety; provided, that if any charge shall be placed against such vehicle for
cost of removal or storage, or both, by anyone called upon to assist therewith, the same shall be paid
prior to removal from such place of storage or safekeeping. (1976 Code)
9.08: LOADING ZONES:
The Council may, by resolution, establish loading zones to be used for the specific purpose of loading
or unloading merchandise from a commercial vehicle or vehicle temporarily being utilized in the
transport of merchandise. These loading zones shall be installed by order of the Chief of Police where
in the judgment of the Council a commercial loading zone is justified. (1976 Code)
9.09: RESERVED PARKING FOR CITY EMPLOYEES:
The City Administrator shall, when directed by the Council, designate certain parking spaces to be
reserved for city employees, which spaces shall be duly signposted. (1976 Code)
9.10 - 9.98: RESERVED:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 186/444
9.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR OR PETTY MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:
A. Where the specific section, subsection, paragraph or provision specifically makes violation a
misdemeanor, he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where a violation is committed in a
manner or under circumstances so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor; where he stands convicted of violation of any
provision of this chapter, exclusive of violations relating to the standing or parking of an unattended
vehicle within the immediately preceding twelve (12) month period for the third or subsequent time,
he shall be punished as for a misdemeanor.
B. As to any violation not constituting a misdemeanor under the provisions of subsection A of this
section, he shall be punished as for a petty misdemeanor. (1976 Code)
Chapter 10
PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES AND OFFENSES
Chapter 10
PUBLIC PROTECTION, CRIMES AND OFFENSES
Article I. Health
10.01: UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE, LITTER OR LIKE:
A. It is unlawful for any person to deposit garbage, rubbish, offal, the body of a dead animal, or other
litter or debris in or upon any public street, public waters or the ice thereon, public lands or private
lands, or water or ice thereon, without the consent of the owner.
B. It is unlawful for any person to store or keep garbage, rubbish, offal, the body of a dead animal, or
other litter or debris upon his or her premises, except in a metal or plastic container having a top
which is securely fastened thereto, or a city approved garbage bag on the day of pick up. (Ord. 7,
2nd Series, eff. 10-18-1976; amd. 1992 Code)
10.02: TOILET INSTALLATION REQUIRED:
It is the duty of every owner or occupant of any property within the city, having a dwelling house or
business building situated thereon, which property is within five hundred feet (500') of any municipal
water and sewer mains, to install a toilet in such dwelling or business building and make connection
thereof with such water and sewer mains. Whenever the noncompliance of the owner or occupant of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 187/444
such property is reported to the city, the city administrator shall forthwith make such investigation as
he deems necessary or proper and report his findings to the council. If the council finds and reports
that the lack of toilet facilities is an unhealthful or insanitary condition, the city shall forthwith serve
written notice upon said owner or occupant requiring the installation of toilet facilities upon premises
described in said notice, and connection thereof with the sewer and water mains, all of which shall be
done within thirty (30) days after service of such written notice. Whenever any owner or occupant shall
default in compliance with such written notice, the council may by resolution direct that a toilet be
installed and connection made with the water and sewer mains and that the actual cost of such
installation be paid in the first instance out of the general revenue fund, and assessed against the
property so benefited. After such installation and connection is completed by order of the council, the
city shall serve a written notice of intention to make an assessment therefor. If such assessment is not
paid within ten (10) days, the city shall certify the amount thereof to the county auditor in the same
manner as with other special assessments; provided, that the council may by resolution provide that
the assessment be spread over a term of three (3) years, upon written request by the owner of the
property. (1976 Code)
10.03 - 10.09: RESERVED:
Article II. Safety
10.10: USE OF BOW AND ARROW:
It is unlawful for any person to shoot a bow and arrow, except in the physical education program in a
school supervised by a member of its faculty, or a communitywide supervised class or event
specifically authorized by the chief of police. (1976 Code; amd. 1992 Code)
10.11: ANIMAL REGULATION:
A. Definitions:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY: For purposes of this section, the Little Falls police department is
the governmental subdivision responsible for animal control operations within its jurisdiction.
ANIMALS: Cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ponies, ducks, geese, turkeys, chickens,
guinea hens, dogs, cats and all other animals and feathered fowl.
AT LARGE: An animal off the premises of the owner and not under control of the owner by leash,
chain or otherwise.
DANGEROUS: Without provocation inflicted substantial bodily harm on a human being or another
domestic animal; or killed a domestic animal without provocation while off owner's property.
GREAT BODILY HARM: Bodily injury which creates a high probability of death, or which causes
serious permanent disfigurement, or which causes a permanent or protracted loss or impairment of
the function of any bodily member or organ, or other serious bodily harm.
OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing, harboring,
keeping, having an interest in, or having care, custody or control of the dog.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 188/444
PETS: Any species of domestic animal which in common practice are maintained in the home of
the owner.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS: Been found potentially dangerous (inflicts bites without
provocation, chases without provocation, or has a known propensity to attack unprovoked) and the
animal subsequently endangers the safety of humans or other domestic animals.
PROPER ENCLOSURE: Securely confined indoors or in a secure area or structure suitable to
prevent the animal from escaping and to provide protection from the elements.
SUBSTANTIAL BODILY HARM: Bodily injury, which involves a temporary but substantial
disfigurement, or which causes a temporary but substantial loss or impairment of the function of
any bodily member or organ, or which causes a fracture of any bodily member.
ZOO: A state licensed zoological garden maintaining animals for display. (1992 Code; amd. Ord.
135, 5th Series, eff. 10-23-2006)
B. Keeping: It is unlawful for any person to keep any animal, not in transit, in any part of the city not
zoned for agricultural purposes, except for pets or in zoos.
C. Running At Large: No person who is the owner or in possession of an animal shall permit the
animal to run at large.
D. Housing: No person shall keep any animal in any structure which is infested by rodents, vermin,
flies or insects.
E. Treatment: It is unlawful for any person to treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
F. Trespasses: It is unlawful for any person to herd, ride or drive any animal across lands of another
without permission from the owner. (1992 Code)
G. Animal Pound: Any dog found in the city without an animal tag, or running at large, shall be placed
in the animal pound, and an accurate record of the time of such placement shall be kept on each
animal. Every animal so placed in the animal pound shall be held for redemption by the owner for a
period of not less than five (5) regular business days. A "regular business day" is one during which
the pound is open for business to the public for at least four (4) hours between eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Impoundment records shall be preserved for a minimum of six
(6) months and shall show: 1) the description of the animal by species, breed, sex, approximate
age and other distinguishing traits; 2) the location at which the animal was seized; 3) the date of
seizure; 4) the name and address of the person from whom any animal three (3) months of age or
over was received; and 5) the name and address of the person to whom any animal was
transferred. If unclaimed, such animal shall be humanely destroyed and the carcass disposed of,
unless it is requested by a licensed educational or scientific institution under authority of Minnesota
statutes section 35.71; provided, however, that if a tag affixed to the animal, or a statement by the
animal's owner after seizure specifies that the animal should not be used for research, such animal
shall not be made available to any such institution, but may be destroyed after the expiration of the
five (5) day period. (Ord. 131, 2nd Series, eff. 10-29-1984; amd. 1992 Code)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 189/444
H. Notice Of Impounding: Upon the impounding of any animal, the owner shall be notified, or if the
owner of the animal is unknown, written notice shall be posted for three (3) days at the city hall,
describing the animal and the place and time of taking. (Ord. 9, 2nd Series, eff. 12-17-1976; amd.
1992 Code)
I. Release From Animal Pound: Animals shall be released to their owners, or persons previously in
possession of them, upon a sworn statement of ownership, proof that a license has been duly
issued for such animal, and proof of current inoculations, and payment of impounding fees as
established by the council by resolution. (Ord. 48, 2nd Series, eff. 7-19-1980; amd. 1992 Code)
J. Nuisances:
1. Habitual Barking: It shall be unlawful for any person to own or possess an animal which
habitually barks, howls, whines or makes any other loud or unusual noises. "Habitual barking"
will be defined as any barking with a continuous duration of more than five (5) minutes. Such
barking must also be audible off of the owner's or caretaker's premises.
2. Damage To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person's animal to damage any lawn, garden or
other property, whether or not the owner has knowledge of the damage. Any such animal may
be impounded as provided in subsection G, "Animal Pound", of this section, or a complaint may
be issued by anyone aggrieved by the animal under this section, against the owner of the animal
for prosecution. (Ord. 135, 5th Series, eff. 10-23-2006)
K. Immobilization Of Animals: For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any peace officer,
animal control officer or other person assisting a peace officer or animal control officer may use a
so called tranquilizer gun or other instrument for the purpose of immobilizing and catching an
animal. (Ord. 9, 2nd Series, eff. 12-17-1976; amd. 1992 Code)
L. Dangerous Animals: Once an animal has been declared to be dangerous, the owner must register
the animal with the local animal control authority, which has established limitations and restrictions
for the owners of the animal deemed to be dangerous. This procedure will follow in accordance
with Minnesota statutes section 347.52. Any police officer or animal control officer may impound
for a period of ten (10) days any animal which he believes to be dangerous. In the case of such
impoundment, the officer shall comply with the provisions of subsection G, "Animal Pound", of this
section. If, after the expiration of the ten (10) day impoundment period and the officer no longer
deems the animal dangerous, he may return the animal to the owner. If the officer believes after
the ten (10) day impoundment period that the animal is dangerous or if the animal is not claimed
by its owner, he may humanely destroy such animal and dispose of the carcass; provided,
however, any police officer or animal control officer may kill an animal which he believes to be
dangerous and impractical to apprehend. (Ord. 135, 5th Series, eff. 10-23-2006)
M. Dog Licenses: It is unlawful for any person or other possessor of a dog over six (6) months of age
to fail to obtain a proper city license therefor. (Ord. 48, 2nd Series, eff. 7-19-1980)
N. Application: Application for a dog license shall be upon a form supplied by the city containing a
certificate by a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the state, which
certificate shall state that the dog for which application for a license is made has been inoculated
against rabies. (Ord. 9, 2nd Series, eff. 12-17-1976)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 190/444
O. Term And Fee: All dog licenses shall be for the life of the dog; providing, the dog possesses a
current rabies tag or other proof of inoculation, and said license shall expire when the dog has no
current rabies tag or other proof of inoculation. License fees shall be fixed from time to time by a
resolution of the council.
P. Tag Required: All licensed dogs shall wear a collar and have a tag firmly affixed thereto evidencing
such lifetime license. A duplicate for a lost tag may be issued by the city administrator upon
presentation of the receipt showing the payment of the lifetime license fee, upon presentation of a
certificate by a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine within the state, which
certificate shall state that the dog for which application for a duplicate license has been made, has
a current rabies inoculation, and upon payment of the fee of twenty five cents ($0.25) for issuance
of the duplicate. Dog tags shall not be transferable, and no refunds shall be made on any dog
license fee. (Ord. 48, 2nd Series, eff. 7-19-1980)
Q. Removal Of Excrement: It is unlawful for any person who owns or has custody of a pet to cause or
permit such animal to defecate on any private property without the consent of the property owners
or any public property, unless such person immediately removes the excrement and places it in a
proper receptacle. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to seeing eye dogs under the
control of a blind person or dogs while used in city police activity. (Ord. 13, 4th Series, eff. 7-12-
1993)
R. Biting Animals: Any animal that has not been inoculated by a live modified rabies vaccine and does
not have, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, immunity to rabies and which has bitten any
person, wherein the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall be
confined by the city for a period of not less than ten (10) days, at the expense of the owner. The
animal may be released at the end of such time if healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and
by the payment of all costs by the owner. However, if the owner of the animal shall elect
immediately upon receipt of notice of need for such confinement by the city to voluntarily and
immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a veterinary hospital of the
owner's choosing within Morrison County, and provide immediate proof of such confinement in
such manner as may be required, the owner may do so. (Ord. 145, 4th Series, eff. 9-13-1999)
10.12: DANGEROUS TRESPASSES AND OTHER ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to:
A. Smoke in the presence of explosives, or inflammable materials, or in a building or area in which
"No Smoking" notices have been prominently posted; or
B. Interfere with or obstruct the prevention or extinguishing of any fire, or disobey the lawful orders of
a law enforcement officer or firefighter present at the fire; or
C. Show a false light or signal or interfere with any light, signal or sign controlling or guiding traffic
upon a highway, railway track or navigable water, or in the air; or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 191/444
D. Place an obstruction upon a railroad track; or
E. Expose another or his property to an obnoxious or harmful gas, fluid or substance, with intent to
injure, molest or coerce; or
F. Trespass or permit animals under his control to trespass upon a railroad track; or
G. Permit domestic animals or fowl under his control to go upon the land of another within the city; or
H. Interfere unlawfully with any monument, sign or pointer erected or marked to designate a point of a
boundary, line or a political subdivision, or a tract of land; or
I. Trespass upon the premises of another without claim of right; or
J. Enter the premises of another with intent to take or injure any fruit, fruit trees or vegetables growing
thereon without the permission of the owner or occupant; or
K. Without the permission of the owner, tamper with or get into or upon a motor vehicle, or ride in or
upon such motor vehicle knowing it was taken and is being driven by another without the
permission of the owner. (1976 Code)
10.13: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY; PRESENCE AT UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY:
A. Unlawful Assembly: It is unlawful for three (3) or more persons to assemble, and each participant
shall be guilty of unlawful assembly, if the assembly is: 1) with intent to commit any unlawful act by
force; or 2) with intent to carry out any purpose in such manner as will disturb or threaten the public
peace; or 3) without unlawful purpose but the participants to conduct themselves in a disorderly
manner as to disturb or threaten the public peace.
B. Presence At Unlawful Assembly: It is unlawful for any person to be present at the place of an
unlawful assembly and refuse to leave when so directed by a law enforcement officer. (1976 Code)
10.14: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It is unlawful for any person, in a public or private place, knowing, or having reasonable grounds to
know that it will, or will tend to, alarm, anger or disturb others or provoke any assault or breach of the
peace, to do or permit upon premises owned or controlled by him, the following:
A. Engage in brawling or fighting; or
B. Disturb an assembly or meeting, not unlawful in its character; or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 192/444
C. Engage in offensive, obscene or abusive language or in boisterous and noisy conduct tending
reasonably to arouse alarm, anger or resentment in others; or
D. Wilfully and lewdly expose his person or the private parts thereof, or procure another to so expose
himself; and any open or gross lewdness or lascivious behavior, or any act of public indecency; or
E. Voluntarily enter the waters of any river or city public swimming pool or beach between the hours of
ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M., except with specific permission; or enter
such waters without being garbed in a bathing suit sufficient to cover his person and equal to the
standards generally adopted and accepted by the public; or
F. Cause the making or production of an unnecessary noise by shouting or by any other means or
mechanism, including the blowing of any automobile or other vehicle horn; or
G. Use a flash or spotlight in a manner so as to annoy or endanger others; or
H. Cause defacement, destruction or otherwise damage to any premises or any property located
thereon; or
I. Strew, scatter, litter, throw, dispose of or deposit any refuse, garbage or rubbish onto any premises,
except into receptacles provided for such purpose; or
J. Enter any motor vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or operator; or
K. Fail or refuse to vacate or leave any premises after being requested or ordered, whether orally or in
writing, to do so, by the owner or person in charge thereof, or by any law enforcement agent or
official; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any person who is owner or tenant
of the premises involved, nor to any law enforcement or other government official who may be
present thereon at that time as part of his official duty, nor shall it include the spouse, children,
employee or tenant of such owner or occupier. (Ord. 131, 2nd Series, eff. 10-29-1984)
10.15: CURFEW:
A. Minors Under The Age Of Eighteen: It is unlawful for any minor person to be or loiter upon the
streets or public places between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00)
A.M.
B. Parents And Guardians: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care
or custody of any minor to allow or permit such minor to be or loiter upon the streets or public
places in violation of this section unless such minor is accompanied by a person of lawful age
having such minor in charge.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 193/444
C. Places Of Amusement, Entertainment Or Refreshment: It is unlawful for any person operating, or in
charge of, any place of amusement, entertainment or refreshment, or other place of business, to
allow or permit any minor to be or remain in such place in violation of this section, unless such
minor is accompanied by a person of lawful age having such minor in charge. This subsection shall
not be construed to permit the presence, at any time, of any person underage in any place where
his presence is otherwise prohibited by law.
D. Exceptions: Such curfew shall not apply to any students under the age of eighteen (18) years who
are lawfully attending, going to or returning from school, church or community sponsored athletic,
musical or social activities or events, or where the presence of a minor is connected with or
required by some legitimate business, trade, profession or occupation in which the said minor is
permitted by law to be engaged, in which case the curfew for a minor, if approved by the parent or
guardian, shall be determined by the mayor. (1976 Code)
10.16: BURNING PROHIBITED:
A. Permit Required: No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city without
first having obtained an open burning permit. An open burning permit may be obtained from the fire
chief in accordance with Minnesota department of natural resources regulations.
B. Excessive Or Noxious Smoke: No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of oils,
petroleum fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials or other materials which produce
excessive or noxious smoke, such as tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood, composite
shingles, tarpaper, insulation, composition board, sheetrock, wire, paint or paint fillers. (Ord. 30,
4th Series, eff. 4-25-1994)
10.17: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES:
A. Firearms And Explosives, Generally: It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any cannon,
gun, pistol or other firearm, firecracker, sky rocket or other fireworks, air gun, air rifle, or other
similar device commonly referred to as a BB gun, within the city, except as permitted by state law.
(Ord. 111, 5th Series, eff. 8-15-2005)
B. Permitted Fireworks: Nothing in this section shall apply to a display of fireworks by an organization
or group of organizations authorized in writing by the council, or to a peace officer in the discharge
of his duty, or to a person in the lawful defense of his person or family.
C. Firearms, Lindbergh State Park: Nothing in this section shall apply to the manager of Lindbergh
state park or his designee, or to individuals licensed by the state department of natural resources
to participate in a managed hunt after consulting with the city, within Lindbergh state park. (Ord.
51, 4th Series, eff. 2-13-1995)
D. Gun Safety Class: Nothing in this section shall apply to the discharge of an air gun, air rifle or other
similar device commonly referred to as a BB gun, when it is used in a community wide supervised
class or event, specifically authorized by the city. (Ord. 121, 4th Series, eff. 7-13-1998)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 194/444
10.18 - 10.19: RESERVED:
Article III. Other Public Protection
10.20: RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING PUBLIC PARKS:
A. Park Defined: For purposes of this section, the term "park" means any land, building or water,
owned or used by the city for public recreation.
B. Unlawful Acts: It is unlawful for any person in any park to engage in any of the following prohibited
conduct:
1. Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, displace or remove any structure, equipment or park
property.
2. Fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition.
3. Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil or other materials, or
make any excavation by any means.
4. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure the bark, or pick the flowers
or seeds of any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any
other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
5. Climb, stand, walk or sit upon any monument, foundation, railing, fence or upon any other
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
6. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal,
reptile or bird; nor remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or
nest, or young of any reptile or bird.
7. Place or cause to be placed in any water in or adjacent to a park, any substance which will or
may result in the pollution of said waters.
8. Deposit refuse or trash anywhere on the grounds of any park. Such refuse or trash shall be
placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not so
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
9. Drive or ride a motor vehicle in excess of the posted speed and in no case faster than fifteen
(15) miles per hour.
10. Drive any vehicle in any area except the designated park roads or parking areas, or such other
areas as may be so posted.
11. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be
in accordance with the posted directions and with the instructions of any attendant who may be
present.
12. Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor powered or not, upon
any waters, except at places designated for boating by the park director. Such activity shall be in
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 195/444
accordance with applicable regulations as are now or hereafter adopted.
13. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished.
14. Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor
shall any person leave, after closing hours, any movable structure or vehicle to be used for such
purpose, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the like, except as authorized and
posted.
15. Ride a horse, except on designated bridle trails. Horses shall be thoroughly broken and
properly restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go
unattended.
16. Build or attempt to build a fire, except in such areas and under such regulations as may be
designated by the park director. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or other flammable material within any park area or on any road
abutting or contiguous thereto.
17. Enter an area posted as "closed to the public", nor shall any person use, or abet the use of,
any area in violation of posted notices.
18. Engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or engage in
any disorderly conduct or behavior in breach of the public peace.
19. Expose or offer for sale any article or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article, except by and under the authority and regulation of the
council.
20. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever,
nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or
roads adjacent to a park, unless authorized by the city engineer or the building official.
21. Carry an uncased firearm. (1976 Code; amd. 1992 Code)
10.21: MINNESOTA UNIFORM FIRE CODE:
A. Adoption: The 1988 uniform fire code, as amended by chapters 7510.3100 through 7510.3280, one
copy of which has been marked "City of Little Falls - Official Copy", and which is on file at the office
of the building official, is hereby adopted by reference as the fire code for the city for the purpose
of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion. Every provision contained in this code, except as modified or amended by this section,
is hereby adopted and made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein.
B. Establishment Of Districts In Which Storage Of Flammable Or Combustible Liquids In Outside
Aboveground Tanks Is Prohibited:
1. The limits referred to in section 79.501 of the Minnesota uniform fire code in which storage of
flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby
established as the corporate limits of the city, except the area on the east side of the Mississippi
River, one hundred fifty feet (150') to either side of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks from
Fourth Avenue Southeast to Fifth Avenue Northeast, on the west side of the Mississippi River
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 196/444
one hundred fifty feet (150') either side of the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks from Ninth
Avenue Northwest to Twelfth Avenue Northwest.
2. The limits referred to in section 79.1401 of the Minnesota uniform fire code, in which new bulk
plants for flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as the
corporate limits of the city, except by conditional use permit.
C. Establishment Of Limits In Which Bulk Storage Of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is To Be Restricted:
The limits referred to in section 82.103(a) of the Minnesota uniform fire code, in which bulk storage
of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as the corporate limits of the city,
except by conditional use permit.
D. Establishment Of Limits Of Districts In Which Storage Of Explosives And Blasting Agents Is To Be
Prohibited: The limits referred to in section 77.106(b) of the Minnesota uniform fire code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby established as the corporate
limits of the city, except by conditional use permit.
E. New Materials; Processes Or Occupancies Which May Require Permits: The city engineer, the
building official and the fire chief shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which
shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in said code. (Ord. 101, 3rd Series, eff.
1-28-1991)
10.22: NATURAL LANDSCAPE PLANS:
A. Natural Landscape Plan:
1. Conditions: A landowner wishing to maintain property in a natural state may be exempted from
the requirements of subsection 10.41L4 of this chapter, providing the following conditions are
met:
a. No part of the property exempted shall be within any platted street or alley;
b. The landowner shall control noxious weeds on the property as required by Minnesota
statutes;
c. The property shall be maintained according to a natural landscape plan approved by the city.
2. Stay Of Notice To Eradicate: If no natural landscape plan has been approved by the city prior to
service of a notice to eradicate, eradication shall be stayed if a natural landscape plan is
presented to the city for approval prior to eradication.
3. Criteria: In approving a natural landscape plan, the city shall consider the following criteria:
statement of intent and purpose for the natural area; description of the vegetation types, plants
and plant succession; management and maintenance techniques employed; the character and
nature of the surrounding area; use of native plants; maintenance of wildlife habitat.
4. Revocation: Notwithstanding approval of a natural landscape plan, the city may order mowing of
the area subject to the plan upon a determination that the area is a hazard to the health, safety
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 197/444
and welfare of the residents. The city may revoke a natural landscape plan upon a finding that
the terms of the plan have not been complied with, or that it has failed to achieve its purpose.
5. Recommended Trees, Shrubs: The following trees and shrubs are recommended for meeting
the requirements of natural landscape plans:
a. Coniferous trees: American larch (tamarack); black spruce; eastern white pine; white spruce;
balsam fir; northern cedar (arborvitae); Norway red pine; eastern red cedar;
b. Deciduous trees: red oak; red maple; paper birch; pagoda dogwood; butternut; eastern
cottonwood; bur oak; sugar maple; blue beech; white ash; tamarack; bigtooth aspen; green
ash; yellow birch; hackberry; black ash; ironwood; basswood;
c. Evergreen shrubs: common juniper;
d. Deciduous shrubs: dull leaf indigo bush; round leafed dogwood; American hazelnut; common
winterberry; pussy willow; American cranberry bush; common chokecherry; red twigged
dogwood; black chokecherry; smooth sumac; coyote willow; red berried elder; American plum;
gray dogwood; beaked hazel; leatherwood; staghorn sumac; American elder; nannyberry; pin
cherry;
e. Planting for wildlife habitat: spruce or fir rather than pine; mixture of red, white and bur oaks;
fruit and nut bearing plants; native species rather than exotics or ornamental cultivars; warm
season grasses (prairie species) rather than cool season grasses (brome and bluegrass);
f. For year round food supply for wildlife: highbush cranberry; red osier dogwood; gray dogwood;
wild plum; juneberry; mountain ash; crabapple; chokecherry; staghorn sumac. (Ord. 60, 6th
Series, eff. 7-21-2014; amd. Ord. 74, 6th Series, eff. 5-4-2015)
10.23: HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS, APPLIANCES AND TRADE FIXTURES
STORED WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 74, 6th Series, eff. 5-4-2015)
10.24: ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES:
(Rep. by Ord. 74, 6th Series, eff. 5-4-2015)
10.25: DISTURBING THE PEACE, NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS:
A. Unlawful To Make Loud Or Unnecessary Noises: It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or
cause to be made, loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys, disturbs or affects the
comfort, repose, health or peace of others.
B. Unlawful Acts: The following acts set forth in the following subsections are declared to be loud and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 198/444
1. Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc.: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle, except as a danger warning.
2. Radios, Tape And Disc Players, Etc.: The using, operating or permitting to be played any radio
receiving set, tape or disc player, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner, considering the time and place and
the purpose for which the sound is produced, as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of a
person or persons of ordinary sensibilities.
a. The play, use or operation of any radio, tape or disc player, musical instrument, phonograph
or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to
be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from such machine or device shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section.
b. When sound violating this section is produced or reproduced by a machine or device that is
located in or on a vehicle, the vehicle's owner is guilty of the violation; provided, however, that
if the vehicle's owner is not present at the time of the violation, the person in charge or control
of the vehicle at the time of the violation is guilty of the violation.
c. With the exception of the machines or devices listed in subsection D of this section, this
section shall apply to all radios, tape and disc players, musical instruments, phonographs, and
machines and devices for the production or reproduction of sound, whether on public or
private property.
3. Loudspeakers, Amplifiers For Advertising: The using, operating, or permitting to be played any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
building or structure.
4. Yelling, Shouting, Etc.: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at any time or place so as
to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel,
motel or other place of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
5. Animals, Birds, Etc.: The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
6. Sound Trucks For Advertising Purposes: The use of sound trucks or any other vehicle equipped
with sound amplifying devices for the purposes of advertising any program, project or meeting of
any public agency, private business, religious organization, civic group, political party or
charitable organization.
7. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals: The creation of any excessive noise on any street or
private property adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, court or hospital, while the
same are in use which unreasonably interferes with the use thereof, provided conspicuous signs
are displayed indicating that the same is a school, hospital, court or church.
8. Hawkers, Peddlers: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
9. Noisy Parties And Gatherings:
a. Prohibition: No person shall, between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M., congregate at, or participate in, any party or gathering of two (2) or more people
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 199/444
from which noise emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet and repose
of another person. No person shall knowingly remain at such a noisy party or gathering.
b. Evidence: Noise of such volume as to be clearly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from
the structure or building in which the party or gathering is occurring, or in the case of
apartment buildings, in the adjacent hallway or apartment, shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section.
c. Duty To Disperse: When a police officer determines that a party or gathering is in violation of
this section, the officer may order all persons present at the premises where the violation is
occurring, other than the owner or tenants of the premises, to disperse immediately. No
person shall knowingly remain at such a party or gathering. (Ord. 01, 5th Series, eff. 2-28-
2000)
C. Unlawful Acts, Except In Areas Zoned Industrial I: The following are declared to be loud and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter in all parts of the City, except in those areas zoned I
Industrial District, under the zoning ordinance of the City: (Ord. 01, 5th Series, eff. 2-28-2000; amd.
Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
1. Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any vehicle, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
2. Defect In Vehicle Or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other
noise which shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity.
3. Construction Or Repairing Of Buildings: The erection (including excavating), demolition,
alteration or repair of any building between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on weekdays, and all day Sunday, except where single individuals or families work
on single-family residences for their own occupancy owned by them, except that the building
inspector may, in cases of emergency, grant permission to repair at any time when he finds that
such repair will not affect the health and safety of the persons in the vicinity.
4. Pile Drivers, Hammers, Etc.: The operation between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any pile driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power or
electric hoist, or other appliance the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
5. Blowers: The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion
engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of aerating gases or fluids,
unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler
device sufficient to deaden such noise.
D. Exceptions: The following are exempt from violation of this chapter:
1. Activities which are duly authorized, sponsored or licensed by the City, so long as the activity is
conducted pursuant to the conditions of the license, permit or contract authorizing such activity.
2. Church bells, school bells, chimes or carillons.
3. Persons who have gone to a party for the sole purpose of abating the violation.
4. Antitheft devices.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 200/444
5. Machines or devices for the production of sound on or in authorized emergency vehicles or for
authorized emergency purposes. (Ord. 01, 5th Series, eff. 2-28-2000)
10.26: STORAGE OF WOOD:
(Rep. by Ord. 74, 6th Series, eff. 5-4-2015)
10.27: CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF BEER, WINE OR LIQUOR ON
STREETS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess in an unsealed container, "beer", "wine" or
"liquor", as those terms are defined in chapter 3 of this code, on any street, public beach or other
public property, except city parks and other public property when and where permission has been
specifically granted or licensed by the council; provided, that this section shall not apply to the
possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle on streets or public property when the
container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of
the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with
a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within
the area occupied by the driver or passengers. (Ord. 131, 2nd Series, eff. 10-29-1984)
10.28: CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF BEER, WINE OR LIQUOR ON
PRIVATE PARKING LOTS:
It is unlawful for any person to consume or possess in an unsealed container, "beer", "wine" or
"liquor", as those terms are defined in section 3.01 of this code, on any privately owned parking lot
which is clearly signposted prohibiting such possession and consumption; provided, that this section
shall not apply to the possession of an unsealed container in a motor vehicle on privately owned
parking lots when the container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle if it is equipped with a trunk, or kept
in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor
vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. For the purpose of this section, a utility or glove compartment
shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver or passengers. (Ord. 131, 2nd Series,
eff. 10-29-1984)
10.29: EXHIBITION DRIVING:
It is a misdemeanor for any person to:
A. Operate a motor vehicle on a public highway, street, parking lot, alley or other public property or
private property without the consent of the owner in such manner as to cause any of the following:
1. Spinning or skidding of the wheels or tires.
2. Squealing or similar noise from the driving tires.
3. Defacing the roadway with black marks or indenting the roadway by skidding or spinning of tires.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 201/444
4. "Fishtailing" or skidding sideways.
5. Rapid intermittent application of the accelerator making the vehicle bounce up or down or make
excessive noise.
6. Accelerating in an excessive manner in an apparent acceleration contest commonly referred to
as "drag racing".
B. Drive or operate a vehicle on a public highway, street, parking lot, alley or other public property or
private property without consent of the owner, at erratic or irregular and changing speeds so as to
create a hazard to himself or other persons or property, or to interfere with other traffic in the area.
(Ord. 104, 2nd Series, eff. 8-1-1983)
10.30: JAKE BRAKING:
It shall be unlawful for any truck to intentionally dynamic brake ("jake brake") on any public highway,
street, parking lot or alley. (Ord. 135, 4th Series, eff. 4-5-1999)
10.31: PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES:
A. Purpose: The city council has determined that there is a need for alternative methods of enforcing
the city codes. While criminal fines and penalties have been the most frequent enforcement
mechanism, there are certain negative consequences for both the city and the accused. The delay
inherent in that system does not ensure prompt resolution. Citizens resent being labeled as
criminals for violations of administrative regulations. The higher burden of proof and the potential of
incarceration do not appear appropriate for most administrative violations. The criminal process
does not always regard city code violations as being important. Accordingly, the city council finds
the use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil penalties is legitimate and a necessary
alternative method of enforcement. This method of enforcement is in addition to any other legal
remedy that may be pursued for city code violations.
B. Alternative Methods Of Enforcement: This administrative enforcement procedure seeks to gain
compliance with certain provisions of this code and serves as an alternate to any formal criminal or
civil court action. The administrative hearing process provided for in this section shall be in addition
to any other legal or equitable remedy available to the city for city code violations, except that if a
determination is made by the hearing officer pursuant to the hearing process detailed in this
section that a violation did not occur, the city may not then proceed with criminal prosecution of the
same act or conduct.
C. Authority To Issue Order To Correct Letters And Administrative Citations: The following city
employees and agents are authorized to issue compliance letters and administrative citations for
violations of this code:
1. Licensed peace officers of the Little Falls police department;
2. City building official;
3. City housing/rental housing inspector;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 202/444
4. City engineer;
5. City zoning administrator;
6. Fire chief of the Little Falls fire department.
D. Administrative Offenses; Schedules Of Fines And Fees:
1. Except as noted herein, a violation of any provision of this code is an administrative offense
which may be subject to an administrative citation and civil penalties pursuant to this section.
Each day a violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
a. The following offenses shall not be subject to administrative citation:
- Traffic offenses under Minnesota state statutes chapter 169;
- Sections 10.10, 10.12, 10.14, 10.17, and 10.29, and subsection 10.11L of this chapter.
2. An administrative offense may be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
3. The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of recommended fines for offenses initiated
by administrative citation. The city council is not bound by that schedule when a matter is
appealed for administrative review.
4. The city council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to administrative hearing officers.
5. The city council shall adopt written procedures for administering the administrative citation
program.
E. Order To Correct; Administrative Citations: Upon the reasonable belief that an administrative
offense has occurred, the city officials listed above shall serve on the violator an order to correct
the violation. If compliance is not achieved within the time line prescribed in the order to correct the
violation, the official is authorized to issue an administrative citation. An administrative citation shall
be presented in person or by first class mail to the person responsible for the violation. Service
shall be deemed complete upon depositing the citation in the United States mail, properly
addressed to the last known address of the person to be served and postage prepaid. The citation
shall state the following: date, time and nature of the offense, citing the relevant portion of this
code that was allegedly violated, the amount of the scheduled civil fine, and the manner for paying
the fine, a statement that the city code violation and the amount of the administrative penalty may
be contested to be heard before an independent hearing officer by notifying the city administrator
or designated representative in writing within ten (10) days of the date of the citation, and a
statement that failure to pay the administrative civil penalty may result in it being assessed against
the property as provided in Minnesota statutes chapter 429.
F. Exceptions To Issuance Of Order To Correct Letter: For violations of subsections F1 through F7 of
this section the city shall not be required to issue a compliance letter and may proceed directly to
the issuance of an administrative citation as provided in subsection E of this section.
1. Repeat offender. If the same owner commits a subsequent violation within twelve (12) months
after a compliance letter has been issued for the same or similar offense.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 203/444
2. License violations. This constitutes any violation of a city code license requirement including not
having a license.
3. Noncriminal violations of:
a. Public nuisance.
b. Unlawful deposit of garbage.
c. Off road vehicle violations.
d. Snowmobile violations.
e. Boating violations.
f. Animal complaints.
g. Barking dog violation.
h. Trespassing in a city park.
i. Skateboards, etc., on sidewalks.
4. Property maintenance code.
5. Rental housing maintenance code.
6. Erosion and sediment control ordinance.
7. Land use code.
G. Reasonable Extensions: Following service of the compliance letter, the city shall attempt to work
with the owner to resolve the violation, including, but not limited to, responding to reasonable
extensions for compliance.
H. Payment Of Penalty And Correction Of Violation: If the owner pays the administrative civil penalty
and corrects the city code violation, no further action will be taken against the owner or the owner's
real property for that same violation. If payment is made but correction is not accomplished, a
subsequent administrative citation may be issued, criminal proceedings may be initiated, or any
other proceedings or remedies available in order to enforce correction of the violation. If no
payment is made, no correction of the violation is made, and no request for hearing is made in
accordance herein, the city may assess the administrative civil penalty against the property owner
pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 429, issue a subsequent administrative citation and
commence a new administrative process, initiate criminal proceedings or initiate other enforcement
action authorized by law or a combination hereof.
I. Request For Hearing: An owner or occupant may contest the administrative citation and the amount
of the fine by requesting a hearing, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the citation, to the
city administrator or designated representative.
J. Administrative Hearing Procedure:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 204/444
1. Hearing Officers: The city council will periodically approve a list of lawyers, from which the city
administrator will select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which the hearing is
requested. The person who has requested the hearing has the right to request, no later than
fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing, that the assigned hearing officer be removed
from the case. One such request for each case will be granted by the city administrator. A
subsequent request must be directed to the assigned hearing officer who will decide whether the
hearing officer can fairly and objectively review the case. If such a finding is made, the hearing
officer shall remove himself or herself from the case, and the city administrator shall assign
another hearing officer. The hearing officer is not a judicial officer, but is a public officer as
defined by Minnesota statutes section 609.415. The hearing officer shall not be a current or
former employee of the city of Little Falls.
2. Notice Of Hearing: Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by first class mail to the
person responsible for the violation no less than twenty (20) days in advance of the scheduled
hearing, unless a shorter time is accepted by both parties. Service shall be deemed complete
upon depositing the notice of hearing in the United States mail, properly addressed to the last
known address of the person to be served and postage prepaid.
3. Payment For Cost Of Hearing: The cost of the hearing shall be borne solely by the nonprevailing
party. The city shall provide an estimate of the cost of the hearing at the time of the request for
hearing. The city council has the authority to reduce the nonprevailing party's costs where that
party can demonstrate indigency by clear and convincing evidence.
Proof of indigency can be demonstrated by the party's receipt of means tested governmental
benefits or a demonstrated lack of assets or current income. Such proof shall be presented to
the city council for determination subsequent to the hearing. However, the hearing officer at the
time of the hearing shall make specific findings as to whether or not the party is indigent with
said findings presented to the city council. In all cases, where the party requesting the hearing is
unable to attend and fails to request a continuance of the hearing at least forty eight (48) hours
in advance of the scheduled hearing, all costs incurred by the city attributable to the hearing
shall be charged to the requesting party.
4. Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the parties shall have the opportunity to present testimony
and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer shall
record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits and the full record of the hearing shall be
kept. The hearing officer shall receive and give weight to evidence, including hearsay evidence
probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent people in the conduct of their
affairs.
5. Authority Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall determine whether a violation did or
did not occur. If the hearing officer determines that a violation did not occur then the citation shall
be dismissed. If the hearing officer determines that a violation did occur, then the officer may do
any of the following: impose a fine anywhere within or up to, but not exceeding, the maximum
penalty for an administrative offense, stay or waive a fine either unconditionally or upon
compliance with the appropriate conditions. When imposing a penalty for a violation, the hearing
officer may consider any or all of the following:
a. The duration of the violation;
b. The frequency of recurrence of the violation;
c. The seriousness of the violation;
d. The history of the violation;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 205/444
e. The violator's conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
f. The good faith effort of the violator to comply;
g. The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
h. The impact of the violation upon the community; and
i. Any other factors appropriate to just result.
6. Fines For Continuing Violations: The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a fine for
more than one day of a continuing violation but only on a finding that the violation caused a
serious threat of harm to the public health, safety or welfare, or the accused intentionally and
unreasonably refused to comply with the code requirement. The hearing officer's decision and
supporting reasons for continuing violations must be in writing.
7. Decision Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall issue a decision in writing to both
parties within ten (10) days of the hearing. Any fines or penalties imposed must be paid no later
than thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing officer's order. If the fine is not paid, the city may
assess the civil penalty against the owner's property pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter
429. If the hearing officer determines that no violation occurred, the city may not proceed with
criminal prosecution for the same act or conduct. The decision of the hearing officer is final and
may only be appealed to the Minnesota court of appeals by petitioning for a writ of certiorari
pursuant to Minnesota statutes section 606.01.
K. Payment Of Fines: Prior to any assessment for unpaid fines, the city shall seek payment of the
fines by notifying the owner of the property in writing of the fine imposed.
L. Assessment Procedure: Unpaid fines including an administrative charge of twenty five dollars
($25.00) plus interest of the total balance will be assessed pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter
429, against the property of the owner charged with the violation. For uncorrected or continued
violations, the city will correct the violation and assess the charges for doing so. (Ord. 72, 6th
Series, eff. 3-16-2015)
10.32: ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. Statement Of Purpose And Objectives: The police and fire departments respond to many false
alarms each year, at a level that places burdens upon the time and resources of these entities.
False alarms also create an increased level of risks on the safety of responding personnel and to
the public. Therefore, the justification of this section is to reduce the high level of risks and
expenses by reducing the frequency of occurrence of these false alarms and establishes a system
of administration. This section shall apply to all types of alarms that require law enforcement or fire
response.
B. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ALARM ADMINISTRATOR: A person or persons designated by the city to administer, control and
review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 206/444
ALARM AGENT: Includes any person who is employed by an alarm business, either directly or
indirectly, including an owner, corporate officer or director, whose duties include any of the
following: selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing
on any building, place or premises, any police or fire alarm system, central station system or
burglary alarm systems.
ALARM BUSINESS: Includes the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing,
altering, replacing, moving or installing any police and/or fire alarm system.
ALARM SIGNAL: A detectable signal, audible or visual, generated by an alarm system to which
law enforcement and/or firefighting personnel are requested to respond.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any electronic device used for the purpose of notifying the general public or
public safety personnel of the existence of an emergency situation to which public safety personnel
respond, including, but not limited to, automatic dialing devices, burglary alarm systems, control
station systems, fire alarm systems, or police and/or fire alarm systems.
ALARM USER: Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, governmental, educational
entity or any other entity owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, using the services of an
automatic dialing device, police alarm system, fire alarm system, central station system or a
burglar alarm system.
ANSWERING SERVICE: A telephone answering service, which receives signals from any alarm
system and thereafter immediately relaying the message by live voice to the communications
center of the sheriff's office.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An automated alarm system, which sends a prerecorded voice
message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation, which the alarm
system is designed to detect.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into an area
protected by the system, but which system is not connected to a police alarm or central station
system.
CENTRAL STATION: An office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are
connected, where operators supervise the circuits, and where guards are maintained continuously
to investigate signals.
CENTRAL STATION SYSTEM: A system in which the operation of electrical protection circuits and
devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained and supervised from a central
station having operators and security personnel on duty at all times.
CITY OR COUNTY: The city of Little Falls or the county of Morrison.
DIRECT LINE: A telephone line leading directly from a central station to the communications
center of the sheriff's office that is for use only to report emergency signals on a person to person
basis.
EXCESSIVE ALARMS: Three (3) or more false alarms signaled by any police or fire alarm system
within a calendar year.
FALSE ALARMS: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction,
improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of an alarm system, or of his/her
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 207/444
employees or agents, to which the police or fire department has been dispatched, where an
emergency situation does not exist. Such terminology does not include alarms caused by
hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, lightening, power failure, damage to power lines or severe
weather conditions.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: Any device designed for the detection of fires on the premises for alerting
others of a fire, and when activated emits a sound or transmits a signal or message which system
is connected to or monitored by the county sheriff's office.
KEY HOLDER: A person who has your permission and is able to gain entry into your property.
LOCAL ALARM: An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from
the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by
an alarm company or user.
POLICE ALARM SYSTEM: Any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on the
premises or alerting others of an unlawful act, or both, and when activated, emits a sound or
transmits a signal or message which system is connected to or monitored by the county sheriff's
office.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE: Any telephone line leading directly into the communications center of the
sheriff's office that is for the purpose of handling emergency calls on a person to person basis, and
which is identified as such by a specific number included in the emergency numbers listed in the
telephone directory issued by the telephone companies within the sheriff's office jurisdiction.
PROPRIETARY SYSTEM: An alarm system sounding and/or recording alarm and supervisory
signals at a control center located within the protected premises, the control center being under the
supervision of the proprietor of the protected premises. A "proprietary system" includes a signal
line connected directly to the sheriff's office communications center, a central station or answering
service; it thereby becomes an "alarm system" as defined in this section.
VERIFY: An attempt by the monitoring company or its representative, to contact the alarm site
and/or user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a
person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law
enforcement and/or firefighting personnel be dispatched in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary
alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this section, telephone verification shall require at a
minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an
alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal
is valid before requesting law enforcement and/or firefighting personnel be dispatched.
C. Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law
enforcement or fire department personnel when no crime or danger to life or property is being
committed or attempted or otherwise to cause a false alarm. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain
or use an audible alarm system, which can sound continually for more than ten (10) minutes. It
shall also be unlawful to install, maintain or use an automatic dial protection device that reports or
causes to be reported, any recorded message to the police or fire departments.
D. Fee For False Alarms: The owner of property upon which an automatic alarm device is located
and/or each owner of an automatic alarm device shall pay a fee as established by resolution upon
the response of a third and subsequent false alarms by the fire and/or police departments in a
calendar year. Continued responses to false alarms by the department will be billed at a rate set
forth by resolution. (Ord. 5, 6th Series, eff. 3-5-2008)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 208/444
10.33: POSSESSION AND SALE OF SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS:
A. Purpose And Intent: This section is adopted for the purpose of protection of public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare of our residents by prohibiting the possession and/or sale of synthetic
cannabinoids.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section "synthetic cannabinoid" shall mean:
1. A synthetic equivalent of the substance contained in the cannabis plant, or in the resinous
extractives of the genus Cannabis, or a synthetic substance, derivative, or its isomers with
similar chemical structure or pharmacological activity such as the following:
a. 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole; some trade or other names, also known as JWH-018;
b. 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole; some trade or other names, also known as JWH-073;
c. Phenol, CP 47, 497 and homologues, or 2-[(1R, 3S)]-3-[hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methylocatan-2-yl)phenol, where side chain n=5, and homologues where side chain n=4, 6 or
7; and
d. Any similar structural analogs.
2. Products, by whatever trade name, that are treated, sprayed, or saturated with one or more of
the above chemicals. Some currently marketed products containing synthetic cannabinoids
identified in this subsection B include K2, spice, mojo, smoke, genie, Yucatan fire, diamond
spice, red dragon smoke, skunk, K2 summit, and Pandora potpourri.
C. Unlawful Acts: No person shall use, possess, purchase, sell, give away, barter, exchange,
dispense, deliver, distribute, or manufacture any synthetic cannabinoids, as defined in this section,
within the city.
D. Exceptions: Acts otherwise prohibited under this section shall not be unlawful if performed by or
under the direction of a licensed physician, dentist or other medical health professional authorized
to direct or prescribe such acts. (Ord. 27, 6th Series, eff. 10-4-2010)
10.34 - 10.39: RESERVED:
10.40: RENTAL HOUSING MAINTENANCE CODE:
A. General:
1. Title: These regulations shall be known as the RENTAL HOUSING MAINTENANCE CODE of
the city of Little Falls.
2. Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to all rental housing structures and all existing
premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the
elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 209/444
the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and
premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
3. Findings: The city council finds there exists in the city numerous rental housing properties that
are substandard in one or more important features of structure, equipment, maintenance, or
occupancy. Such conditions adversely affect public health and safety and lead to the
continuation, extension, and aggravation of blight. Adequate protection of public health, safety
and welfare therefore requires the establishment and enforcement of minimum property
maintenance standards.
4. Intent: It is not the intention of the city to intrude upon the fair and contractual relationship
between landlord and tenant. The city shall not intervene as an advocate of either party, or act
as an arbiter, nor be receptive to complaints from tenant or landlord that are not specifically and
clearly relevant to the provisions of this section.
5. Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
APPROVED: Approved by the housing inspector pursuant to applicable provisions of this section and
other codes and regulations.
ATTIC STORY: Any story situated wholly or partly in the roof, so designed, arranged or built as to be
used for business, storage or habitation.
BASEMENT: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below
ground level) on at least three (3) sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
BATH: A bathtub or shower bath.
BEDROOM: A habitable room within a dwelling unit which is used, or intended to be used, primarily
for the purpose of sleeping, but shall not include any kitchen or dining room.
CLEAN: The condition of being free from readily noticeable dirt, soil, stain, leftover food particles, or
other material not intended to be a part of the object in question.
COMMUNAL: Used or shared by, or intended to be used or shared by the occupants of two (2) or
more rooming units.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE: The following diseases, for the purposes of this section, are deemed
communicable: chicken pox, diphtheria, hepatitis, poliomyelitis, smallpox, tuberculosis, typhoid fever
and fevers with rash.
DEAD BOLT LOCKS: A locking bolt which, when in the locked position, can only be moved positively
by turning a knob, key, sliding bolt, or by a mechanism activated by working a combination.
DINING ROOM: A habitable room used or intended to be used for the purpose of eating but not for
cooking or the preparation of meals.
DWELLING: Any building or structure, or portion thereof, except temporary housing, which is wholly or
partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants. There are three (3)
principal types:
a. Single-Family: A freestanding (detached) residence structure designed for or occupied by
one family only.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 210/444
b. Two-Family: A residence designed for or occupied by two (2) families only, with separate
housekeeping and cooking facilities for each, referred to commonly as a duplex.
c. Multiple-Family: Three (3) or more dwelling units in one structure.
DWELLING UNIT: A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by a single
family but not including hotels, motels, boarding or rooming houses or tourist homes.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit with one primary room which doubles as a living room,
kitchen, and bedroom.
EMERGENCY: Any condition or combination of conditions which in the opinion of the county
health authority, housing inspector, or the fire chief requires immediate action for the
protection of health, safety, or welfare of the occupants of a dwelling or of the public.
EXTERMINATION: The control or elimination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
FAMILY: Two (2) or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, adoption, or
foster care, or a group of not more than four (4) persons not so related maintaining a common
household and using common cooking and kitchen facilities.
FIRE CHIEF: The legally authorized fire chief or authorized representative.
FIRE ESCAPE: An emergency means of egress. A fire escape shall not constitute a required
stairway.
FIRE RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION: Construction to resist the spread of fire, details of which
are specified in the state building code as adopted in section 5.01 of the city code.
GARBAGE: Means and includes organic refuse resulting from the preparation of food, and
decayed and spoiled matter from any source.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA: An area that has a ceiling height of seven feet (7') throughout.
However, on floors above the first floor the habitable area shall have a minimum ceiling height
of seven feet (7') over fifty percent (50%) or more of its area, and no part of any floor having a
ceiling height of less than five feet (5') shall be considered as part of the habitable floor area;
and further, dwellings shall have a minimum ceiling height of not less than seven feet (7') over
fifty percent (50%) of the floor area. See subsection G2 of this section for ceiling height
exceptions.
HABITABLE ROOM: Any room meeting the requirements of this section for sleeping, living,
cooking or dining purposes excluding such enclosed spaces as closets, pantries, bath or toilet
rooms, service rooms, recreation rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics,
foyers, storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms and similar spaces.
HAZARDOUS HEATING INSTALLATIONS: All heating installations except those which
conform with the applicable laws regulating the installation of such space heating in effect now
or at the time of installation and which have been maintained in good repair and working
condition and are being used in a safe manner.
HAZARDOUS PLUMBING: All plumbing except that which conforms with the applicable laws
regulating the installation of such plumbing in effect now or at the time of installation and
which has been maintained in good condition and which is free of cross connections and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 211/444
siphonage between fixtures.
HAZARDOUS WIRING: All wiring except that which conforms with the applicable laws
regulating the installation of such wiring in effect now or at the time of the installation, and
which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner.
HOUSING INSPECTOR: The legally authorized housing inspector of the city or authorized
representative.
INFESTATION: The presence of any insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests within a dwelling
or on the dwelling premises.
KITCHEN: A habitable room used or intended to be used for cooking or the preparation of
meals.
LICENSE ACTIONS:
Deny: Withhold or refuse to grant a license.
Revoke: Take back, withdraw, annul, or cancel the license.
Suspend: Prohibit for a period of time, the privilege of the use of the license.
LIVING ROOM: A habitable room within a dwelling unit, which is used or intended to be used
primarily for general living purposes.
NONDWELLING STRUCTURE: Any structure, except a dwelling, used or intended to be used
for the shelter or enclosure of any animal or property of any kind.
OCCUPANT: Any person over one year of age, including an owner or operator, living,
sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit or hotel unit.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in
which dwelling units, rooming units or hotel units are let.
OWNER: The person who is the last owner of record or the fee owner or the contract
purchaser or the agent of the aforementioned person.
PLUMBING SYSTEM: The plumbing system of a building includes the water supply
distributing pipes; the fixtures and fixture traps; the soil, waste and vent pipes; the building
drain and building sewer; the stormwater drainage, with their devices and appurtenances; and
connections within the building and outside the building within the property line.
PREMISES: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or plot of land, either
occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure.
PROFESSIONAL: Whenever the words "professional state of maintenance and repair" are
used in this section, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a
reasonably skillful manner.
PUBLIC WAY: A street, alley, or other parcel of land open to the outside air leading to a street,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 212/444
that has been deeded, dedicated to or otherwise appropriated to the public for public use and
which has a clear width and height of not less than ten feet (10').
RECYCLABLES OR RECYCLABLE MATERIALS: Recyclables are former items of rubbish,
which have been cleaned so as not to cause health or nuisance problems.
Recyclables shall include the following: paper, glass, plastic containers, aluminum cans, metal
cans, and other materials defined by agreement between the hauler and city. Collection of
recyclables shall be made at least twice a month. The hauler shall be responsible for picking
up and disposing of recyclable materials at an approved recycling center. Any of the above
items which are not properly cleaned, prepared or stored such that they pose the threat of
health, environmental or nuisance problems shall remain the responsibility and property of the
individuals or household from which the materials originated.
REHABILITATION CENTER: One operated by a lawfully established and existing
philanthropic or charitable organization or agency operating on a statewide or national basis
and which employs personnel of demonstrated competency in the fields of social, spiritual and
physical rehabilitation, and has and operates under its own charter, regulations, rules and
standards. In order to qualify, such agency must furnish adequate proof of the soundness of
its governing charter, regulations and code and of its prior successful existence and practice.
RENT OR RENTAL CHARGE: Any consideration paid, either monetary, including payment of
utilities (in all or in part), or "in lieu of payments" such as, but not limited to, maintenance or
repair (cutting grass, shoveling snow, painting, etc.). A usually fixed periodical return made by
the tenant or occupant for the possession and use thereof in whole or in part of the dwelling
unit.
Exception: Rental license registration is not required for occupancy of dwelling units by
immediate family members/relatives, defined as spouse, parent, child, brother, sister,
grandparent, or grandchild.
ROOMER: An occupant of a rooming house who is not a member of the family of the operator
of that rooming house, and shall also mean an occupant of a dwelling unit who is not a
member of the family occupying the dwelling unit. This shall not be construed as to include
temporary nonpaying guests of the operator.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling, containing one or more
rooming units, with or without meals.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended
to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking of meals.
RUBBISH: Means and includes all inorganic refuse matter such as tin cans, glass, paper,
ashes, sweepings, and similar substance.
SANITARY: The condition of being clean, free from infective, physically hurtful, diseased,
poisonous, unwholesome, or otherwise unhealthful substances or influence and being
completely free from rodents or arthropods, from the traces of either, and from an environment
conducive to the growth of either.
SHARED BATH DWELLING: A dwelling unit which does not contain a water closet and a hand
lavatory and a bathtub or shower for the exclusive use of the occupants of the unit.
SOLID WASTE: Discarded materials other than fluids.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 213/444
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the
upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a
building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar or unused underfloor space is more
than six feet (6') above grade, as defined herein, for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total
perimeter, or is more than twelve feet (12') above grade, as defined herein, at any point, such
basement, cellar or unused underfloor space shall be considered a story.
STORY, FIRST: The lowest story in a building which qualifies as a "story", as defined herein,
except that a floor level in a building having only one floor level shall be classified as a first
story, provided such floor level is not more than four feet (4') below grade, as defined herein,
for more than fifty percent (50%) of the total perimeter, or more than eight feet (8') below
grade, as defined herein, at any point.
SUPERFICIAL FLOOR AREA: Clear floor space, exclusive of fixed or built-in cabinets or
appliances.
SUPPLIED: Furnished, provided by, or under the control of, the owner, operator or agent.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is
designed to be transportable and which is not permanently attached to the ground or to
another structure.
WATER CLOSET: A toilet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece, which is connected to the
city water and sewer system or other approved water supply and sewer system.
WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION: As applied to dwelling shall mean that type of construction
in which the load bearing portions of the exterior walls or a portion thereof are of wood.
6. Meaning Of Certain Words:
a. Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling units", "shared bath dwelling", "shared bath units",
"rooming house", "rooming unit", or "premises" are used, they shall be construed as though
they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
b. Whenever the words "professional state of maintenance and repair" are used they shall mean
that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
c. Whenever the words "properly installed", "properly maintained", "properly connected" or
"properly constructed" are used they shall mean in conformance with such codes of the city
applicable now or at the time of such installation which governed such installations,
maintenance connections or construction.
7. Temporary Housing Prohibited Exception:
a. The housing inspector may issue a permit to allow for temporary housing when a specified
emergency creates the need to allow for such housing. A permit may be issued only when the
emergency creating the need is an act of nature, a technological failure or malfunction, a
terrorist incident, a public health emergency, an industrial accident, a hazardous material
accident, or destruction caused by a civil disturbance.
b. When the housing inspector issues a permit to allow for temporary housing, the housing
inspector shall provide that the permit will expire after a specific period of time, not to exceed
six (6) months. The housing inspector shall attempt to set the expiration date to coincide with
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 214/444
the elimination of the need for temporary housing. The housing inspector may grant one 6-
month extension of this permit.
c. The housing inspector may set conditions on the use of the permit to mitigate the negative
impacts of the permit. These conditions may include compliance with applicable statutes,
codes and/or rules, including, but not limited to, the Little Falls fire code, county health code,
Little Falls building code, Little Falls rental housing maintenance code, Little Falls property
maintenance code and the Little Falls land use regulations (zoning) code. In addition, the
housing inspector may impose any additional appropriate conditions to the use of the
temporary housing permit.
d. The housing inspector may revoke the permit if the need for such temporary housing ends, or
if the permit holder fails to comply with the conditions set by the housing inspector as to the
use of the temporary housing permit.
8. Continuing Violations: Each day's continuance of any violation of this section after due notice
has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
9. Enforcement By Suit: Refer to Minnesota statutes 504B, as amended; landlord and tenant, and
the pamphlet entitled "Landlords And Tenants: Rights And Responsibilities", from the office of
the attorney general, regarding disputes between landlords and tenants.
10. Powers Declared Additional: The powers conferred on the housing inspector shall be in
addition to the power already conferred upon said housing inspector and shall not be construed
as in any way limiting these powers.
B. Enforcement:
1. Officers Authorized: The housing inspector or authorized city representative shall enforce the
provisions of this section.
2. Inspections Required; Powers: Pursuant to provisions of this section as set forth herein, the
housing inspector shall make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units,
shared bath dwellings, rooming units, and premises located within the city for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this section. The housing inspector, or authorized representative, may
enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises after obtaining consent from an occupant of the premises. In the event that an
occupant of the premises does not consent to entry by the housing inspector or authorized
representative, and if there is probable cause to believe that an inspection is warranted, then
application may be made to the court for an administrative or other search warrant for the
purpose of inspecting the premises. No person shall refuse entrance or impede an authorized
city representative, in the performance of emergency duties. In case of emergency every such
housing inspector or authorized city representative shall have the right to enter, examine and
survey all premises, grounds, erections, structures, dwellings and buildings and every part
thereof in the city at all times.
3. Severability: If any subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is declared
invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
section, which shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this section
are hereby declared to be severable.
4. Notice Of Violations: Whenever the Morrison County health department, the housing inspector,
or authorized city representative determines that there has been a violation, or that there are
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 215/444
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation, of any provision of this section,
notice of such violation or alleged violation shall be given to the person or persons responsible
therefor. Such notice shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification;
c. Specify the violation which exists and remedial action required;
d. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
e. Be served upon the owner, or the operator, or the occupant, as the case may require. Such
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner, or upon such operator, or
ordinance upon such occupant if a copy thereof is served upon such owner, operator or
occupant personally; or if a copy is left at such owner's, operator's or occupant's usual place
of residence with a person of suitable age and discretion; or by depositing in the United States
post office, the notice addressed to such owner's, operator's or occupant's last known address
with postage prepaid thereon; or if service cannot be made by any one of the above means
then such notice shall be deemed served if a copy of such notice is posted and kept posted for
twenty four (24) hours in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by such notice.
5. Emergency Orders: When, in the opinion of the building official, there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of
a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure
because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the building official is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith.
The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading
as follows, "This Structure Is Unsafe And Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited By The Building
Official". It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of
securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition, or of
demolishing the same.
6. Warning Notice Of Unsanitary Condition: The housing inspector or authorized city representative
shall take note of any unsanitary conditions caused by accumulation of garbage, rubbish, or
other debris upon any premises observed by them. A "warning notice" of such conditions shall
be served upon the owner and occupant of the premises, either by mail or by leaving such notice
in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such notice shall be on a form to be prepared by the
housing inspector of the city and a record of all such notices served shall be transmitted to the
housing inspector or authorized city representative for further inspection and enforcement of the
provisions of this section. The service of any notice pursuant to this section shall not in any way
supersede or affect any other order, tag, or notice of violation duly issued or served pursuant to
any other code.
7. Enforcement By City Attorney: The city attorney may enforce any provisions of this section,
including any order to vacate condemned dwellings and apartments, by mandamus, injunction,
or any other appropriate remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
8. Violations: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section will be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each violation of this section will constitute a separate offense. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. The
code official shall also have the authority to issue an administrative citation as provided in
section 10.31 of this chapter in an effort to gain compliance with the provisions of this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 216/444
C. Equipment And Facilities:
1. Compliance Required: No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or allow another to
occupy any dwelling, dwelling unit, or other structure for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking,
or eating therein which does not comply with the requirements set forth in this subsection.
2. Liability For Utility Services Payments: This section covered by state statutes 504B, as
amended.
3. Copy Of Lease: Tenant to be given copy of lease.
4. Tenant To Be Notified Of Entry: These codes covered by Minnesota statutes 504B, as amended.
5. Dwelling Plumbing Facilities Required: Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink, a water
closet, a bathtub or shower, and hand lavatory all in good working condition, and properly
connected to a water supply and sewage system. The water closet and shower or bathtub shall
be located within a room that affords privacy to a person within said room. The hand lavatory
shall be placed in the same room as the water closet, or if located in another room, shall be
located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet is
located. Doors of bath or toilet rooms shared by persons other than members of a "family", as
defined in this section, shall be provided with an approved locking device.
6. Shared Bath Dwelling Unit Plumbing Facilities Required: Every shared bath dwelling unit shall
contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water supply and
sewage disposal system and shall have available to its occupants a water closet, a hand
lavatory, and a bathtub or shower. The occupants of not more than two (2) shared bath dwelling
units may share a single water closet, a single hand lavatory and a single bathtub or shower if:
a. The number of occupants sharing a water closet, hand lavatory and bathtub or shower does
not exceed four (4) persons.
b. Such water closet, hand lavatory, bathtub or shower shall be in good working condition and
properly connected to a water and sewer system.
c. The room or rooms within which the water closet, hand lavatory, and bath are contained is
located not more than one floor distant from the dwelling units whose occupants share the use
of such facilities.
7. Basement Water Closet: A water closet may be located in a basement when required for a legal
dwelling unit or shared bath unit within such basement. A water closet may be located in a
basement when such water closet is supplementary to water closets required by this section. A
first floor dwelling unit should not have to go to the basement for its required water closet.
8. Hot And Cold Water: Every kitchen sink, hand lavatory, and bathtub or shower shall be properly
connected with both potable hot and cold running water and shall, with normal use, have an
adequate supply of both hot and cold water.
9. Water Heating Facilities: Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities properly
installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and properly connected with the
hot water lines required under the provisions of subsection C8 of this section. An approved
combination temperature and pressure valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained on water heaters. The discharge pipe shall be full size and run to within
eighteen inches (18") from the floor or a safe place for disposal. The hot water heating facilities
required by this section shall be of a capacity and so maintained and operated as to permit, with
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 217/444
normal use, an adequate supply of water to be drawn at any required kitchen sink, hand
lavatory, bathtub or shower and to maintain the temperature of said water at not less than one
hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120F) at the fixture.
10. Sewer And Water Connections:
a. It shall be unlawful to construct any on site wastewater treatment system on any lot or parcel
of land in the city abutting on a public sanitary sewer with which connections may be made, if
said on site wastewater treatment system be within five hundred feet (500') of said public
sewer. Construction of any new on site wastewater treatment system shall only be allowed
after a permit has been issued by the city. The design and construction of any such on site
system shall be in full compliance with all applicable state codes. All on site wastewater
treatment systems either existing or constructed under the provisions herein established shall
be operated and maintained as effective treatment systems. Correction and improvement of
on site wastewater treatment systems shall be the responsibility of the owner and shall be
accomplished as may be directed by the city. Refer to section 4.30 of the city code for
additional requirements.
b. No cross connections shall be allowed between private water supply systems and the city
water system.
11. Solid Waste Storage: Every dwelling unit, rooming unit, and shared bath unit shall be provided
with an adequate number of containers to hold the solid waste accumulated by such units until
said solid waste is removed from the premises.
a. One- And Two-Family Dwelling Units: For one- and two-family dwelling units, the owner and
occupant shall determine who will provide adequate containers with close fitting covers for the
storage of rubbish, garbage and other solid waste materials until removed from the premises
for disposal.
b. More Than Two Dwelling Units: The owner of every rental dwelling with more than two (2)
units shall provide adequate containers with close fitting covers for the storage of rubbish,
garbage and other solid waste materials until removed from the premises for disposal. These
containers shall be made of metal or approved plastic and be equipped with tightfitting covers.
An owner, operator, or agent utilizing private solid waste collection shall provide both the
required solid waste containers and the removal service. Unobstructed walkways shall be
maintained to the required solid waste containers. Such walkways shall lead from the public
way and shall also be accessible to and usable by the occupants of the dwelling for which the
containers are provided. Snow, whether natural, piled or accumulated, to a depth greater than
six inches (6") shall be deemed to constitute an obstruction if not removed within a twenty four
(24) hour time period after snow has ceased to fall. When in the opinion of the housing
inspector it has proven necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the
housing inspector may require owners of dwellings at specific addresses to provide large
dumpster type solid waste containers. Said dumpster type containers must be rodentproof,
well maintained, bear identification of the solid waste hauler supplying the containers,
including the phone number, and be provided with metal or approved plastic covers that the
tenants can operate with no unusual physical effort. The solid waste haulers providing the
dumpster service must provide collection service at least once every week and the dumpster
or dumpsters shall be of sufficient size to handle the accumulation of solid waste between pick
up periods from the address where the dumpster type container is required. Large dumpster
type solid waste containers shall be required after conditions at a specific address have
resulted in the issuance of two (2) written orders for overflowing solid waste within any twelve
(12) month period. When dumpster type containers are used as the solid waste containers on
a regular basis, they shall be screened from the view of the street public right of way. Where
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 218/444
screening is required, such screening shall be six feet (6') in height and at least ninety five
percent (95%) opaque throughout the year, unless otherwise specified.
D. Light, Ventilation And Heating:
1. Light And Ventilation: Habitable rooms shall be provided with natural light by means of windows
or skylights with a glazed area of not less than eight percent (8%) of the floor area of such rooms
with a minimum of eight (8) square feet. All bathrooms, water closet compartments, and similar
rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an
area of not less than one-twentieth (1/20) of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of one
and one-half (11/2) square feet. Not less than one-half (1/2) of the required window or skylight
area shall be openable to provide natural ventilation.
Exceptions to the requirements for windows are:
a. The glazed areas need not be openable where the opening is not required by this section and
an approved mechanical ventilation system capable of producing 0.35 air change per hour in
the room is installed or a whole house mechanical ventilation system is installed capable of
supplying outdoor ventilation air of fifteen (15) cubic feet per minute (cfm) per occupant
computed on the basis of two (2) occupants for the first bedroom and one occupant for each
additional bedroom.
b. The glazed areas need not be installed in rooms where the exception contained in subsection
D1a of this section is satisfied and artificial light is provided capable of producing an average
illumination of six (6) foot-candles over the area of the room at a height of thirty inches (30")
above the floor level.
Windows shall not be required in kitchens of dwelling units when such kitchen has an opening
of at least twenty (20) square feet into an adjoining habitable room and when such kitchen is
provided with an approved mechanical ventilation system. In addition, the window area of the
adjoining habitable room referred to above shall be of sufficient size so as to provide for the
light and ventilation requirements of the kitchen area as well as for said adjoining habitable
room.
2. Emergency Escape And Rescue Required: Basements with habitable space and every sleeping
room shall have at least one openable emergency escape and rescue window or exterior door
opening for emergency escape and rescue.
3. Electric Outlets And Fixtures: In all existing dwellings now or hereafter supplied with electric
service, every habitable room with one hundred twenty (120) square feet of floor space or less
shall be provided with two (2) separate floor or wall type duplex electric convenience outlets, and
an additional duplex electric convenience outlet shall be required for each additional eighty (80)
square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor space. Required outlets shall, insofar as possible, be
spaced equal distances apart. Kitchens and rooms with kitchen areas shall have one duplex
electric convenience outlet in addition to the number herein required for other habitable rooms.
One ceiling type electric light fixture or one wall type electric light fixture controlled by a remote
switch may be supplied in lieu of one required electric convenience outlet in each habitable
room. Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room
shall contain at least one supplied electric light fixture. All general use cellar or basement areas
shall be provided with sufficient artificial light so as to provide one foot-candle of light at all floor
areas. All electric outlets and fixtures shall be installed, maintained and energized by a source of
electric power in a manner complying with the state electrical code applicable now or at the time
such outlets or fixtures were or are installed. The electric service and all wiring shall be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 219/444
maintained in good condition and used in a safe manner. All hazardous wiring and all
disconnected, exposed wiring shall be removed. Any and all substandard work shall be repaired
to present day state electrical code requirements.
4. Heating Facilities: The owner of every building containing habitable rooms shall provide heating
facilities and shall be required to see that said heating facilities are properly installed, safely
maintained, and in good working condition, and that said facilities are capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms located therein to a
temperature of at least sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68F), measured at a distance of thirty
six inches (36") above floor level, and not closer than thirty six inches (36") from any wall at all
times when the outside temperature is at minus twenty degrees Fahrenheit (-20F). The owner
or operator shall furnish heat to the occupants thereof whenever the outside temperature is sixty
degrees Fahrenheit (60F) or below for any continuous twenty four (24) hour period. Cooking
appliances shall not be used to heat any dwelling unit.
5. Exit Illumination: The means of egress, including the exit discharge, shall be illuminated at all
times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied. Exit illumination is not
required inside individual dwelling units. The means of egress illumination shall not be less than
one foot-candle at the floor level. Every exterior stairway shall be adequately illuminated at
floors, landings and treads.
6. Screens: Openable windows in each habitable room shall be supplied with a screen. Such
screens shall have a mesh of not less than number fourteen (14). Other such screening may be
required by the housing inspector when deemed necessary for insect control or safety of
persons.
E. Maintenance By Owner:
1. Compliance Required: No person shall occupy any building or other structure or portion thereof,
which does not comply with the requirements set forth in this section.
2. Foundations, Roofs, Exterior Walls, And Surfaces:
a. All exterior surfaces shall be of a material manufactured or processed specifically for use in
such a weather exposed location, including redwood and other naturally suitable materials,
and every exterior wall, chimney, foundation and roof shall be reasonably weathertight,
watertight and rodentproof; and shall be kept in a professional state of maintenance and
repair.
Exterior walls shall be maintained and kept free from dilapidation by cracks, tears or breaks or
from deteriorated plaster, stucco, brick, wood or other material that is extensive and gives
evidence of long neglect.
b. The protective surface on exterior walls of a building above ground level shall be maintained
in good repair so as to provide a sufficient covering and protection of the structural surface
underneath against its deterioration.
Without limiting the generality of this section, a protective surface of a building shall be
deemed to be out of repair if:
(1) The protective surface has paint which is blistered, cracked, flaked, scaled or chalked
away including window trim, cornice members, porch railings and other such areas.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 220/444
(2) The pointing of any chimney or the pointing of any brick or stone wall is loose or has fallen
out.
(3) Any exterior surface or plane required to be repaired under the provisions of this section
shall be repaired in its entirety.
3. Pest Extermination: Every owner of a dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on the premises. The housing inspector may order the
extermination done by a person licensed to do such work when in the housing inspector's
opinion the infestation is widespread and severe.
4. Other Pests Constituting Nuisance: Whenever it shall appear to the housing inspector that rats,
skunks, snakes, starlings, grackles, common wild pigeons, or bats which are creating an
offensive, nauseous, hurtful, dangerous, unhealthful, or uncomfortable condition to or for any
person or persons or to the neighborhood, said housing inspector is authorized to decree such
conditions a public nuisance and said housing inspector or an authorized representative shall
issue a written notice to the owner or person in charge of or in control of the premises to remove,
exterminate or otherwise rid the premises of the cause of such public nuisance within a
reasonable period of time. Where the owner of the premises or the person in charge or control
thereof cannot be found after due diligence, the written notice referred to in this section may be
posted upon the premises with the same force and effect as though served upon the owner.
5. Interior:
a. Every interior partition, wall, floor, door, window, trim surface, radiator, and ceiling shall be
kept in a professional state of repair. Interior partitions, walls and ceilings shall be provided
with an interior finish material specifically manufactured for, and intended to be used as an
interior finished surface.
Walls, floors, and ceilings that are required to be fire rated by new construction regulations
shall be maintained and repaired to prevent a lowering of the resistance to fire or the spread of
fire. In addition, maintenance and repairs to walls, floors and ceilings separating dwelling
units, or dwelling units from public corridors or stairways shall be done in a manner which will
not reduce the sound transmission class of such walls, floors, or ceilings. Dwelling unit doors
leading to communal, shared, or public areas, when replaced, shall be replaced with an
approved solid core door not less than one and three-eighths inches (13/8") in thickness. For
the purposes of this section, professional state of repair shall apply to the repair and
application of interior finishes. Interior finishes shall meet the flame spread classification set
forth in chapter 8 of the state building code as adopted in chapter 5 of the city code when such
interior finishes are hereafter altered, refinished, repaired or replaced.
b. No interior wall of any dwelling or building accessory thereto shall have paint that is blistered,
cracked, flaked, scaled or chalked away.
6. Rainwater Drainage: All rainwater shall be so drained and conveyed from every roof so as not to
cause dampness in the walls, ceilings, or floors of any portion of the dwelling or of any adjacent
building or structure. Gutters and downspouts, if provided, shall be kept in a professional state of
repair and in compliance with the provisions of subsection E2 of this section.
7. Windows, Exterior Doors, Hatchways: Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway
shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof; and shall be kept in a professional
state of maintenance and repair. Every exterior window or door of habitable rooms, bath, and
toilet rooms shall be supplied with a storm window or storm door or the equivalent for ventilation,
light, and insulation. Unless otherwise provided for by written agreement, the owner or operator
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 221/444
shall install such storm windows and storm doors not later than November 1 of each year. Such
written agreements shall be applicable only to one- and two-family dwellings. All exterior doors
of dwellings, except those, which are required to be out swinging based on occupant load, shall
be provided with a storm door unless the principal door has an "R" value of two (2) or more. The
following energy conservation measures are required:
a. Install weather stripping between exterior operable window sash and frames and between
exterior doors and frames.
Exception: Weather stripping is not required on storm doors or storm windows.
b. Caulk, gasket or otherwise seal exterior joints between foundation and rim joist, around
window and door frames, between wall and roof, between wall panels, at penetrations for
utility services through walls, floors, and roofs and all other openings in the exterior envelope.
8. Shades And Drapes: Every window of every room let to another for sleeping purposes and the
windows of bath and toilet rooms used in conjunction with such sleeping rooms shall be supplied
with shades, draw drapes, or other devices or materials which when properly used will afford
privacy to the occupant of the room. However, upon written agreement of the owner and the
occupant, said shades, drapes or devices need not be provided.
9. Stairways And Porches:
a. Construction And Maintenance Generally Live Load: Every inside or outside stairways
attached to a dwelling, every porch and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as
to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed
thereon; and shall be kept in a professional state of maintenance and repair. Normal use live
load shall be the uniform load as set out in the state building code, one hundred (100) pounds
per square foot.
b. Handrails: Every inside or outside stairway attached to a dwelling that has four (4) or more
risers shall have at least one handrail, and all such stairways which are forty four inches (44")
or more in width, or which are open on both sides, shall have a handrail on each side. If a
stairway is open on one side, the required handrail shall be placed on the open side, when
required by the housing inspector. Stairways required to be more than eighty eight inches
(88") in width shall be provided with an intermediate handrail. However, only one handrail shall
be required when such an outside stairway serves a one- or two-family dwelling and the
stairway is not more than thirty inches (30") above the adjacent surface. All handrails shall be
not less than thirty four inches (34") or more than thirty eight inches (38") vertically above the
nose of the stair treads or stairway platforms.
c. To Be Kept Clean Of Snow, Etc.: Required means of egress that are exposed to the elements
shall be kept clear at all times of rubbish, snow, ice, or other obstructions when such egress
serves a multiple dwelling.
10. Guardrails: All accessible doorways, unenclosed floor and roof openings, open stairs, porches,
balconies, walkways and landings which are more than thirty inches (30") above grade or the
surface below shall be protected by an approved guardrail. New installations or replacements of
guardrails shall be in compliance with the state building code.
11. Plumbing Fixtures: Every supplied plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes shall be
installed in a nonhazardous manner and maintained free from defects, leaks, or obstructions.
Water closets shall be provided with seats, which can be maintained in a sanitary condition.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 222/444
12. Bathroom And Toilet Room Floors: Every toilet room floor and bathroom floor shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to moisture and all such floor and
floor coverings shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
13. Supplied Facilities: Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under
this section shall be so constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be kept in a professional state of maintenance and repair. Appliances used for cooking, air
conditioning, laundry, dishwashing, or refrigeration, when supplied by the lessor, shall be
installed and maintained so they will function safely and effectively.
14. Discontinuance Of Required Services: Refer to Minnesota statutes 504B, as amended.
15. Vacant Dwelling Units: No owner shall occupy or permit any other person to occupy any vacant
dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and complies with all provisions of this
section. The owner of any dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of all garbage, rubbish,
and other discarded debris left on the premises where the dwelling unit is vacant.
16. Hanging Of Screens: Every owner of a dwelling let to another shall be responsible for hanging
all screens whenever the same are required under the provisions of this section. Screens shall
be hung not later than May 1 of each year. This provision shall not preclude the owner and
tenant from agreeing by written contract to have said tenant hang the screens as required above
for other than multiple dwellings. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the owner
from engaging a tenant, caretaker, or any person from hanging the screens for remuneration.
17. Prohibited Uses: No person shall use or permit the use of any dwelling or any building or any
lot or premises for any use not permitted by the city's land use regulations (zoning) code.
18. Numbering Units: All habitable units let to another in a multiple dwelling shall be numbered or
lettered in an approved and conspicuous manner on each passage door leading from such unit.
All passage doors from each unit shall have the same number or letter and no two (2) units shall
bear the same number or letter. Cross reference subsection H12, "Address Posting", of this
section.
19. Mailboxes: Every owner shall provide a suitable mail deposit box for each rental unit. Such mail
deposit box shall be approved by the United States postal service.
20. Changing Or Altering Locks: No person shall change or alter any keyed lock, or place such a
new lock on the entrance of a dwelling unit without first providing the tenant or owner of that
dwelling unit with a suitable functional key to operate such a lock. A tenant shall obtain
permission of the owner, in writing, before installing permanent locks.
21. Doorbells Or Buzzers: Every multiple dwelling of eleven (11) or more dwelling units or eleven
(11) or more rooming units shall be equipped with an operable system of bells, buzzers or other
signaling devices which operate from the exterior of a locked entryway and signal either within
each dwelling unit and rooming unit or in the hallway or common area of each floor of the
building.
22. Secured Egress And Ingress To Be Provided For Certain Multiple Dwellings: All multiple
dwellings containing eleven (11) or more dwelling units or eleven (11) or more rooming units
existing now or hereafter created shall provide the following security measures: all doorways
leading to the exterior or to an exterior vestibule or entry must be secured by a locking device
approved by the housing inspector. The locking devices provided for required egress doorways
shall be of a type that will engage and lock automatically when the door is in the closed position
within the frame provided. Further, locks on such required egress doors shall be openable from
the exterior by the use of a key or other approved device. A key box of a type approved by the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 223/444
Little Falls fire department shall be installed for access by public safety agencies of the city of
Little Falls, namely, the fire department and police department. All locking common entry/egress
doors on buildings with fewer than eleven (11) units shall meet the key box requirement of this
section. All doors, whether required egress doors or auxiliary, shall be openable from the inside
without the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. All locking devices required by this
section shall be kept in a professional state of maintenance and repair.
F. Maintenance By Occupants:
1. Cleanliness: Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling unit, and premises thereof, which that person occupies or
controls.
2. Residential Storage Standards: This section applies to any dwelling as well as appurtenant
porches, decks, and stairways whether or not enclosed and to garages which are an accessory
use to the dwelling. With the exceptions noted herein; other than furniture, all wood products,
paper and paper products, clothing, bedding, towels, linens, tablecloths, drapes, area rugs,
maintenance supplies, and additionally, all materials of any kind which are flammable or which
may be subject to infestation by rodents or arthropods or other pests, shall when not in actual
use, at a minimum and in addition to all other requirements imposed by law, meet each of the
following storage standards:
a. All materials must be stored off the floor in shelves, cabinets, or other sturdy storage device
not made of paper or paper products.
b. Storage of materials shall not impede free access to all walls, windows, doors, and heating
and other fixtures.
c. Each shelf, cabinet, or other sturdy storage device other than built-in storage devices shall
have such free space around it so access without moving the material can be obtained and a
visual inspection made for combustibility, rodents, arthropods and other pests, and other
health and safety hazards.
3. Disposal Of Solid Waste: Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all solid
waste in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the containers required by subsection C11
of this section. Occupants shall place their solid waste only in containers that have been
assigned to their dwelling or dwelling units by a private solid waste hauler contracted to provide
collection service to a building. Failure to comply with this requirement shall constitute a violation
of this section. Prior to placement in the containers required by subsection C11 of this section,
solid waste may be stored within the dwelling, but only temporarily. It shall be stored in sturdy
baskets or containers which are not made of paper or paper products and which will be
consistent with the other requirements of city codes. The amount of solid waste temporarily
stored shall not exceed three (3) cubic feet of volume in any one room. In order to be counted as
a separate room for the purposes of this section, the enclosed area involved must be able to be
closed off completely from other rooms of the dwelling. The term "temporarily" as used in this
section means for a period not to exceed nine (9) calendar days.
4. Use Of Storm Windows And Operation Of Mechanical System Controls: Every occupant of a
dwelling supplied with storm windows and doors shall use the storm windows and doors
provided in a reasonable and energy saving manner. This shall include the proper utilization of
combination storm windows and doors supplied by the owner during the periods of time when it
is necessary to heat the dwelling unit. Every occupant shall also operate all mechanical system
controls intended to be operated by the occupant in a reasonable and energy efficient manner.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 224/444
The occupant shall not adjust mechanical system controls not intended to be operated by the
occupant, nor take any actions that impair the operation of the mechanical systems.
5. Supplied Plumbing Fixtures: Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied plumbing
fixtures therein clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in
their proper use and operation.
6. Plumbing Fixtures Or Appliances Furnished By Occupant: Every plumbing fixture or appliance
furnished by the occupant shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working
condition, shall be clean and sanitary, and free from defects, leaks or obstructions.
7. Damage Property: No person shall wilfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any part of
residential real estate, supplied fixtures, equipment, including smoke detectors, furnishings or
any other property of another.
G. Space, Use And Location:
1. Compliance Required: No person shall occupy or let or allow another to occupy any building or
other structure for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the requirements set
forth in this section.
2. Ceiling Height: At least fifty percent (50%) of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of seven feet (7'). However, in dwellings one story and attic in height, attic type
bedrooms may be located above the first floor of each dwelling unit if such attic type bedrooms
have a minimum ceiling height of not less than seven feet (7') over fifty percent (50%) of its floor
area and shall be provided with a stairway in full compliance with the building code.
The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not
be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the
purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
Exception: Habitable rooms existing at the time of adoption of this section having a ceiling height
of not less than six feet eight inches (6'8") (2033 mm) with not less than six feet four inches
(6'4") (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
3. Required Space In Dwelling Units: Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum superficial floor
area of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet for the first occupant, seventy (70)
additional square feet for the second occupant and one hundred (100) square feet for each
additional occupant in excess of two (2). The floor area shall be calculated on the basis of the
total habitable floor area of all habitable rooms. Single room dwelling units shall not be occupied
by more than four (4) persons. Rooms used exclusively for sleeping purposes shall have the
following minimum superficial floor area: seventy (70) square feet for one person, ninety (90)
square feet for two (2) persons and the required superficial floor area shall be increased at the
rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of two (2). However, occupancy of a
sleeping room shall not exceed four (4) persons. Habitable rooms having a multiple use shall
have not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of superficial floor area.
Other habitable rooms shall have not less than seventy (70) square feet of superficial floor area,
except kitchens. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than seven feet (7') in any
dimension. Multiroomed dwelling units, when let to another, shall include a kitchen room. The
floor area of such required kitchen room is not to be included when calculating floor area for the
purposes of determining occupant load.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 225/444
4. Dwelling Unit To Be Occupied By One Family: No dwelling unit shall be occupied by more than
one family. However, unrelated persons may occupy a dwelling unit when such occupancy is
permitted and authorized. When, in the opinion of the housing inspector, it is necessary for the
protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants, the owner or agent of dwelling
units let to another may be required to post in a conspicuous place, with a transparent cover, a
card issued by the housing inspector setting forth the maximum number of persons who may
lawfully occupy such a dwelling unit. Said card shall be posted inside the dwelling unit at eye
level on, or within four feet (4') of, the main entrance door.
5. Arrangement Of Rooms: No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements with access to a bathroom or toilet room intended for use by
occupants of more than one sleeping room that can be had only by going through another
sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or toilet room.
6. Basement Space May Be Habitable: No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or
dwelling unit unless:
a. The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water.
b. The total window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area sizes as
required in subsection D1 of this section.
c. The total openable window area or mechanical ventilation in each room is equal to at least the
minimums required under subsection D1 of this section.
d. At least one emergency escape and rescue opening is provided. Every sleeping room shall
have at least one openable emergency escape and rescue opening as required in subsection
D2 of this section. Cross reference subsection D2, "Emergency Escape And Rescue
Required", of this section.
H. Fire Protection:
1. Compliance Required: No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming house, rooming unit, lodging house, or lodging unit which does not comply with the
applicable fire prevention provisions of this section and the following additional standards for
safety from fire.
2. Open Fires: No person shall set or maintain any open fire, or knowingly furnish the materials for
any such fire, or authorize any such fire to be set, kindled or maintained on or in any street, alley,
lot, land or public or private grounds within the city, except as may be permitted and in
accordance with rules established by the Little Falls fire department.
3. Vacant Dwellings: The owner of any dwelling in the city, whenever the same becomes vacant or
unoccupied shall remove therefrom, all papers or other combustible waste materials
accumulated therein, and shall securely close and keep closed all doors, windows or other
openings into such building while the same remains unoccupied.
4. Fire Warning System: Smoke detectors are required in every bedroom, and one in the hallway
adjacent to sleeping rooms. It is required to have a smoke detector per level.
5. Fire Extinguishers: (Refer to subsection H4 of this section.) No person shall tamper with, meddle
with, remove, empty, damage, or destroy any extinguisher except in the event of fire or
authorized inspection. The minimum size and classification shall be 2A10BC. A tag with the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 226/444
name of the servicing company and the service date, or a tag with the date placing the
extinguisher in service, shall be affixed to the extinguisher and shall remain affixed until the next
servicing.
6. Flammable Liquids: Flammable liquids shall not be stored in any rooming house, lodging house,
or any dwelling in quantities exceeding one gallon.
a. All such flammable liquids of one gallon or less shall be stored in sealed metal containers or
safety cans not exceeding one gallon capacity and only one such container shall be allowed in
each unit, as set out herein. Nonwater based paints, varnishes, and similar products used for
decorating therein shall be stored in sealed metal containers.
b. No flammable liquids such as gasoline, diesel fuel, motor oils, or any similar product shall be
stored inside a dwelling unit.
c. Fueled equipment, including, but not limited to, motorcycles, mopeds, lawn care equipment
and portable cooking equipment, shall not be stored, operated or repaired within a dwelling
unit.
d. In any structure containing three (3) or more dwelling units, no person shall kindle, maintain,
or cause any open fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, or on any ground
floor patio within fifteen feet (15') of a structure.
e. No person shall store or use any fuel, barbecue, torch, or other similar heating or lighting
chemical or device in the locations designated in subsection H6d of this section.
Exception: Listed electric or gas fired barbecue grills that are permanently mounted and wired
or plumbed to the building's gas supply or electrical system and that maintain a minimum
clearance of eighteen inches (18") on all sides, unless listed for lesser clearances, may be
installed on balconies and patios when approved by the fire chief.
7. Attic Rooms: In dwellings erected prior to July 1, 1972, dwelling units and rooming units may be
located in the attic of a dwelling that is not more than two (2) stories and attic in height, provided
that the following conditions are complied with:
a. The attic shall have a habitable floor area exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the floor below.
b. The required egress stairways shall be located inside the confines of the dwelling and shall be
enclosed with materials having a one hour fire resistant rating and self-closing fire doors
separating each floor. The one hour fire resistant rating for materials enclosing said egress
stairway shall be as specified in "Methods Of Fire Tests Of Building Construction And
Materials" (ASTM designation: E119) of the American Society For Testing And Materials, on
file in the office of the housing inspector. The required self-closing fire doors shall be
constructed of type B construction.
c. At least one-half (1/2) of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of
seven feet (7').
d. There shall be compliance with all the provisions of the land use regulations (zoning) code
and all other provisions of this section.
8. Restricted Attic Use: The use of the attic in a two-story and attic dwelling shall be confined
strictly to the use of the family or families occupying the first and/or second floors of such
dwellings. Such attics shall not be occupied by more than three (3) persons.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 227/444
9. Heating Plants: In all multiple dwellings over two (2) stories and basement in height or
containing more than four (4) dwelling units on any floor above the first floor or containing more
than ten (10) sleeping rooms on any floor above the first floor of such building, the heating plant
shall be separated from the rest of the building by not less than a one hour fire resistive
occupancy separation as defined in the building code or in lieu thereof a sprinkler system
approved by the fire chief.
10. Carbon Monoxide Alarm:
a. An approved carbon monoxide alarm shall be provided within ten feet (10') of all sleeping
rooms.
b. "Approved carbon monoxide alarm" means a device meant for the purpose of detecting
carbon monoxide that is certified by a nationally recognized testing laboratory to conform to
the latest Underwriters Laboratories standards (known as UL2034 standards).
Exceptions: In certain multi-family dwellings:
(1) Multi-family dwellings may have approved and operational carbon monoxide alarms
installed between fifteen (15) and twenty five feet (25') of carbon monoxide producing
central fixtures and equipment provided there is a centralized alarm system or other
mechanism for responsible parties to hear the alarm at all times.
(2) An owner of a multi-family dwelling that contains minimal or no sources of carbon
monoxide may be exempted from the requirements of the statute provided that such owner
certifies to the Minnesota commissioner of public safety that such multi-family dwelling
poses no foreseeable carbon monoxide risk to the health and safety of the dwelling units.
(3) Reference: Minnesota statutes 299F.50, as amended.
11. Egress: Dwellings erected after July 1, 1972, shall have and shall maintain the egress facilities
required by the Minnesota state building code at the time of erection. Dwellings existing prior to
July 1, 1972, shall be provided with egress facilities as required by said Minnesota state building
code or in compliance with the following regulations; every habitable unit shall have a safe
unobstructed means of egress. Every dwelling unit located above the first floor and every
rooming house where three (3) or more roomers occupy one or more rooming units located
above the first floor and every basement dwelling unit shall have at least two (2) independent
egress stairways which shall be located remote from each other, and one of such stairways shall
be an inside stairway. Every such egress shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Every dwelling with an occupant load of ten (10) persons or fewer shall have one approved
means of egress. Dwellings located on the second story shall have at least one approved
means of egress if the occupant load of the entire story does not exceed ten (10) persons.
Second stories having an occupant load of more than ten (10) persons and all other stories
and basements shall have not less than two (2) approved means of egress.
Exception: Only one approved means of egress shall be required from a basement within an
individual dwelling unit when the occupancy load of such basement is ten (10) or fewer.
b. Contact the code official for more information on measurements, placements, build dates,
etc., for stairways, handrails, and guardrails.
c. All required egress stairs shall be easily accessible from every dwelling or dwelling unit
without passing through any room other than public, shared or communal areas. Egress shall
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 228/444
lead directly to grade, and such grade shall have an unobstructed path of travel to a public
way.
d. Egress doors connected to public, shared or communal areas must be easily opened from the
inside along the path of egress and remain unlocked or be of a type which can be unlocked
without the use of a key or any special skill or knowledge. Where multiple dwellings have more
than five (5) dwelling units, or more than ten (10) rooming units sharing the same means of
egress, the doors serving such egress shall swing in the direction of travel and be self-closing
and latching. All stair tower doors located in multiple dwellings which are four (4) or more
stories in height, and where the dwelling units are not individually owned, shall be openable
from the inside of the stair tower without the use of a key or any special skill or knowledge
when such stair tower doors open into a public, shared or communal area. No person shall
lock, fasten closed, block open or in any other way tamper with the operation of self-closing
fire doors so that said doors do not function as required by this section.
e. Any required means of egress exposed to the elements shall be kept clear of rubbish, snow,
ice and other such obstructions at all times. All vertical ladders and other emergency fire
escapes not recognized as a required means of egress shall be maintained in good order and
repair.
12. Address Posting: Every dwelling shall have the proper street address number conspicuously
posted in the front and in the rear or on a building accessory to such dwelling at the rear so as to
be readily identified in case of fire or other emergency. The rear address number may be omitted
if there is no public way at the rear of the building. The numbers required by this section shall be
mounted on a permanently fixed surface, the numbers shall be arabic, not roman numerals or
words, and shall be of sufficient size four inches (4") minimum height and of a contrasting color
so as to be readily distinguishable and readable from the public way front and rear. Cross
reference subsection E18, "Numbering Units", of this section and the definition of
"house/building numbers" in section 11.02 of the city code.
13. Ventilation Shafts: No ventilation shafts or ducts shall exhaust or terminate within a building. All
such shafts or ducts shall lead to the outside.
14. Transom Windows: Openings such as transom windows shall not be permitted into public
hallways. Existing transoms shall be permanently fixed in the closed position and all such
openings shall be enclosed with materials having a fire resistance rating of one hour or equal to
that of the walls adjoining such transoms or openings.
15. Storage Near Heating Plant: No person shall store or permit the storage of any combustible
material, other than fuel used in conjunction with the heating system, within three feet (3') of any
heating plant or furnace.
16. Exit Signs: All exits in multiple dwellings having ten (10) or more dwelling units on any one
floor, or in rooming houses having more than five (5) rooming units on any one floor, or in any
multiple dwellings having a total of ten (10) or more of any combination of the aforesaid dwelling
units and rooming units on a floor shall be marked with red, internally illuminated exit signs that
will be clearly visible from hallways, corridors and public areas. Where exit signs are not visible
there shall be illuminated directional markers indicating the location and direction to follow to
reach such exits. Such internally illuminated signs shall be marked "EXIT" in letters at least four
inches (4") high. Exit signs provided in accordance with the building code when properly
maintained shall also be acceptable.
17. Minimum Requirements: The requirements contained in this section are considered to be
minimum and not maximum. The city of Little Falls has adopted the Minnesota state fire code.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 229/444
All properties subject to this section are subject to the Minnesota state fire code as adopted and
amended by the city of Little Falls and shall in the case of discrepancy supersede this section.
I. Rooming Houses:
1. Compliance Required: No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with the
requirements set forth in this section.
2. Lavatory And Bath Facilities: At least one water closet, hand lavatory and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be
supplied for each ten (10) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including
members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of the said facilities; provided that
in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not
more than one-half (1/2) of the required number of water closets, and provided further that in
rooming houses existing prior to July 1, 1972, where a hand lavatory, connected to a water and
sewer system and in good working condition, is supplied in each rooming unit, then the number
of persons who shall share the use of a water closet and bathtub or shower shall not exceed
twelve (12) persons. All such facilities shall be located within the rooming house so as to be
accessible to the occupants of each rooming unit sharing such facilities without going through a
unit of another occupant. Every hand lavatory and bathtub or shower required under the
provisions of this section shall be supplied with hot and cold running water at all times. No
plumbing facilities required under this section except the guest toilet room may be located in a
cellar. No such plumbing facilities shall be located more than one floor distant from the rooming
unit for which such plumbing facilities are provided.
General toilet rooms may be provided to serve members of one sex but not to exceed twenty
four (24) persons. Water closet compartments and bath or shower compartments in general
toilet rooms shall be constructed in such a manner so as to afford the user privacy. General toilet
rooms shall have an approved mechanical ventilation system. Rooming houses having only
general toilet rooms for the tenants all of one sex shall have a toilet room containing a water
closet and hand lavatory for guest use.
3. Communal Kitchens: Communal kitchens shall be permitted only in rooming house occupancies.
Every rooming house within which the occupants of rooming units are permitted to prepare
meals shall contain a communal kitchen that has adequate cooking, refrigeration and plumbing
facilities to allow the preparation of meals in a clean and healthful manner by the occupants.
Every communal kitchen shall be located within a room accessible to the occupant of each
rooming unit sharing the use of such kitchens, without going outside the rooming house and
without going through a unit of another occupant. The owner or operator of a rooming house
wherein meals are served to tenants shall obtain a food and drink license as required by the
Minnesota state health department.
4. No Cooking Signs: The operator shall post in every rooming unit a sign on which shall be written
or printed in letters not less than one inch (1") in height the following words "No Cooking
Permitted In This Room" and such sign shall remain so posted at all times. No person shall cook
or prepare meals in any rooming unit, and no operator knowingly shall allow cooking or
preparation of meals in any rooming unit.
5. Sanitary Maintenance: The owner or operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of
every other part of the rooming house; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 230/444
maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the
rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
6. Reporting Of Communicable Disease: The operator of a rooming house shall report to the
county health authority within twenty four (24) hours the name of any person living in the
rooming house who is suffering from a communicable disease, and such report shall be made
whenever there is reason to believe or suspect that any person in such rooming house may be
afflicted with any communicable disease.
7. Keeping Of Register: Every person registered as a rooming house operator shall at all times
keep a register within the rooming house, in which shall be written the names of all occupants
renting or occupying rooming units in such rooming house. After the name or names of persons
renting or occupying any rooming unit the operator, or operator's agent, shall write the number of
the room or rooms which each person is to occupy, together with the date and hour when such
room or rooms are rented, all of which shall be done before such person is permitted to occupy
such room or rooms. The register shall be at all times open to inspection by the chief of police,
Morrison County health authority, housing inspector, or fire chief, or their authorized
representatives.
8. Entry Of True Name In Register: No person shall write or cause to be written in any rooming
house register any other or different name than the true name of such person or the name by
which such person is generally known.
9. Rehabilitation Centers: A "rehabilitation center" as defined in subsection A5 of this section
relating to this section, may be operated, provided:
a. Such rehabilitation center provides a definite program of medical supervision and employs
personnel of demonstrated competency in social and physical rehabilitation;
b. The center files with the housing inspector written rules, standards and controls governing the
rehabilitation operation and program, and files with the housing inspector any amendments or
additions to its code, and such rules, standards, program and amendments thereto are
approved by the city council;
c. If the rules, standards and programs as presented are approved by the city council, such
rehabilitation center may then be registered as a multiple dwelling.
d. If the above requirements are all complied with, the rehabilitation center may then operate a
multiple dwelling without compliance with subsections G3, I3 and C7 of this section.
J. Shared Bath Dwelling Units:
1. Compliance Required: No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any shared bath
dwelling except in compliance with the requirements set forth in this section.
2. New Units Prohibited: New shared bath dwelling units shall not be installed. Existing shared
bath dwelling units not of record shall be vacated and removed. Nothing herein shall prohibit any
right of appeal as provided by subsection O of this section.
K. Unfit Dwellings:
1. Condemnation Authorized; Requiring Vacating: Whenever the housing inspector finds that any
dwelling, multiple dwelling, or dwelling unit constitutes a hazard to the health, safety, or welfare
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 231/444
of the occupants or to the public because it lacks maintenance, or is dilapidated, unsanitary,
vermin infested, or rodent infested, because it lacks the sanitary facilities and equipment
required by this section, or because it violates residential storage standards, the housing
inspector may condemn such dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. If any
dwelling or any part thereof is occupied by more families than provided by this section, or is
erected, altered or occupied contrary to law, such dwelling shall be deemed an unlawful
structure and the housing inspector may cause such dwelling to be vacated. It shall be unlawful
to again occupy such dwelling until it or its occupation, as the case may be, has been made to
conform to the law.
2. Placarding: Any dwelling or dwelling units condemned shall be posted with a placard of
condemnation by the housing inspector. The placard of condemnation shall include the following:
a. Name of the city;
b. The name of the authorized department having jurisdiction;
c. The provisions of this section or other code under which it is applicable;
d. Street address of building, dwelling number if applicable;
e. A statement of reason or reasons for condemnation;
f. A statement of time when occupants must vacate the dwelling or dwelling unit not less than
twenty four (24) hours or more than thirty (30) days (except in cases of emergency);
g. The date that the placard of condemnation is posted;
h. A statement of the penalty for defacing or removal of the placard.
3. Notice Of Condemnation Required: Whenever the housing inspector, county health authority, or
the fire chief intends to condemn a dwelling or dwelling unit, notice shall be given to the owner of
such condemnation and placarding of the dwelling or dwelling unit. Such notice shall:
a. Be in writing;
b. Include the street address of the building, dwelling number if applicable;
c. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued;
d. Set a date to bring the conditions herein set out into compliance with this section and as
notice that after said date the building or dwelling will be condemned.
4. Service Of Notice Of Condemnation: Service of notice of condemnation shall be as follows:
a. By delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of the
owner with a person of suitable age and discretion; or
b. By depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last
known address with postage prepaid thereon, or by posting and keeping posted for twenty
four (24) hours a copy of said notice in placard form in a conspicuous place on the
condemned premises.
5. Duty To Vacate: Any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as
unfit for human habitation by the housing inspector, Morrison County health authority, or the fire
chief shall be vacated within a reasonable time as required by said housing inspector and it shall
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 232/444
be unlawful for any owner or operator to let or allow any person to occupy said dwelling or
dwelling unit. No person shall occupy any dwelling or dwelling unit, which has been condemned
and placarded by said housing inspector after the date set forth in the placard of condemnation.
The housing inspector, Morrison County health authority, or the fire chief may allow a security
person or fire guard to occupy the condemned dwelling when, in the opinion of said housing
inspector, such action best serves public interest.
6. Condemned Dwellings Not To Be Occupied: No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been
condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human
habitation until written approval is secured from the housing inspector, Morrison County health
authority or the fire chief. The housing inspector, Morrison County health department, or fire
chief shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
7. Defacing, Removal Of Placard: No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling
or dwelling unit that has been condemned and placarded. Such placard shall only be removed
by the enforcing officer.
L. Accessory (Nondwelling) Structures, Etc.:
1. Compliance Required: No person shall construct, or allow or permit to exist on any premises any
accessory (nondwelling) structure, fence, or condition, which does not comply with the
requirements set forth in this subsection.
2. Construction, Maintenance Of Accessory Structures: Every foundation, exterior wall, roof,
window, exterior door, basement hatchway, and every other entranceway of every nondwelling
structure shall be so constructed and maintained as to prevent the structure from becoming a
harborage for rats. Each entranceway for persons or vehicles in any such structure on
residential property shall have exterior doors. All such structures and exterior doors shall be kept
in good workmanlike state of maintenance and repair. All exterior surfaces of nondwelling
structures shall be of a material manufactured or processed specifically for use in such a
weather exposed location. Nondwelling structures shall not be used for the storage of garbage
or rubbish unless such garbage or rubbish is placed in an approved container or stored in a
manner so as not to constitute a health or safety hazard.
3. Grading And Drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water on said premises or within any building or structure located
thereon, and every premises shall be continuously maintained in a sanitary, erosion free, and
dust free condition by suitable landscaping with grass, trees, shrubs, or other planted ground
cover, or by paving with asphalt, concrete, or by such other suitable means as shall be approved
by the housing inspector. Whenever a premises is not in compliance with this section and
presents a hazard to public health and welfare, the housing inspector shall give a fifteen (15) day
notice to the owner or owners or the agent of such owners and occupant or tenant of premises in
the city to correct the violation. In the event said violation is not corrected, the housing inspector
shall take the necessary actions to secure compliance with this section. Premises shall be
considered hazardous when it becomes a potential source of filth and cause of sickness, when
stagnant water or dust is left to accumulate or stand on the premises, or when erosion of the soil
causes the same to spill over onto the sidewalk, street or the adjoining property.
4. Open Excavations And Areas: No person shall maintain or allow to continue without approved
guardrails any excavation, pit, area wall, stairwell or window well which, due to its depth and/or
location on a premises, constitutes a hazard to the health and safety.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 233/444
5. Fences And Retaining Walls: Every fence and retaining wall on or adjacent to residential
property shall be kept well mended and in good repair, consistent with the design thereof.
6. Occupancy Prohibited: No person shall occupy or let or allow another to occupy an accessory
(nondwelling) structure for the purpose of living therein.
M. Building Security:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to require security devices in certain buildings used
for dwellings and certain nondwelling structures accessory thereto, as a safety, burglary and
theft prevention measure. Such security devices shall be installed in a professional manner and
maintained operable and effective as installed.
2. Dead Bolt Locks:
a. Specifications: A dead bolt not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") in its least dimension, which
penetrates into the strike plate not less than three-eighths inch (3/8") shall be deemed to meet
the requirements of this section. Further dead bolt locks installed or replaced after the
adoption of this section, shall have a bolt throw of at least three-fourths inch (3/4") and the
strike plate shall be secured with steel screws at least two and one-half inches (21/2") in length
or secured in a manner to provide equivalent security.
b. Dead Latch, Bolt Type Locks: Mortised dead latch, bolt type locks, properly installed and
maintained, when installed prior to the adoption of this section, may be deemed to provide the
security required by this subsection; however, latch type locks shall not be approved for new
installations.
c. To Be Openable Without A Key: Except as hereinafter expressly permitted in this section,
dead bolt locks, as required by this section, shall be of a type openable from the inside without
the use of a key or any special knowledge or effort. A lock bolt moved by a skeleton type key
shall not be used to provide security for any rental unit.
3. Locks Required: All rooming houses existing now or hereafter constructed shall be provided with
dead bolt locks on all entrance doors of each rooming unit. However, rooming houses having six
(6) or fewer rooming units and occupied by six (6) or fewer roomers may provide the required
security by dead bolt locks on all exterior doors of said rooming house. Key locking shall be as
required for other occupancies in this subsection.
4. Locks Required For Dwellings: All dwellings, when let to another, shall be provided with dead
bolt locks on all entrance doors of each dwelling unit, at least one of which must be capable of
being locked from the exterior. The provisions of this subsection become effective at the time of
adoption of this section.
5. Security For Exterior Garage Doors: All exterior doors on garages provided for the use of the
nonowner occupants of dwellings shall be equipped with such locks, bolts, security bars or other
approved security devices which, when in a closed, secured position, will prevent the doors from
being opened from the outside.
6. Window Security:
a. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (6') above ground or a walking
surface below that provides access to a dwelling shall be equipped with a locking device. All
other windows and doors of dwellings let to another which are accessible to persons by
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 234/444
means of porches, stairs, fire escapes, balconies, corridors, walkways, interior balconies,
roofs, or other such possible accesses, shall be provided with an approved locking device
which, when in the locked position, will prevent the window or door from being opened from
without the dwelling unit or rooming unit.
b. Windows and doors of bath and toilet rooms let in conjunction with the aforementioned units
shall be provided with an approved locking device when such windows are deemed accessible
by the standards set forth in this section.
c. The window security required by this section shall be provided at the prime window or door
and latching or locking devices on storm sash or screen frames will not be accepted as
meeting the intent of this section.
7. Responsibility For Security: The owner, operator, or agent in charge of buildings covered by this
section shall be responsible for compliance with the terms and provisions of this subsection.
8. Keys Required: The owner, operator, or agent in charge of dwellings let to another shall furnish
the lessee with a key for the dead bolt lock or other lock required by this subsection.
9. Easement Agreements:
a. No utility company may seek to enter a multi-unit dwelling in order to maintain, repair, replace,
or remove any of its facilities without providing to the owner of the building not less than four
(4) hours' advance notice during normal business hours (8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. Monday
through Friday) except:
(1) In case of emergency;
(2) Meter reading, monitoring, adjustments, connecting or reconnecting;
(3) At the request of a tenant;
(4) To protect the health and safety of tenants;
(5) When the activity does not require the company to access the building through the security
doors.
b. No utility company may require as a condition of its services that direct sales to the tenants of
a multi-unit dwelling with exterior security doors be allowed except during limited periods of
time negotiated with the owners of the building and upon adequate notice to the tenants so as
not to compromise the security of the building.
N. Rental Dwelling Licenses:
1. Definitions: Words used in this subsection shall have the meanings ascribed in subsection A of
this section, unless otherwise defined herein. "Appropriate action" shall mean that action which a
reasonable license holder would take based upon the facts and circumstances of each case so
as to prevent a reoccurrence of a disorderly use.
2. License Required: No person shall allow to be occupied or let to another for occupancy, any
dwelling unit unless the owner has first obtained a license under the terms of this subsection N.
Any "lease to own" type arrangement is still technically a rental and must be registered as such
until such time as the dwelling unit purchase transaction is accomplished.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 235/444
Any "contract for deed" will not be recognized unless properly recorded with Morrison County as
required by Minnesota state statutes 507.235, as amended.
3. Applicability And Exceptions:
a. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to all rental dwellings and dwelling units,
including rented single-family dwellings and rented dwelling units in owner occupied dwellings,
as well as rented condominiums, rented townhouses and leasehold cooperative dwelling units,
as those terms are defined in Minnesota statutes 273.124, subdivision 6, as amended,
Minnesota statutes 515B, as amended, Minnesota law and this section.
b. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to jails, licensed nursing homes, licensed
board and care homes, parsonages, parish houses, manses and rectories, hospitals, and
owner occupied dwelling units in a cooperative, condominium or townhouse building.
4. What The License Covers:
a. One license shall be issued for each building with rental dwelling units. For each individually
owned rental dwelling unit in a multi-unit building, a license will be required of each unit.
b. The city shall have authority to exercise its licensing powers under this section, including the
power to issue, renew, deny, revoke, and suspend licenses, with respect to an entire building
or only a portion of a building.
5. Application For License: The owner of each rental dwelling shall make written application to the
city for a license to carry on the business of renting residential property. In addition, the owner of
each such rental dwelling constructed after the effective date of this section shall make written
application to the city for a license as herein provided prior to initial occupancy. Such application
shall be made on a form available at the city or furnished by the housing inspector for such
purpose and shall set forth the following information:
a. Name, business or residence address, telephone number of the owner. If the owner is a
partnership, the name of the partnership, the name, residence address of the managing
partner. If the owner is a corporation, the name and address of the corporation and the name
of the chief operating officer, in cases where the owner of a dwelling resides outside of the city
of Little Falls, the owner's agent/contact person shall reside within thirty (30) miles of the city
of Little Falls.
b. If the owner has appointed an agent authorized to accept service of process and to receive
and give receipt for notices, the name, business or residence address, and telephone number
of such agent.
c. Every applicant shall identify in the application, by name, residence or business street
address, and telephone number, a natural person who is actively involved in, and responsible
for, the maintenance and management of the premises. Said natural person, if other than the
owner, will thereby accept joint and several responsibilities with the owner (including any
potential criminal, civil, or administrative liability) for the maintenance and management of the
premises. A post office box or commercial mail receiving service is not acceptable as an
address for such person. The individual authorized herein may also be the owner of the
dwelling or an agent identified in subsection N5b of this section.
d. Street address of the dwelling.
e. Number and kind of units within the dwelling (dwelling units, rooming units, or shared bath
units). For each unit, specify the floor number, and the unit number and/or letter and/or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 236/444
designation.
f. In the event that any of the information required to be provided by this subsection changes, the
applicant or licensee shall, within fourteen (14) days, notify in writing the city hall, or an
authorized representative of the housing inspector, of the change. However, if the natural
person authorized in subsection N5c of this section changes, the licensee or applicant shall
file an amended application within fourteen (14) days. Furthermore, for just cause, the housing
inspector, or an authorized representative of the housing inspector, may request that an
applicant or licensee complete and file a new or replacement application for any rental
dwelling, giving the licensee or applicant a minimum of fourteen (14) days to comply.
6. Minimum Inspection Standards: The minimum standard to be used for inspections, for
compliance with this section for buildings with licenses, shall include the inspection of the
building interior and exterior, the site, the common areas and the basement.
7. Expiration And Renewal: All licenses issued under this subsection shall expire on December 31
of each year, subject to renewal year to year in the manner provided in this subsection. All
licensees shall apply for renewal of their licenses on a form provided by the city. No license shall
be granted without payment of the required license fee. An individual who is operating a rental
dwelling after the license has expired is operating an unlicensed rental dwelling.
8. License Nontransferable: A license issued hereunder is nontransferable. A new license
application shall be required for each change of ownership of a rental dwelling.
9. License Fees:
a. An annual license fee shall be assessed on all rental units. The license fee shall be included
with the initial application or renewal statement. Such fee shall be set by resolution of the city
council. A change in ownership shall require a new license application and payment of the
license fee. An increase in the number of licensed dwelling units during the license year shall
require an amended license application and the payment of an additional license fee to cover
the additional units.
b. Operation of an unlicensed dwelling unit shall be subject to an additional administrative fee, in
accordance with city council resolution. This fee shall be in addition to any other appropriate
enforcement action or fees due.
10. Issuance of License: It is unlawful to operate a rental premises without first having registered
the rental premises. All new rental premises must be registered within thirty (30) days of being
rented and annually thereafter.
11. Licensing Standards: The following minimum standards and conditions shall be met in order to
hold a rental dwelling license under this section. Failure to comply with any of these standards
and conditions shall be adequate grounds for the denial, refusal to renew, revocation, or
suspension of a rental dwelling license.
a. The licensee or applicant shall have paid the required license fee.
b. Rental dwelling units shall not exceed the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the
land use regulations (zoning) code.
c. No rental dwelling or rental dwelling unit shall be over occupied or illegally occupied in
violation of the land use regulations (zoning) code or this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 237/444
d. The rental dwelling shall not have been used or converted to rooming units in violation of the
land use regulations (zoning) code.
e. The owner shall not allow weeds, vegetation, junk, debris, or rubbish to accumulate
repeatedly on the exterior of the premises so as to create a nuisance condition. If the city is
required to abate such nuisance conditions under section 10.41 of this chapter, or collect,
gather up or haul solid waste more than three (3) times during a period of twelve (12) months
or less, it shall be sufficient grounds to deny, revoke, suspend or refuse to renew a license.
f. The rental dwelling or any rental dwelling unit therein shall not be in substandard condition, as
defined in subsection N12 of this section.
g. The licensee or applicant shall have paid the required reinspection fees.
h. The licensee or his or her agent shall allow the housing inspector and his or her authorized
representative to perform a rental license review inspection as set forth in subsection N22 of
this section.
i. The licensee shall maintain a current register of all tenants and other persons with a lawful
right of occupancy to a dwelling unit and the corresponding floor number, and unit number
and/or letter and/or designation of such unit within the building. The register shall be kept
current at all times. The licensee shall designate the person who has possession of the
register and shall inform the housing inspector of the location at which the register is kept. The
register shall be available for review by the housing inspector or his or her authorized
representatives during normal business hours or in an emergency situation.
j. There shall be no delinquent property taxes or assessments on the rental dwelling.
k. There is no active arrest warrant, outstanding administrative citation or unpaid fine for a Little
Falls rental housing maintenance code or land use regulations (zoning) code violation
pertaining to any property in which the licensee, applicant or property manager has a legal or
equitable ownership interest or is involved in management or maintenance.
l. Any person(s) who has had an interest in two (2) or more licenses denied, revoked,
suspended, or not renewed pursuant to this section or to subsection N16 of this section or a
combination of denials, revocations, suspensions, or nonrenewals shall be ineligible to hold or
have an interest in a rental dwelling license for a period of five (5) years.
m. No new rental dwelling license shall be issued for the property during the pendency of
adverse license action initiated pursuant to subsection N16 of this section.
n. The licensee or applicant must have a current, complete, and accurate rental dwelling
application on file with the housing inspector in accord with the provisions of subsection N5 of
this section.
o. Any violation as listed in subsection N24 of this section.
12. Substandard Dwelling: A rental dwelling structure shall be considered substandard if:
a. The dwelling unit scores twenty five (25) or more points; or
b. Any major violation within the dwelling remains uncorrected. Any single violation scoring six
(6) or more points is considered a major violation.
For purposes of the point calculation in this section, any combination of four (4) rooming units
or shared bath units shall constitute one dwelling unit. Points for a violation in a common area
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 238/444
of the structure outside a dwelling unit will not be cumulative on a unit by unit basis. However,
twenty five (25) or more points in the common areas of a structure, including, but not limited
to, the entryways, corridors, community rooms, exterior walls and roof, will constitute a
substandard structure.
The housing inspector shall cause to be prepared and shall keep on file for public inspection
an accurate, complete, and detailed description of each violation used in the point calculation
procedure set forth herein. The inspecting officer shall assign points according to the severity
of each code violation on a scale from one up to the maximum points possible for such
violation.
Except when otherwise provided by state law, conditions in the design or structure of a
building, such as, but not limited to, the size and dimension of rooms and windows and the
electrical and plumbing systems that were legal under existing codes when built shall not be
violations as long as they are maintained in good repair. A violation shall receive maximum
points when a required item is completely absent, completely fails to perform its function, or is
imminently hazardous to the health or safety of the occupants.
Each code violation shall have a maximum number of points to be assigned based on the
relative life safety hazard created by the code violation. The table of maximum violation points
will be established by the housing inspector. The housing inspector will use the designated
housing inspection form for the purpose of determining the existence of substandard
dwellings.
13. Reinspection Fee:
a. There shall be no fee charged for an initial inspection to determine the existence of a rental
housing maintenance code violation or for the first reinspection to determine compliance with
the code violation. A reinspection fee, set by city council resolution, shall be charged for each
subsequent reinspection that is conducted for compliance with an order, as determined by the
housing inspector or the housing inspector's designee.
b. The reinspection fee prescribed above shall be billed directly to the owner or contact
person/agent of the property. Reinspection fees shall be increased by fifty percent (50%) when
not paid within thirty (30) days after initial billing, to cover administrative costs. Failure to pay
such fees shall be grounds for denial, revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of a rental
dwelling license. This subsection shall not be considered the exclusive method of collecting
reinspection fees and shall not preclude collection by other lawful methods.
c. Every notice of violation and order to correct rental housing maintenance code violations shall
contain a clear and conspicuous explanation of the policy in this section requiring fees for
reinspections.
d. The housing inspector may waive a reinspection fee in case of error, mistake, injustice, or
other good cause.
14. Condemned And Boarded Buildings: When a building is condemned as hazardous or unfit for
human habitation due to defects in its structure or its electrical, plumbing, or mechanical
systems, or boarded under Minnesota statutes 463.251, requiring a code compliance inspection
prior to reoccupancy, the rental dwelling license shall be revoked on the effective date of the
condemnation or boarding. The dwelling shall be eligible to hold a rental dwelling license upon
reinspection and correction of any violations that caused the building to be condemned.
15. Housing Inspector's Determination Of Noncompliance Notice:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 239/444
a. If the housing inspector determines that a building or dwelling unit fails to meet the licensing
standards set forth in subsection N11 or N12 of this section, he or she shall mail a notice to
the owner or the owner's agent. The notice shall specify the reasons why the building or unit
fails to meet the licensing standards in subsection N11 or N12 of this section and shall include
a copy of the inspection report if applicable.
b. If the rental dwelling fails to meet one or more of the standards set forth in subsection N11 of
this section, the notice shall indicate that the license holder or applicant has ten (10) days to
correct the defects, after which the city council will take action to deny, refuse to renew,
revoke, or suspend the license.
c. If the rental dwelling fails to meet the standards set forth in subsection N12 of this section, the
notice shall indicate that the license holder or applicant has up to thirty (30) days to correct the
defects causing the building to be substandard, after which the city council will take action to
deny, refuse to renew, revoke, or suspend the license. The housing inspector may for good
cause authorize additional time to correct defects causing a building to be substandard. If the
defects create an imminent hazard to health or safety, the housing inspector may proceed
immediately for denial, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension under subsection N16 of this
section or may shorten the deadline for compliance to less than thirty (30) days.
d. Whenever a notice of noncompliance is issued under this section, the housing inspector shall
also cause a notice to tenants to be prominently posted on the building. The notice shall
indicate that a license proceeding has been commenced against the owner because the
building has been found to be in violation of this section; that after a stated period of time
allowed to bring the building into compliance, the city council may proceed to deny, revoke, or
suspend the rental dwelling license for the building; that if the city council denies, revokes, or
suspends the license, tenants may be required to vacate the building; that further information
can be obtained from the city.
e. The housing inspector shall maintain copies of the notice of noncompliance and send copies
of the noncompliance notice to tenants at the time of posting of the notice on the building.
16. Denial, Nonrenewal, Revocation, Suspension: If after any period for compliance under
subsection N12 of this section has expired, the housing inspector determines that the dwelling
fails to comply with any of the licensing standards in subsection N11 or N12 of this section or the
housing inspector has initiated an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license
pursuant to subsection N24 of this section the housing inspector shall mail the owner a notice of
denial, nonrenewal, revocation, or suspension of the license. The notice shall state:
a. That the housing inspector has determined that the building fails to comply with the licensing
standards for rental dwellings in subsection N11 or N12 of this section, that the licensee has
failed to take appropriate action following conduct by tenants and/or their guests on the
licensed premises under subsection N24 of this section or that the licensee has failed to
submit a written management plan that satisfies the requirements set forth in subsection N24d
of this section.
b. The specific reasons why the building fails to meet licensing standards, including copies of
applicable inspection reports, or notices sent to licensee of conduct on licensed premises.
c. That the housing inspector has referred the matter to the city council with a recommendation
to deny, not renew, revoke, or suspend the license.
d. That the city council will deny, refuse to renew, revoke, or suspend the license unless the
owner appeals the determination within ten (10) days after the date of the notice, in the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 240/444
manner provided in subsection N23 of this section. The notice shall describe how an appeal
may be filed under subsection O of this section.
e. That after denial, nonrenewal, revocation or suspension, the dwelling or the affected dwelling
units therein must be vacated, and shall not be reoccupied until all violations are corrected
and a license is granted by the city council (except where an extension of time has been
granted by the housing inspector due to weather). Further, no license will be reissued by the
city council until an approved plan to control conduct on premises has been presented and
accepted by the city council if the denial, nonrenewal, revocation or suspension was under
subsection N24 of this section.
f. The housing inspector shall cause a notice to tenants to be mailed or delivered to each
licensed dwelling unit and prominently posted on the building. The notice shall indicate that
the rental dwelling license for the building has been denied, nonrenewed, revoked, or
suspended, whichever is applicable; that the action will become final on a specific date unless
the building owner appeals and requests a hearing; that tenants may be required to vacate the
building when the action becomes final; that further information can be obtained from the city.
17. Reinstatement Fee: A fee set by city council resolution must accompany any application for
reinstatement of any license that has been denied, nonrenewed, revoked or suspended under
subsection N24 of this section. This reinstatement fee is in addition to the license fees imposed
pursuant to subsection N9 of this section.
18. Vacation Of Affected Dwelling Units: When an application for rental dwelling license has been
denied, or a rental dwelling license has been revoked, suspended, or not renewed, or when the
owner has not obtained a current rental dwelling license upon proper application as required by
this section, the housing inspector shall order the dwelling or the affected dwelling units therein
vacated, giving tenants a reasonable time to arrange new housing and to move their
possessions.
19. Operation Of Rental Dwelling Without License A Misdemeanor: A person who allows to be
occupied, or lets to another, any dwelling unit, without a license as required by this section, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
20. Unauthorized Removal Of Notices A Misdemeanor: Any person, who removes, defaces,
tampers or in any way interferes with any notice posted pursuant to this section, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
21. Remedies In This Section Not Exclusive: The remedies provided in this section are not
exclusive. They are in addition to, and do not supersede or preempt, other remedies such as
condemnation, written violation orders and warnings, administrative citations, criminal charges
for violation of substantive provisions of any city or state code relating to housing maintenance,
fire safety, building codes, zoning, health, and the like. Further, the remedies in this section do
not supersede or affect the legal rights and remedies of tenants provided under state law or this
section.
22. Duties Of Licensee: Every holder of a rental dwelling license shall:
a. Post his or her license certificate when received from the housing inspector. The certificate
shall be conspicuously posted in a frame with transparent cover in a public corridor, hallway,
or lobby of the dwelling for which it is issued. For other than multiple dwellings, the certificate
shall be prominently posted at or near the front entrance of the building.
b. Maintain a current register of all tenants and other persons with a lawful right of occupancy to
a dwelling unit and the corresponding floor number, and unit number and/or letter and/or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 241/444
designation, within the building. The register shall be kept current at all times. The licensee
shall designate the person who has possession of the register. The register shall be available
for review by the housing inspector or authorized representatives during normal business
hours or upon an emergency situation.
c. Permit housing inspector and his or her authorized representatives, either voluntarily or
pursuant to an administrative or other warrant, to enter upon the premises for the purpose of
conducting inspections to verify compliance with this section, and the fire, health, zoning and
building codes of the city. Such inspections shall be made at such frequencies as the housing
inspector deems appropriate and necessary, and when practical, shall provide reasonable
advance notice to the license holder or a managing agent.
d. The owner of any dwelling which is required to be licensed by this section shall, prior to the
time of sale of said dwelling, notify the buyer in writing of all unabated orders and violation
tags issued by the housing inspector or building department, pertaining to said dwelling, as
well as the requirement of law that said dwelling, upon acquisition by a new owner, must be
licensed with the housing inspector. A copy of the notification shall be mailed to the housing
inspector within five (5) days of furnishing the notification to the buyer. If the dwelling is owned
by a corporation, an officer of said corporation shall carry out the notification required by this
section. If the property is owned by more than one person, a notification by one of the owners
shall satisfy this section. For the purposes of this section, "time of sale" shall be construed to
mean when a written purchase agreement is executed by the buyer or, in the absence of a
purchase agreement, upon the execution of any document providing for the conveyance of a
dwelling required to be licensed.
e. Submit current application information as required by subsection N5 of this section.
23. Notices: Whenever a notice is required to be sent to or served upon the licensee of a rental
dwelling under this subsection, notice shall be deemed sufficient if sent by first class mail to the
owner or owner's authorized agent at the address specified in the last license application filed in
the building department under subsection N5 of this section. If a notice sent to the address
specified in the last license application is returned, and the owner or owner's agent cannot be
found, then notice shall be sent to the person authorized in the last license application, under
subsection N5c of this section as responsible for the maintenance and management of the
premises, or any other known caretaker or manager, and a notice shall also be posted on the
building.
Every licensee shall notify the inspections division within fourteen (14) days of any changes in
the names, addresses, and other information concerning the persons listed in the last license
application filed with the division. Whenever notice is required to be sent or delivered to tenants
of a dwelling unit under this subsection, notice shall be sufficient if sent by first class mail to the
tenants or occupants of each licensed dwelling unit at the address specified in the license
application or the register that the licensee maintains pursuant to subsection N22b of this
section.
24. Conduct On Licensed Premises:
a. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to take appropriate action, with the assistance of
the Little Falls police department, following conduct by tenants and/or their guests on the
licensed premises, which is determined to be disorderly, in violation of any of the following
statutes or city codes, to prevent further violations:
(1) Minnesota statutes 504B.171, as amended, which prohibits the following illegal activities:
prostitution, unlawful sale of controlled substances, unlawful possession, transport, sale, or
use of weapons, possession of stolen property;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 242/444
(2) Minnesota statutes 609.75 through 609.76, as amended, which prohibit gambling;
(3) Minnesota statutes 340A.401, as amended, which prohibits the unlawful sale of alcoholic
beverages;
(4) Minnesota statutes 609.72, as amended, which addresses disorderly conduct;
(5) Minnesota statutes 609.33, as amended, which addresses disorderly house;
(6) Section 10.25 of this chapter, which addresses noise related issues.
b. The Little Falls police department shall be responsible for enforcement and administration of
this subsection.
c. Upon determination by the Little Falls police department utilizing established procedures, that
a licensed premises was used in a disorderly manner, as described in subsection N24a of this
section, the Little Falls police department shall notify the licensee by mail of the violation and
direct the licensee to take appropriate action with the assistance of the Little Falls police
department to prevent further violations.
d. If another instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurs within twelve (12)
months of an incident for which a notice in subsection N24c of this section was given, the Little
Falls police department shall notify the licensee by mail of the violation. The licensee shall
then submit a written management plan to the Little Falls police department within ten (10)
days of receipt of the notice of disorderly use of the premises. The written management plan
shall detail all actions taken by the licensee in response to all notices of disorderly use of the
premises within the preceding twelve (12) months. The written management plan shall also
detail all actions taken by the licensee to prevent further disorderly use of the premises. The
notice provided to the licensee of the violation shall inform the licensee of the requirement of
submitting a written management plan may result in the city council taking action to deny,
refuse to renew, revoke or suspend the licensee.
e. If another instance of disorderly use of the licensed premises occurs within eighteen (18)
months, if the premises contains between one and six (6) distinct and separate residential
units, or within twelve (12) months, if the premises contains more than six (6) distinct and
separate residential units, after the second of any two (2) previous instances of disorderly use
for which notices were sent to the licensee pursuant to this section, the rental dwelling license
for the premises may be denied, revoked, suspended, or not renewed. An action to deny,
revoke, suspend, or not renew a license under this section shall be initiated by the Little Falls
police department in the manner described in subsection N16 of this section and shall proceed
according to the procedures established herein.
f. No adverse license action shall be imposed where the instance of disorderly use of the
licensed premises occurred during the pendency of eviction proceedings or after proper notice
is given by the licensee to a tenant to vacate the premises, where the disorderly use was
related to conduct by that tenant or his/her guests. Eviction proceedings shall not be a bar to
adverse license action, however, unless they are diligently pursued by the licensee. A notice
to vacate shall not be a bar to adverse license action unless a copy of the notice is submitted
to the Little Falls police department within ten (10) days of receipt of the violation notice.
Further, an action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a license based upon violations of
this section may be postponed or discontinued by the Little Falls police department at any time
if it appears that the licensee has taken appropriate action to prevent further instances of
disorderly use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 243/444
g. A determination that the licensed premises have been used in a disorderly manner as
described in subsection N24a of this section shall be made upon substantial evidence to
support such a determination. It shall not be necessary that criminal charges be brought to
support a determination of disorderly use, nor shall the fact of dismissal or acquittal of such a
criminal charge operates as a bar to adverse license action under this section.
25. Review Of Subsection: The Little Falls police department shall review this subsection N24
three (3) years after the effective date of these revisions to determine its impact upon both
landlords and tenants, and to recommend any changes which may be appropriate. The Little
Falls police department shall keep records of all actions and proposed actions under said
subsection N24 of this section to facilitate the review required herein.
O. Means Of Appeal:
1. Request For Hearing: An owner or occupant may contest any determination made by the code
official pertaining to this section by requesting a hearing, in writing, within ten (10) days of the
date of the determination, to the city administrator or designated representative.
a. Hearing Procedure:
(1) Hearing Officer: The city council will periodically approve a list of lawyers, from which the
city administrator will select a hearing officer to hear and determine a matter for which the
hearing is requested. The person who has requested the hearing has the right to request,
no later than fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing, that the assigned hearing
officer be removed from the case. One such request for each case will be granted by the
city administrator. A subsequent request must be directed to the assigned hearing officer
who will decide whether the hearing officer can fairly and objectively review the case. If such
a finding is made, the hearing officer shall remove himself or herself from the case, and the
city administrator shall assign another hearing officer. The hearing officer is not a judicial
officer, but is a public officer as defined by Minnesota statutes 609.415, as amended. The
hearing officer shall not be a current or former employee of the city of Little Falls.
(2) Notice Of Hearing: Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by first class mail to
the person responsible for the violation no less than twenty (20) days in advance of the
scheduled hearing, unless a shorter time is accepted by both parties. Service shall be
deemed complete upon depositing the notice of hearing in the United States mail, properly
addressed to last known address of the person to be served and postage prepaid.
(3) Payment For Cost Of Hearing: The cost of the hearing shall be borne solely by the
nonprevailing party. The city shall provide an estimate of the cost of the hearing at the time
of the request for hearing. The city council has the authority to reduce the nonprevailing
party's costs where that party can demonstrate indigency by clear and convincing evidence.
Proof of indigency can be demonstrated by the party's receipt of means tested
governmental benefits or a demonstrated lack of assets or current income. Such proof shall
be presented to the city council for determination subsequent to the hearing. However, the
hearing officer at the time of the hearing shall make specific findings as to whether or not
the party is indigent with said findings presented to the city council. In all cases, where the
party requesting the hearing is unable to attend and fails to request a continuance of the
hearing at least forty eight (48) hours in advance of the scheduled hearing, all costs incurred
by the city attributable to the hearing shall be charged to the requesting party.
(4) Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the parties shall have the opportunity to present
testimony and question any witnesses, but strict rules of evidence shall not apply. The
hearing officer shall record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits and the full
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 244/444
record of the hearing shall be kept. The hearing officer shall receive and give weight to
evidence, including hearsay evidence probative value commonly accepted by reasonable
and prudent people in the conduct of their affairs.
(5) Authority Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall determine whether a violation
did or did not occur. If the hearing officer determines that a violation did not occur then the
citation shall be dismissed. If the hearing officer determines that a violation did occur, then
the officer may do any of the following: impose a fine anywhere within or up to, but not
exceeding, the maximum penalty for an administrative offense, stay or waive a fine either
unconditionally or upon compliance with the appropriate conditions. When imposing a
penalty for a violation, the hearing officer may consider any or all of the following:
(A) The duration of the violation;
(B) The frequency of recurrence of the violation;
(C) The seriousness of the violation;
(D) The history of the violation;
(E) The violator's conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;
(F) The good faith effort of the violator to comply;
(G) The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;
(H) The impact of the violation upon the community; and
(I) Any other factors appropriate to just result.
(6) Fines For Continuing Violations: The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a
fine for more than one day of a continuing violation but only on a finding that the violation
caused a serious threat of harm to the public health, safety or welfare, or the accused
intentionally and unreasonably refused to comply with the code requirement. The hearing
officer's decision and supporting reasons for continuing violations must be in writing.
(7) Decision Of The Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall issue a decision in writing to
both parties within ten (10) days of the hearing. Any fines or penalties imposed must be paid
no later than thirty (30) days of the date of the hearing officer's order. If the fine is not paid,
the city may assess the civil penalty against the owner's property pursuant to Minnesota
statutes 429, as amended. If the hearing officer determines that no violation occurred, the
city may not proceed with criminal prosecution for the same act or conduct. The decision of
the hearing officer is final and may only be appealed to the Minnesota court of appeals by
petitioning for a writ of certiorari pursuant to Minnesota statutes 606.01, as amended.
b. Payment Of Fines: Prior to any assessment for unpaid fines, the city shall seek payment of
the fines by notifying the owner of the property in writing of the fine imposed.
c. Assessment Procedure: Unpaid fines including an administrative charge of twenty five dollars
($25.00) plus interest of the total balance will be assessed pursuant to Minnesota statutes
429, as amended, against the property of the owner charged with the violation. For
uncorrected or continued violations, the city will correct the violation and assess the charges
for doing so. (Ord. 75, 6th Series, eff. 5-4-2015)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 245/444
10.41: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
A. General:
1. Title: These regulations shall be known as the PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE, hereinafter
referred to as "this section", and the city of Little Falls, Minnesota, hereinafter referred to as
"city".
2. Scope: The provisions of this section shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation,
space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other
hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and
occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration,
enforcement and penalties.
3. Intent: This section shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public
health, safety, and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and
maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply
with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety
as required herein.
4. Severability: If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is, for any
reason, held to be unconstitutional; such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this section.
B. Applicability:
1. General: The provisions of this section shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures
and premises, as set forth in subsection A of this section. Where, in a specific case, different
subsections of this section specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
2. Maintenance: Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this section or a
previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or
repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause
any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from
or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption
as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this section are
not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems
and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the
owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, and
premises.
3. Application Of Other Codes: Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Minnesota
state building code, Minnesota state mechanical, fuel gas and plumbing code, and the national
electrical code. Nothing in this section shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any
provision of the land use regulations (zoning) as provided in chapter 11 of the city code.
4. Existing Remedies: The provisions in this section shall not be constructed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or
demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 246/444
5. Workmanship: Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly
or indirectly by the enforcement of this section shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike
manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
6. Historic Buildings: The provisions of this section shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or
structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the
code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
7. Referenced Codes And Standards: The codes and standards referenced in this section shall be
those that are listed in chapter 5 of the city code and considered part of the requirements of this
section to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this section and the reference standards, the provisions of this section shall apply.
8. Requirements Not Covered By This Section: Requirements necessary for the strength, stability,
or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure, or equipment, or for the public safety, health
and general welfare, not specifically covered by this section, shall be determined by the code
official.
C. General Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
APPROVED: Approved by the code official.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
BATHROOM: A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
BEDROOM: Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a
dwelling or sleeping unit.
CODE OFFICIAL: The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this
section or any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN: To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT: That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or
agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for
use under, on or above a said lot or lots.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY: The open space on the premises and an adjoining property under the
control or owners or operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their
harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination method.
GARBAGE: The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
GUARD: A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 247/444
sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface
to a lower level.
HABITABLE SPACE: Space in a structure used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms,
toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable
spaces.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain within such a
unit a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life threatening injury or death at
any time.
INFESTATION: The presence within or contiguous to a structure or premises of insects, rats,
vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for
reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair,
or incapable of being moved under its own power.
LABELED: Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been affixed a label, seal,
symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or
other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance
with applicable nationally recognized standards.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET: To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not
the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or
pursuant to an unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within
a building.
OPENABLE AREA: That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or
offered for occupancy.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the
property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.
PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 248/444
the sky, which is deeded or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for
compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended
to be occupied for sleeping or living but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall
include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials; paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
SLEEPING UNIT: A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent
provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and
spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE: An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not
required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either
did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to
do.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
TENANT: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record,
occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM: A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
VENTILATION: The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air
to, or removing such air from, any space.
WORKMANLIKE: Executed in a skilled manner, e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line,
undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a structure.
D. Terms, Words And Meanings:
1. Scope: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this
section, have the meanings shown in this subsection.
2. Interchangeability: Words stated in the present tense include the future, words stated in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter, the singular number includes the plural and
the plural, the singular.
3. Terms Defined In Other Codes: Where terms are not defined in this section and are defined in
the international fire code, international zoning code, Minnesota state building code, Minnesota
state mechanical, fuel gas and plumbing code or the national electrical code, such terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in these codes.
4. Terms Not Defined: Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
subsection, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 249/444
5. Parts: Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling", "premises", "building", "rooming house",
"rooming unit", "housekeeping unit", or "story" are stated in this section, they shall be construed
as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
E. Code Official For Property Maintenance Inspections:
1. General: The executive official in charge of property maintenance inspection shall be known as
the code official.
2. Appointment: The code official shall be appointed by the city council.
3. Deputies: In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the city and with the concurrence of
the city council, the code official shall have the authority to appoint deputy code officials; other
related technical officers, inspectors and other employees as needed.
4. Liability: The code official, officer or employees charged with the enforcement of this section,
while acting for the city, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and are hereby relieved
from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of
duties and under the provisions of this section shall be defended by the legal representative of
the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate
shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this section; and any officer, acting in good faith and without malice with regards to
the enforcement of this section, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection
therewith.
5. Fees: The fees for activities and services performed in carrying out the responsibilities under
this section shall be as indicated in the fee schedule adopted by the city council and updated
from time to time.
F. Duties And Powers Of The Code Official:
1. General: The code official shall enforce the provisions of this section.
2. Implementation Authority: The code official shall have authority as necessary in the interest of
public health, safety and general welfare; to interpret and implement the provisions of this
section; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of local
climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire
performance requirements specifically provided for in this section, or of violating accepted
engineering methods involving public safety.
3. Inspections: The code official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports
of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in
writing. The code official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to
report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the city administrator.
4. Right Of Entry: The code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable
times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If
entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by
law.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 250/444
5. Identification: The code official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or
premises in the performance of the official's duties under this section.
6. Notices And Orders: The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders pursuant to
subsection R of this section to ensure compliance with this section.
7. Records: The code official shall keep records of all business and activities specified in the
provisions of this section. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the
building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise
provided for by other regulations.
8. Alternative Materials, Methods And Equipment: The provisions of this section are not intended to
prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically
prescribed by this section, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative
material or method of construction shall be approved where the code official finds that the
proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this section, and
that the alternate material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the
equivalent of that prescribed in this section in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability and safety.
9. Required Testing: Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of
this section, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this
section, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the code official
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to
the jurisdiction.
10. Test Methods: Test methods shall be as specified in this section or by other recognized test
standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the code official shall be
permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
11. Test Reports: Reports of tests shall be retained by the code official for the period required for
retention of public records.
12. Material And Equipment Reuse: Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless
such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary,
placed in good and proper working condition and approved.
G. General Requirements:
1. Scope: The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum conditions and the
responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
2. Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in
compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this section. A person
shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not
in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this section.
Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a
clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit
or premises which they occupy and control.
3. Vacant Structures And Land: All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause
a blight problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 251/444
H. Unsafe Structures And Equipment:
1. General: When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a
structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of this section.
a. Unsafe Structures: An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health,
property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum
safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure
contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
b. Unsafe Equipment: Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator,
moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on
the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment
is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
c. Structure Unfit For Human Occupancy: A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the
code official finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which
the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested,
contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities
or other essential equipment required by this section, or because the location of the structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
d. Unlawful Structure: An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by
more persons than permitted under this section, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary
to law.
2. Closing Of Vacant Structures: If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and
occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the code official is authorized to post a
placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an
attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified
in the order, the code official shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any
available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien
upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
3. Notice: Whenever the code official has condemned a structure or equipment under the
provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment in accordance with subsection R3 of this section. The notice shall be in
the form prescribed in subsection R2 of this section.
4. Placarding: Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions
within the time given, the code official shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a
placard bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying
the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
a. Placard Removal: The code official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval
of the code official shall be subject to the penalties provided by subsection Q of this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 252/444
5. Prohibited Occupancy: Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the code official
shall be vacated as ordered by the code official. Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for
the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded
equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by subsection Q of this section.
I. Emergency Measures:
1. Imminent Danger: When, in the opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger of failure or
collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure
because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the code official is hereby
authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith.
The code official shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited By The Code
Official". It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of
securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of
demolishing the same.
2. Temporary Safeguards: Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever, in the
opinion of the code official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the code official
shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such
structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the code official deems necessary to
meet such emergency.
3. Closing Streets: When necessary for public safety, the code official shall temporarily close
structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public
ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
4. Emergency Repairs: For the purposes of this subsection, the code official shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
5. Costs Of Emergency Repairs: Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be
paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action
against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery
of such costs.
6. Hearing: Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order
forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, have the right to appeal such order pursuant to
section 10.31 of this chapter.
J. Demolition:
1. General: The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the code official's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or
occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove
such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make
safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 253/444
cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two (2) years, to
demolish and remove such structure.
2. Notices And Orders: All notices and orders shall comply with subsection R of this section.
3. Failure To Comply: If the owner of a premises fails to comply or appeal under section 10.31 of
this chapter with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the
structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by
contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal shall
be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate.
4. Salvage Materials: When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall
have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be
promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and
the amounts deducted, to the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If
such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state.
K. Exterior Structure:
1. General: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
2. Protective Treatment: All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good
condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well
as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall
be maintained weather resistant and watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion
shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from
exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this
requirement.
3. Premises Identification: Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to
be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall
contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (4") (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of
0.5 inch (12.7 mm). Cross reference definition of "house/building numbers" in section 11.02 of
the city code.
4. Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
5. Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and
breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
All foundation walls shall also be kept clear of volunteer trees and brush that is overgrown near
the house that could cause damage to the foundation walls.
6. Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials;
and weather resistant and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 254/444
7. Roofs And Drainage: The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.
8. Decorative Features: All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe
condition.
9. Overhang Extension: All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees,
signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good
repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or
rust by periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
10. Stairways, Decks, Porches And Balconies: Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony,
and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair,
with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
11. Chimneys And Towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and similar appurtenances
shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
12. Handrails And Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
13. Window, Skylight And Doorframes: Every window, skylight, and doorframe shall be kept in
sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
a. Glazing: All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
b. Openable Windows: Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and
capable of being held in position by window hardware.
14. Insect Screens: During the period from April 15 to October 31, every door, window and other
outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting
screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen
door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means such as air curtains or
insect repellent fans, are employed.
15. Doors: All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition.
Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on
means of egress doors shall be in accordance with the appropriate code.
16. Basement Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance
of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 255/444
17. Guards For Basement Windows: Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied
with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.
18. Building Security: Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping
units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property
within.
a. Doors: Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is
rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a dead bolt lock designed to be readily openable
from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or
effort and shall have a latch throw of not less than one inch (1") (25 mm). Such dead bolt locks
shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good
working order. For the purpose of this subsection, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an
acceptable dead bolt lock.
b. Windows: Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (6') (1828 mm) above
ground level or a walking surface below that provides access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit
or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking
device.
c. Basement Hatchways: Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that
secure the units from unauthorized entry.
L. Exterior Property Areas:
1. Sanitation: All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
2. Grading And Drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of
soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located
thereon. Exception: approved retention areas and reservoirs.
3. Sidewalk And Driveways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. It
shall be unlawful for an owner or tenant of the abutting private property to allow ice or snow to
remain upon the public sidewalk twenty four (24) hours after such snow or ice has ceased to be
deposited.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to clear ice or snow from the
public sidewalk after service of a notice of violation, or appeal subject to the provisions of section
10.31 of this chapter, the owner or agent shall be subject to prosecution or penalty in
accordance with subsection Q of this section. Upon failure to comply with or appeal the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction
shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and remove such ice and snow
thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the
property.
4. Weeds And Grass: It is unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of any lot or parcel of land in
the city to allow any weeds or grass growing upon any such lot or parcel of land to grow to a
greater height than six inches (6"), or to allow such weeds or grass to go to seed, except that
grass may be grown for hay, provided, that the hay is mowed and removed by June 15 of the
year it is grown. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 256/444
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided, however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds or
grass after service of a notice of violation, or appeal subject to the provisions of section 10.31 of
this chapter, the owner or agent shall be subject to prosecution or penalty in accordance with
subsection Q of this section. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, or appeal subject
to the provisions of section 10.31 of this chapter, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction
or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation
and cut and destroy the weeds or grass growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be
paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
(Natural landscape plan. A landowner wishing to maintain property in a natural state may be
exempted from the requirements of this subsection by submittal of a natural landscape plan and
by following the provisions and conditions set forth for said plan as identified elsewhere in the
city code.)
5. Rodent Harborage: All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage
and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved
processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
6. Exhaust Vents: Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon
abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant.
7. Accessory Structures: All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
8. Abandoned And Wrecked Vehicles:
a. State Laws Adopted: The provisions of Minnesota statutes chapter 168B, as amended,
relating to abandoned motor vehicles, is adopted and made a part of this subsection as if set
out in full herein.
b. Definitions: See subsection C, "General Definitions", of this section. Additionally, for the
purposes of this subsection, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A "vehicle", as defined in this subsection, that has remained for a
period of more than four (4) hours on public property illegally, or lacking vital component parts,
or has remained for a period of more than four (4) hours on private property without consent of
the person in control of such property, or in an inoperable condition such that it has no
substantial, potential further use consistent with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an
enclosed garage or storage building. It shall include a vehicle which is in a wrecked, junked or
partially dismantled condition. It shall also mean a motor vehicle voluntarily surrendered by its
owner to the city or a vehicle offered for sale by its owner parked on public property. It shall
also include any vehicle which is not properly and/or currently licensed within the state of
Minnesota.
CLASSIC OR PIONEER CAR: As defined in Minnesota statutes section 168.10, or its
successor, a "classic or pioneer car" shall not be considered an abandoned vehicle.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 257/444
or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
c. Nuisance Declared: The city council has determined that abandoned (including vehicles not
currently licensed), wrecked, junked, partially dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city
create a public nuisance tending to reduce the value of private property, invite plundering,
create fire hazards, attract vermin and constitute a threat to the health and safety of the public.
The accumulation and outside storage of such vehicles, in the nature of rubbish, litter and
unsightly debris is a detriment to the environment and is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance which may be abated as provided herein or as provided under any other ordinance
of the city or law of the state.
d. Abandonment Of Vehicles: No person shall park, store or leave, or permit the parking, storing
or leaving of, any abandoned vehicle on public or private property within the city unless:
(1) Within a building;
(2) Such vehicle is stored or parked on private property in connection with a duly licensed or
authorized commercial enterprise operated and conducted pursuant to law when such
parking or storing of vehicles is necessary to the operation of said commercial enterprise; or
(3) Such vehicle is stored or parked on private property of the owner thereof, or a member of
the owner's family, for the purpose of making repairs thereto, provided, that said repair
period is not to exceed thirty (30) days, after which time said vehicle shall be deemed to be
abandoned.
e. Impoundment Of Abandoned Vehicles: The city may take into custody and impound any
abandoned vehicle which is in violation of the provisions of subsection L8d of this section. Any
person, at the direction of the city administrator, police chief or any other police officer of the
city is hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property for the purpose of enforcing
this subsection.
f. Sale Of Abandoned Vehicles:
(1) Vehicles Over Seven Years Old: When an abandoned vehicle is more than seven (7)
model years of age, is lacking vital component parts, and does not display a license plate
currently valid in the state, or any other state or foreign country, it shall immediately be
eligible for sale at public auction and shall not be subject to the notification and reclamation
provisions of subsection L8g of this section.
(2) Vehicles Seven Years Old And Newer:
(A) Notice To Owner: When an abandoned vehicle does not fall within the provisions of
subsection L8f(1) of this section, the city administrator, police chief or a police officer of the
city shall give notice of the taking into custody of the vehicle pursuant to Minnesota statutes
section 168B.06, as amended.
(B) Public Sale Of Vehicle: An abandoned vehicle taken into custody and not reclaimed
under subsection L8g of this section shall be sold to the highest bidder at public auction or
sale, following ten (10) days' published notice thereof in the official newspaper of the city.
(C) Proceeds Of Sale: From the proceeds of the sale of the abandoned vehicle, the city
shall reimburse itself for the cost of towing, preserving and storing of the vehicle, and all
notice, publication and administrative costs incurred pursuant to this subsection. Any
remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 258/444
lienholder for ninety (90) days and, if not claimed, shall thereafter be deposited in the city
treasury.
g. Reclamation Of Vehicle: The owner, or any lienholder of an abandoned vehicle, or any person
in lawful possession or control of the property upon which said vehicle was abandoned, shall
have a right to reclaim said vehicle from the city upon payment of all towing and storage
charges resulting from the taking of the vehicle into custody within fifteen (15) days after the
date of the notice required by subsection L8f(2) of this section.
9. Defacement Of Property: No person shall wilfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon
any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface
to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
10. Household Furnishings, Appliance And Trade Fixtures: It is unlawful for any person to store or
keep any household furnishings or appliances or trade fixtures intended for use inside of a
building on any property within the corporate limits of the city, unless housed within a lawfully
erected building or unless such person has a valid junk dealer's license obtained under section
6.30 of the city code.
11. Storage Of Wood:
a. Wood Defined: "Wood" shall include, but not be limited to, firewood and lumber, whether
rough, precut construction grade or finished, which is stored or kept on property in the city.
b. Persons Exempt: This subsection shall not apply to: 1) persons having property on which new
construction is taking place and the wood on such property is being used for said construction,
unless the said wood has remained on the property for more than six (6) months and is not a
permanent part of the new construction at the end of that time; and 2) persons storing or
keeping wood on property when said wood is stored or kept in neat and secure stacks in a
covered structure impervious to the elements.
c. Conditions Of Outside Storage: Wood stored or kept in the city which is not contained within a
covered enclosure impervious to the elements shall be stored or kept in neat and secure
stacks as follows: there is no minimum width requirement for open stacks under three feet (3')
in height. Any open stacks over three feet (3') in height shall have a height which is no more
than twice its width with a maximum height of nine feet (9'). Stacks shall be no less than five
feet (5') from any side property line on corner lots, thirty feet (30') from any front property line
or any front of a house, whichever is closer, and two feet (2') from any rear property line or any
side property line of interior lots. Grass height around all wood stacks shall be maintained at a
maximum height of six inches (6").
d. Number Of Cords: No more than ten (10) cords of wood shall be stored on any residential
property.
M. Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs:
1. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in
good repair and shall comply with the provisions contained in section 5.40 of the city code.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt
from the provisions of this subsection.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 259/444
N. Nuisances/Junk/Blight:
1. Public Nuisance: Whoever by an act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally maintains a
public nuisance may be ordered to abate the nuisance as provided in this section, and may be
charged with a misdemeanor offense or issued an administrative citation. The following acts or
omissions shall constitute a public nuisance:
a. Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures, or endangers the safety,
health, morals, comfort, or repose of any considerable number of members of the public.
b. Interferes with, obstructs, or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right of
way, or waters used by the public.
c. Wilfully opposes or obstructs a health officer or physician charged with the enforcement of the
health laws in performing any legal duties.
d. Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law to be a public nuisance/junk/blight and
for which no sentence is specifically provided.
2. Permitting Public Nuisance/Junk/Blight: No person shall permit real property under such
person's control to be used to maintain a public nuisance/junk/blight or let the same knowing it
will be so sold.
3. Permitting Unhealthful Waste Disposal Systems: No person shall permit or maintain, an
offensive, nauseous, hurtful, dangerous or unhealthful outhouse, privy, vault, sewer, or private
drain upon said premises or land, or premises or land occupied or used by or under such
person's control.
4. Permitting Unhealthful Conditions: No person shall permit, suffer, or maintain or fail to remove
any offensive, nauseous, hurtful, dangerous, or unhealthful condition to or for the neighborhood
resulting from the failure to properly dispose of sick or unsound flesh, meat, fish, carcass,
garbage, sewage, waste, debris, or any other offensive substance, liquid, or thing whatsoever
upon said premises or land, or premises or land occupied or used by or under such person's
control, or drop, discharge, pass, deposit, or otherwise deliver the same upon any ground,
private or public.
5. Fertilizer And Burial Of Waste: No person shall leave, deposit, or cause to be placed on any
private ground any garbage, sewage, waste, debris, carcass, or other substance or matter which
is offensive or unhealthy by decomposition provided, that the use of manure in the normal
course for agriculture or horticulture is permitted.
6. Slaughterhouses: No person shall keep or use any slaughterhouse, nor slay, kill, or butcher any
animal, except for their own home use, nor melt or fry out any rough tallow, nor keep or have any
stale, putrid, or stinking fat, grease or meat. No person shall keep within said city any undressed
or dry hides, or offensive, nauseous substance or liquid at any place from whence the stench
thereof may reach the street, avenue, alley, lane, or public land, or to any dwelling. No owner or
occupant of any grocery, cellar, packing house, meat shop, soap factory, tannery, brewery,
distillery and dye house, stable, or other place of business shall suffer or permit any litter or
garbage to be thereon, or swept therefrom upon any street, avenue, lane, or alley. Nor shall any
business owner suffer or permit any foul, unclean, nauseous, or offensive liquid or substance to
pass from any premises under the owner's control adjacent thereto, into, over, or upon any
street, avenue, lane, or alley, or open drain, gutter or sewer, or over or upon any private
grounds.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 260/444
7. Septic Tanks: No person shall cause, permit, or maintain any abandoned cesspool or septic tank
without it being properly filled.
8. Junk: No person, firm, or corporation of any kind shall permit the accumulation of junk that
includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: waste material, trash, rubbish, refuse, or litter
of any kind upon any land or inside or under any building or structure which may provide
harborage or breeding places for mosquitoes, vermin, or rats. No person, firm, or corporation of
any kind shall permit on a property the accumulation of: batteries; paper; lumber or salvaged
wood; boxes or containers; bottles; cans; discarded chemicals; bricks; stones; old or scrap
copper, brass, iron, steel, or other metals; old and/or inoperable appliances; tanks; barrels;
cages; clothing; pallets; wire/cable; dismantled, abandoned or inoperable vehicles, farm
equipment, construction equipment, campers, recreation vehicles, boats, or parts thereof; rope;
rags; glass; rubber; construction debris; plumbing fixtures; furniture; brush piles; cut down trees
and branches; pulled stumps; leaf piles not in a composting container; or other similar objects
and materials which may provide harborage or breeding places for mosquitoes, vermin, or rats.
Useful items such as firewood and building materials may be stored in compliance with
subsection L11 of this section provided they are stored in a manner that will not create any
danger or threat to public health.
9. Blight: No person, firm, or corporation of any kind shall maintain or permit to be maintained any
of these causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property owned, leased, rented, or
occupied by such person, firm, or corporation: a) the building, structure, or parcel of land is in a
condition which poses a threat to the safety, health, morals, and general welfare of the
community; b) it is attracting illegal activity as documented by the police department; c) it is a fire
hazard as determined by the fire department; d) the existence of the following conditions:
missing, damaged or boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls or roofs; parts of
walls that need repair; damaged or missing siding or gutters; a structurally faulty foundation,
porch, chimney, or other attached structure; a principal or accessory buildings in need of repair,
paint, or sealer; fencing in disrepair; overgrown brush; grass or weeds in violation of subsection
L4 of this section; e) accumulation of junk as defined in this subsection; f) sanitary matter
meaning liquid and solid waste intended to be carried off in sewers or drains; g) a structure on
the property that has been continuously vacant for at least one year, has been condemned as
unfit for human occupancy or use by the building official in accordance with the Minnesota
building code, but has neither been demolished nor repaired by the owner as directed by the
building official; h) there is evidence of rat or rodent infestation or harborages caused by
conditions on the property; i) the property has an inadequate sewage, septic, plumbing, well, or
heating system; j) if the property is vacant, the owner has failed to take adequate precautions to
prevent the use of or access to the property by trespassers; k) a potential attractive nuisance to
children exists on the property, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, basements,
excavations, or broken fences, refrigerators, and other appliances.
10. Unlawful Occupations Or Hobbies: No person shall exercise, carry on, follow, or engage in or
work at any business, hobby, trade, or calling or occupation which shall be dangerous, hurtful,
offensive, or unhealthy to the neighborhood.
11. Deposit Of Materials On City Streets Prohibited: No person shall deposit or permit to be
deposited on any public street in this city, leaves, grass, sand or similar materials, nor shall any
person plow, shovel or blow or permit the plowing, shoveling, or blowing of snow onto a public
street in the city, excepting in those commercial districts where property owners have prior
permission to deposit snow from the public sidewalk onto a public street. This provision shall not
apply to any person who is in the process of constructing or maintaining a yard or drive provided
that the materials are immediately removed from the street.
O. Rubbish And Garbage:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 261/444
1. Accumulation Of Rubbish Or Garbage: All exterior property and premises, and the interior of
every structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
2. Disposal Of Rubbish: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and
sanitary manner.
3. Rubbish Storage Facilities: The owner of every occupied premises shall provide approved
covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the
removal of rubbish.
4. Refrigerators: Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded,
abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.
5. Disposal Of Garbage: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved
garbage containers.
6. Garbage Facilities: The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an approved
mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside
garbage container.
7. Garbage Containers: The owner of every establishment which produces garbage shall provide,
and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers for the storage of such
materials until removed from the premises for disposal. The owner of every one- and two-family
dwelling units shall comply with the city's garbage and recycling program and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of garbage. The owner of every establishment
with more than two (2) dwelling units shall provide adequate containers with close fitting covers
for the storage of garbage until removed from the premises for disposal.
P. Extermination:
1. Infestation: All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in
which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that
will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent reinfestation.
2. Owner: The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure
prior to renting or leasing the structure.
3. Single Occupant: The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.
4. Multiple Occupancy: The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, a
multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for
extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is
caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant
shall be responsible for extermination.
5. Occupant: The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest
free condition of the structure.
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be
responsible for extermination.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 262/444
Q. Violations:
1. Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in
violation of any of the provisions of this section.
2. Notice Of Violation: The code official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with
subsection R of this section.
3. Prosecution Of Violation: Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served
in accordance with subsection R of this section shall be subject to: administrative citation per
section 10.31 of this chapter; a misdemeanor per section 1.99 of the city code; or civil actions at
law or in equity as determined by the code official, and the violation shall be deemed a strict
liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official shall institute the
appropriate proceeding restraint, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this section
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. The costs associated with any action taken by
the city on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
4. Violation Penalties: Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall
be deemed a separate offense.
5. Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
city from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, utilization of the
building, structure or premises.
R. Notices And Order:
1. Notice To Person Responsible: Whenever the code official determines that there has been a
violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be
given in the manner prescribed below to the person responsible for the violation as specified in
this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with subsection S of this
section.
2. Form: Such notice prescribed in subsection R1 of this section shall be in accordance with all of
the following:
a. Be in writing.
b. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
c. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.
d. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and improvements
required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this
section.
e. Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
f. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with subsection Q3 of this section.
3. Method Of Service: Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 263/444
a. Delivered personally; or
b. Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known address; or
c. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
4. Penalties: Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in
subsection Q of this section.
5. Transfer Of Ownership: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who
has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell,
transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until
the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until
such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any
compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and shall furnish to the code
official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such
compliance order or notice of violation.
S. Means Of Appeal: Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order
issued under this section shall have the right to appeal pursuant to section 10.31 of this chapter,
provided that a written application for appeal is filed within ten (10) days after the day the decision,
notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of this section or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted or applied,
the provisions of this section do not fully apply, or the requirements of this section are adequately
satisfied by other means.
T. Abatement Process:
1. Abatement Process:
a. Declaration Of Policy: The city council of the city of Little Falls has determined that the health,
safety, good order, general welfare, and convenience of the public are threatened by certain
public nuisances on property within the city limits. It is declared to be the intention of the
council to abate these nuisances, and this subsection is enacted for that purpose.
b. Application: This subsection shall apply to the abatement of all public nuisances, junk and
blight as defined anywhere within this section unless another procedure is specifically
provided.
c. Periodic Inspection And Investigation: The code official, building official, police department
personnel or any other duly authorized representative with all due just cause, shall cause to
be inspected all public and private places in the city within plain view which might contain a
public nuisance as defined in this section as often as practicable to determine whether any
such conditions exist. The code official, building official, police department personnel or any
duly authorized representative shall also investigate all reports of public nuisances located
within the city.
d. Abatement Of Nuisances: Upon a determination by the code official, building official, police
department personnel or any authorized representative that a public nuisance exists within
plain view on any public or private property in the city, the code official, building official, police
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 264/444
department personnel or any authorized representative shall order the public nuisance to be
abated in a manner consistent with city code.
e. Procedure For Removal Of Public Nuisances:
(1) Notification: Whenever the code official, building official, police department personnel or
any authorized representative finds with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance as
identified by this section exists within plain view on any public or private property in the city,
the duly authorized official shall notify the affected property owner by posting notice in a
conspicuous location on the property, or by first class mail addressed to the last known
address that the public nuisance must be abated within a reasonable period of time, not
more than fourteen (14) days from the date of service of the notice. Service by first class
mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing. The order shall state with specificity the
nature of the violations and the requirements for compliance. The order shall also state that
the property owner may appeal the order, within ten (10) days of the date of the order and
request a hearing pursuant to section 10.31 of this chapter. The order shall also state that
failure to abate the public nuisance or request a hearing within the applicable time periods
will result in summary abatement procedures, and that the cost of abatement will be
assessed against the subject property. Upon expiration of the time required by the notice,
the code official, building official, police department personnel or any authorized
representative may abate the nuisance unless a request for a hearing has been timely filed.
(2) Appeal: Any property owner who feels aggrieved by an order of the code official, building
official, police department personnel or any authorized representative issued pursuant to
this section may appeal the order pursuant to section 10.31 of this chapter.
(3) Costs Of Abatement: The code official, building official, police department personnel or any
authorized representative shall keep a record of the costs of abatements done under this
subsection and shall report periodically to the finance officer or other appropriate officer all
work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of
the land, lots or parcels involved and the amount assessable to each.
(4) Unpaid Charges: On or before October 1 of each year, the finance officer shall list the total
unpaid charges for each abatement made under this section against each separate lot or
parcel to which they are attributable. The city council may then spread the charges or any
portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment under other pertinent
statutes, for certification to the county auditor and collection the following year along with
current taxes. Such assessment shall be payable in no more than ten (10) equal annual
installments, pursuant to Minnesota statutes, section 429.011, subdivision 2.
(5) Interference Prohibited: It is a misdemeanor for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere
with the code official, building official, police department personnel or any authorized
representative while they are engaged in the performance of duties set forth in this section.
(Ord. 74, 6th Series, eff. 5-4-2015)
10.42: SHADE TREE DISEASE CONTROL:
The city council has determined that the health of the shade trees within the municipal limits is
threatened by shade tree diseases. It has further determined that the loss of shade trees growing
upon public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of property within the city
and impair the safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is the intention of
the city council to control and prevent the spread of these diseases. This section is enacted for that
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 265/444
purpose and to conform to the policies and procedures embodied in Minnesota statutes section
18G.13 as amended from time to time and rules promulgated thereunder.
A. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the terms defined in this subsection have the following
meanings:
COMMISSIONERS: The commissioner of the state department of agriculture.
DISEASE CONTROL AREA: The entire city, except those areas annually designated by the tree
inspector as "no control zones" pursuant to state law.
SHADE TREE: Ash, oak or elm trees in the city.
SHADE TREE CONTROL PROGRAM OR PROGRAM: A program developed by the city to
combat shade tree disease in accordance with rules promulgated by the commissioner of
agriculture.
SHADE TREE DISEASE: Dutch Elm disease caused by Ceratocystis ulmi, oak wilt disease caused
by Ceratocystis fagacearum, or emerald ash borer (Agrilus planipennis).
TREE INSPECTOR OR INSPECTOR: A person having the necessary qualifications to conduct a
shade tree program and who is so certified by the commissioner of agriculture.
B. Tree Inspector:
1. Position Created: The powers and duties of city tree inspector as set forth in this section are
hereby conferred upon the public works director/city engineer. The public works director may
designate a member of the street department staff to perform the duties of tree inspector.
2. Duties: It is the duty of tree inspector to coordinate, under the direction and control of the city
council, all activities of the municipality relating to the control and prevention of shade tree
disease. The tree inspector shall recommend to the city council the details of a program for the
control of shade tree disease, and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the
city council.
C. Dutch Elm Disease And Oak Wilt And Emerald Ash Borer:
1. Declaration Of Policy: The city of Little Falls has determined that the health of elm and oak trees
is threatened by the fatal disease known as Dutch elm and oak wilt diseases. It also has been
determined that the health of ash trees is threatened by an insect pest known as the emerald
ash borer. It has been further determined that the loss of elm, oak and ash trees growing upon
public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of property and impair the
safety, good order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the
intention of the city of Little Falls to control and prevent the spread of these diseases and insect
pests; this section is intended for this purpose.
2. Shade Tree Disease Program: It is the intention of the city of Little Falls to conduct a program of
plant pest control pursuant to authority granted by Minnesota statutes section 18G.12. This
program is directed specifically at the removal of trees stricken with Dutch elm, oak wilt disease,
or emerald ash borer, and is undertaken at the recommendation of the commissioner of
agriculture and Minnesota statutes. The public works director will act as coordinator for the
commissioner of agriculture and the city of Little Falls in the conduct of this program.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 266/444
3. Nuisance Declared: The following items are a public nuisance wherever they are found within
the city of Little Falls:
a. Any living or standing elm tree infected to any degree with Dutch elm disease fungus,
Ceratocystis ulmi (Buisman) Mureau, or which harbors any elm bark beetles, Scolytus
multistrialus (Eich.) or Hylnrgopinus rufipes (March).
b. Any living or standing oak tree infected to any degree with oak wilt fungus, Ceratocystis
fagacearum.
c. Any living or standing ash tree infested to any degree with emerald ash borer, Agrilus
planipennis.
d. Any dead elm, ash or oak tree, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other material.
D. Abatement: It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in this section to
remain on any premises owned by them. Such nuisance will be abated in the manner prescribed
by this section.
E. Inspection And Investigation:
1. The public works director, his agent or employees assigned to him, may enter upon private
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned in
this section.
2. The public works director, his agent or employees assigned to him, will inspect all premises and
places within the city of Little Falls as often as practicable to determine whether a nuisance
exists.
3. No action to remove infected trees will be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease has been
made.
F. Abatement Of Dutch Elm, Emerald Ash Borer Or Oak Wilt Disease Nuisance On City Property: The
public works director will cause any nuisance, as defined in subsection C of this section, to be
removed from property of the city, including streets, boulevards and alley rights of way (from
property line to property line), and cause same to be sanitized or otherwise effectively treated so
as to destroy and prevent, as fully as possible, the spread of emerald ash borer, Dutch elm or oak
wilt disease fungus. The abatement procedures will be carried out in accordance with such
technical and expert methods and plans as may be designed by the city of Little Falls and
consistent with the regulations and requirements of the commissioner of agriculture of the state of
Minnesota. The public works director will establish procedures for tree removal and disposal
methods consistent therewith.
G. Abatement Of Dutch Elm, Emerald Ash Borer Or Oak Wilt Disease Nuisance On Private Property:
Whenever the public works director finds with reasonable certainty that a nuisance as defined in
subsection C of this section exists on private property, including property controlled by other
entities of government and outside any public way or property of the city, within the city of Little
Falls, the public works director or his authorized representative will notify the owner by mail of the
existence of the nuisances and direct that the nuisance be removed or otherwise effectively treated
in the approved manner within fifteen (15) calendar days after mailing of such notice. The notice
will also state that if the nuisance is not abated by the owner within the time provided, that the city
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 267/444
of Little Falls will abate the nuisance, and assess the costs against the property. In the event the
owner of any private or public premises upon which such a nuisance is situated fails to comply with
the notice, the public works director, his agents or employees assigned to him, will proceed to
abate the nuisance in the manner prescribed for abatement of such nuisances on city property.
Any expenses incurred by the city of Little Falls or by approved contractors in so doing will be a
charge and a lien upon said property and will be collected as a special assessment or as stated in
Minnesota statutes section 18G.13.
H. Collection Of Assessments: The cost of abatement of any nuisance incurred by the city of Little
Falls and not reimbursed by the owner on or before November 1 of each year will be reported by
the finance officer to the city council. The city council will assess the levy and cause to be collected
the amount of such costs as a special assessment upon and against the premises and property
upon which said nuisance existed in the like manner as other special assessments, payable in one
sum or as stated in Minnesota statutes 18G.13.
I. Interference Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the public
works director, his agents, employees or contractors, while they are engaged in the performance of
duties imposed by this section.
J. Position: The public works director is responsible for the enforcement of this section and to
coordinate the abatement program within the rules, regulations and policies set forth by the
commissioner of agriculture and the city council. (Ord. 83, 6th Series, eff. 12-7-2015)
10.43 - 10.98: RESERVED:
Article IV. Violation
10.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, subparagraph or provision of this chapter when he
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful, or performs an act prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when
such failure is prohibited or declared unlawful by a code adopted by reference by this chapter and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor except as otherwise stated in
specific provisions hereof. (1976 Code)
Footnote 1: MSA 169.14.
Footnote 2: MSA 169.30.
Footnote 3: MSA 169.46 _ 169.68, 169.69 _ 169.75.
Chapter 11
LAND USE REGULATIONS (ZONING)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 268/444
Chapter 11
LAND USE REGULATIONS (ZONING)
11.01: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of: a) protecting the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience and general welfare; b) dividing the City into zones and districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of structures and land; c)
promoting orderly development of the residential, business, industrial, recreational and public areas;
d) providing for adequate light, air and convenience of access to property by regulating the use of land
and buildings and the bulk of buildings in relation to surrounding properties; e) limiting congestion in
the public rights-of-way; f) providing for the compatibility of different land uses and the most
appropriate use of land throughout the City; g) providing for the administration of this chapter and
amendments thereto; h) defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and bodies as
provided hereinafter; and i) prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this chapter
thereto. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
11.02: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the language or context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended, the following
words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of this chapter, shall have the meanings and inclusions
subjoined to them:
ANS/TIA/EIA: American National Standard; Telecommunication Industry Association; Electronic
Industrial Association.
ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE (Relating To Telecommunication Facilities): Any facility or
structure serving or being used by or in conjunction with wireless telecommunication facilities or
support structures, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment, storage sheds or
cabinets.
ACCESSORY USE: A use subordinate to and serving the principal use or structure on the same lot
and customarily incidental thereto.
ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed as Zoning Administrator by the City Council, as provided by
this chapter.
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT:
Adult Entertainment Employee: Any person who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business, on a fulltime, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person
is denominated an adult entertainment employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise.
Adult entertainment employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair
or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Adult Entertainment Facility: A building or space in which an admission is charged for the
entrance, or food or non-alcoholic beverages are being sold or intended for consumption, and in
which may be regularly observed live presentation of entertainment distinguished or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 269/444
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Accessory: The offering of merchandise, whether for sale or rental or loan,
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" on
a limited scale that are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the
establishment. A business shall be classified as an accessory adult use if the merchandise for
sale or rental occupies no more than ten percent (10%) of the floor area of the establishment in
which it is located or one hundred (100) square feet, whichever is less, or comprises no more
than twenty percent (20%) of the gross receipts of the entire business operation.
Adult Use Establishment: Adult use establishments include, but are not limited to the following
list of activities or businesses: adult body painting studios, adult book stores, adult cabarets,
adult entertainment facilities, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters,
adult massage parlors, adult health/sports clubs, adult sauna/steam room/bath houses/adult
companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult novelty businesses, adult
motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios and other premises enterprises, establishments,
businesses or places open to some of or all members of the public and membership clubs at or
in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". This definition does not apply to the practice of
medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropractic, physical therapy or podiatry by State licensed
registered persons. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes 617.241
are not lawful and are not included in the definitions of adult uses.
Adult Use, Principal: The offering of merchandise, services and/or entertainment (live or via
various forms of visual, auditory or other sensory media) characterized by an emphasis on
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as a primary or sole activity of a
business or establishment or where the business advertises, otherwise distinguishes or
characterizes itself with an emphasis on the offering of such merchandise, services and/or
entertainment. Any adult use establishment which does not meet the definition of an accessory
adult use shall be considered a principal adult use.
ADULT USES:
Adult Use, Body Painting Studio: An establishment or business which provides the service of
applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the body of a
patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas" or the
application of paint or other substance by a patron to the body of another person.
Adult Use, Bookstore: A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of
items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotape, videotape or motion
picture film, if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to
one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or
significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Cabaret: A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live
entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such
dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Companionship/Conversation/Rap Establishment: A companionship, conversation,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 270/444
rap establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of
engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Hotel Or Motel: A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from
patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Massage Parlor, Health/Sport Club: A massage parlor, health club or sport club which
restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides services distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Mini-Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less
than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for
observation by patrons therein.
Adult Use, Modeling Studio: An establishment whose major business is the provision, to
customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation
or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or
display "specified anatomical areas" which being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by such customers.
Adult Use, Motion Picture Arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin or slug operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show
images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Motion Picture Theater: A building or portion of a building with a capacity of fifty (50)
or more persons used for presenting material, if such building or portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for
observation by patrons therein.
Adult Use, Novelty Business: A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale
of toys, instruments, devices, clothing or paraphernalia designed or used in connection with
stimulation of human genitals or the presentation, display, depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Adult Use, Sauna/Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility: A building or portion of a building used for
providing a steam bath or heated bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing,
relaxation or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxation or reducing agent, if
such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age, or if the service provided
by the sauna/steam room/bathhouse facilities is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
Distinguished Or Characterized By An Emphasis Upon: Means the dominant or principal theme
of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or description of "specified
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 271/444
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", the films so described are those whose
dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or description of "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
AGRICULTURAL, RURAL: A. "Agricultural, Rural": An area in excess of ten (10) contiguous acres
which is used for the production of farm crops, such as vegetables, fruit trees, grain and other crops,
and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of farm poultry, domestic pets and
domestic farm animals. The term "farming" includes the operating of such area for one or more of the
above uses, including dairy farms, with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing produce;
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the
farming activity; and provided, further, that farming does not include commercial pen feeding (feedlots)
or the commercial feeding of garbage to swine or other animals.
B. "Conditional Agricultural, Rural": An area five (5) to ten (10) contiguous acres which is used for
the production of farm crops, such as vegetables, fruit trees, grain and other crops, and their
storage on the area, as well as for raising thereon of farm poultry, domestic pets and domestic
farm animals under a conditional use permit. The term "farming" is defined in this section.
AGRICULTURAL, URBAN: An area less than ten (10) contiguous acres, which is used for the purpose
of growing produce, including crops, fruit trees, shrubs, plants and flowers, vegetables and the like,
provided such produce is intended solely for the use of residents on the property or sale away from
the property. It may include the raising of domestic pets. It shall not include a roadside stand for sale
of products processing or packaging operations, or similar uses.
AIRPORT OR HELIPORT: Any land or structure, which is used or intended for use, for the landing and
takeoff of aircraft, and any appurtenant land or structure used or intended for use for port buildings or
other port structures or rights-of-way.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way which affords secondary means of access to abutting property.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL: The background noise level prior to installing the wind energy conversion
system.
ANIMALS: A. Domestic pets: Fish, dogs, cats, birds and similar animals.
B. Domestic farm animals: Cattle, hogs, horses, bees, sheep, goats, chickens and other commonly
known farm animals.
ANTENNA: Any structure, device or system of electrical conductors, that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves for the provision of cellular, paging, personal communications services (PCS)
and microwave communications. Such structures and devices include, but are not limited to,
directional antennas, such as panels, microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omni-directional
antennas, such as whips.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms with cooking facilities available, which is occupied as a
residence by a single family, and including buildings with three (3) or more dwelling units.
AUTO OR MOTOR VEHICLE REDUCTION YARD: A lot or yard where one or more licensed motor
vehicles, or the remains thereof, are kept for more than seven (7) days for the purpose of dismantling,
wrecking, crushing, repairing, rebuilding, sale of parts, sale as scrap, storage or abandonment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 272/444
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR: The general repairable building or reconditioning of engines, motor
vehicles or trailers, including bodywork, framework, welding and major painting service.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR: The replacement of any part or repair of any part which does not
require the removal of the engine head or pan, engine, transmission or differential; incidental body and
fender work, minor painting and upholstering service when said service above stated is applied to
passenger automobiles and trucks not in excess of seven thousand (7,000) pounds gross vehicle
weight.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground and having one-half (1/2) or less of its
floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-occupied residence where, for compensation, lodging and certain
meals are provided to overnight guests.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Erosion and sediment control and water quality Best
Management Practices that are the most effective and practical means of controlling, preventing and
minimizing degradation of surface water including avoidance of impacts, construction phasing,
minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, prohibitions, and other management practices
published by State or designated area wide planning agencies. Best Management Practices
referenced in this chapter are from the "Minnesota Storm Water Manual", version 1.1, and as
amended from time to time, published by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
BLUFF: A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment, having all the following
characteristics: a) part or all of the feature is in a shore land area; b) the slope rises at least twenty five
feet (25') above the ordinary high water level of the water body; c) the grade of the slope from the toe
of the bluff to a point twenty five feet (25') or more above the ordinary high water level averages thirty
percent (30%) or greater; and d) the slope drains toward the water body.
BLUFF IMPACT ZONE: A bluff and land located within thirty feet (30') from the top of the bluff.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building, other than a motel or hotel, where, for compensation and by
prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodgings are provided for three (3) or more persons, but
not to exceed eight (8) persons.
BUFFER STRIP: Land area used to visibly separate one use from another, or to shield or block
structures, noise, lights or other potential nuisances.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof which may provide shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or
chattel. When said structure is divided by party walls, without openings, each portion of such building
so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from: a) the average elevation of the adjoining ground level;
or b) the established grade adjacent to the building, whichever is lower, to the top of the cornice of a
flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to a point of the roof directly above the highest wall of a
shed roof, to the uppermost point on a round or other arch type roof, to the highest gable on a pitched
or hip roof.
BUSINESS: Any occupation, employment or enterprise wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
which occupies time, attention, labor and materials, or where services are offered for compensation.
CARPORT: An automobile shelter having one or more sides open.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 273/444
CELLAR: That portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) of the floor to ceiling height below
the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly
assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
CLUB OR LODGE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual
dues, use of the premises being restricted to members and their guests. It shall be permissible to
serve food and meals on such premises, providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities
are available.
COLOCATION: The act of siting telecommunications facilities in the same location of the same
support structure as other telecommunications facilities. "Colocation" also means locating
telecommunications facilities on an existing structure (for example buildings, water tanks, towers,
utility poles, etc.), without the need to construct a new support structure.
COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT: An area where fifteen (15) or more animals per acre are fed solely for
purpose of wholesale or retail sale.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL: Any premises where three (3) or more dogs, at any one time, over six (6)
months of age, are owned, boarded, bred or offered for sale.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION: Bowling alley, cart track, jump center, golf, pool hall, vehicle racing for
amusement, dance hall, skating, tavern, theater, firearms range and similar uses.
COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (CWECS): A wind energy conversion
system with a total nameplate generating capacity no less than forty kilowatts (40 kW), but no greater
than one hundred kilowatts (100 kW).
COMMISSION: The Planning Commission of the City.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Unless otherwise stated, the General Plan for land use, transportation and
community facilities prepared and maintained by the Planning Commission.
CONDITIONAL USE: The occupations, vocations, skills, arts, businesses, professions or uses
specifically designated in each zoning use district, which for their respective conduct, exercise or
performance in such designated use districts may require reasonable but special, peculiar, unusual or
extraordinary limitations, facilities, plans, structures, thoroughfares, conditions, modifications or
regulations in such use districts for the promotion or preservation of the general public welfare, health,
convenience or safety therein and in the City, and therefore, may be permitted in such use district only
by a conditional use permit.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: A permit specially and individually granted by the City Council after
review and recommendation by the commission for any conditional use so permitted in any use
district.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICE: The principal place of business used by a company or individual engaged
in building or road construction, including on site fabrication of components, on site storage and
maintenance of equipment.
CONTROLLED INTERSECTION: An intersection with two (2) or more stop signs or traffic signals.
CURB LEVEL: The grade elevation established by the Governing Body of the curb in front of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 274/444
center of the building. Where no curb level has been established, the engineering staff shall determine
a curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this chapter.
DAYCARE FACILITY: Any facility, public or private, which for gain regularly provides one or more
persons with care, training, supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a
regular basis, for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day, in a place other than the
person's own home. Daycare facilities include, but are not limited to, family daycare homes, group
family daycare homes, daycare centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, development achievement
centers, day treatment centers, adult daycare centers and day services.
DECK: A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railing, seats, trellises or other
features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site.
DETENTION FACILITY: A permanent natural or manmade structure, including wetlands, for the
temporary storage of runoff which contains a permanent or semipermanent pool of water.
DWELLING: A building, or one or more portions thereof, occupied or intended to be occupied
exclusively for residence purposes, but not including rooms in motels, hotels, nursing homes or
boarding houses, nor trailers, tents, cabins or trailer coaches. A "dwelling" shall be interpreted to
include lodging rooms.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a
party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building having accommodations for and occupied exclusively by more
than two (2) families.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A single-family building having one or more walls in common with
another single-family building, oriented so as to have all exits directly to the out of doors.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, traffic signals, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories in conjunction
therewith; but not including buildings.
FAA: Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC: Federal Communications Commission.
FALL ZONE: The area, defined as the furthest distance from the wind energy conversion system
base, in which the system will collapse in the event of a structural failure.
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons each related by blood, marriage or adoption living
together as a single housekeeping unit, or a group of not more than four (4) persons not so related,
maintaining a common household.
FENCE: Any partition, structure, wall or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, including
interior balconies, mezzanines, basements and attached accessory buildings, excepting that area
primarily devoted to window display, fitting rooms, stairs, escalators, unenclosed porches, detached
accessory buildings utilized as dead storage, heating and utility rooms, inside off-street parking or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 275/444
loading space.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained through dividing the floor area of a building or
buildings by the lot area on which such building or buildings are located.
FORESTRY: The management, including growing or harvesting of a forest, woodland or plantation,
including the construction, alteration or maintenance of woods, roads and landings, and related
research and educational activities.
FRONT YARD: A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot lines and
extending from the abutting front street right-of-way line to a depth required in the yard regulations for
the district in which such lot is located.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building, or portion of the principal building, including a
carport, which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers or one truck of a rated capacity
not in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building, or portion of a building, except any herein defined as "private garage",
or as a "repair garage", used for the storage of motor vehicles, or where any such vehicles are kept for
remuneration or hire in which any sale of gasoline, oil and accessories is only incidental to the
principal use.
GARAGE, REPAIR: A building or space for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not
including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junkyards.
GENERAL FLOOR PLANS: A graphic representation of the anticipated utilization of the floor area
within a building or structure, but not necessarily as detailed as construction plans.
HEIGHT: The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on a tower or structure,
including any antennas.
HOBBY: An activity or interest pursued outside of one's regular work primarily for pleasure.
HOME OCCUPATION: The accessory use of a home for a business or commercial enterprise,
engaged in by the person residing in that unit. The use must be incidental and secondary to the
principal residential use of the dwelling unit and must not change the residential character of the
dwelling unit or adversely affect the character of the surrounding neighborhood. "Home occupation"
does not refer to a hobby.
HOTEL: A building having provision for nine (9) or more guests in which lodging is provided, with or
without meals, for compensation, and which is open to transient or permanent guests, or both, and
where no provision is made for cooking in any guestroom, and in which ingress and egress to and
from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge.
HOUSE/BUILDING NUMBERS: A set of numbers or letters with a minimum height of four inches (4")
that are visible from across the street or avenue that specifies the street address of the house or
building.
HUB HEIGHT: When referring to a wind turbine, the distance measured from ground level to the
center of the turbine hub of a wind energy conversion system.
HYDRIC OR HYDROPHILIC SOILS: Soils which have an affinity for water or swell and are not easily
coagulated, such as colloids.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 276/444
HYDROPHYTIC VEGETATION: Vegetation which has an affinity to thrive under saturated or nearly
saturated conditions.
INTERIM USE: A temporary use of property to which reasonable conditions may be attached and
which will expire on a certain date or after a certain event, or until zoning regulations no longer permit
it.
INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING: The substantial removal of more than twenty five percent
(25%) of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row or block within one hundred feet (100') of the
ordinary high-water mark of the Mississippi River.
JUNKYARD: An area where used, wasted, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to,
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber products, bottles and used building materials. Storage
of such material in conjunction with permitted manufacturing process when within an enclosed area or
building shall not be included. Such use shall not include organic waste or material.
LAND DISTURBING OR DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES: Any changes of land surface, including
removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling, grading and the construction of any structure, including
parking lots.
LANDINGS: A flat area of a stairway, and does not include boat landings.
LANDSCAPING: Plantings, such as trees, grass and shrubs.
LIFTS: A mechanical conveyance for access up and down a slope, and does not mean boat lift.
LOT: A parcel of land occupied or used or intended for occupancy or used by a use permitted in this
chapter, abutting on a public street, and of sufficient size to provide the yards required by this chapter.
LOT AREA: The area of lot in a horizontal plane bounded by the lot lines.
LOT CORNER: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or
a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a continuous street, the interior angle of which does not
exceed one hundred thirty five degrees (135).
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The property line bounding a lot, except that where any portion of a lot extends into the
public right-of-way or a proposed public right-of-way, the line of such public right-of-way shall be the
lot line for applying this chapter.
LOT LINE, FRONT: That boundary of a lot which abuts an existing or dedicated public street and, in
case of a corner lot, it shall be the shortest dimension on a public street, except that a corner lot in a
nonresidential area shall be deemed to have frontage on both streets. A lot line abutting a controlled
access highway from which there is not direct access to the lot shall not be deemed a front lot line for
the purposes of building or structure setback requirements.
LOT LINE, REAR: The boundary of a lot which is opposite the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot
or other lot with more than one front lot line, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line of the
shortest dimension, or as otherwise determined by the Zoning Administrator after considering the
layout of the lot in relation to surrounding lots. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet (10') in length, or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 277/444
if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot,
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of real property in separate ownership as shown by the real estate
records of the Morrison County Recorder as of January 1, 1981.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two (2) substantially parallel
streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be front lines for applying
this chapter.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured parallel to the front
lines of the lot at the front building setback line.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A manufactured home used for living purposes that is transportable in one
or more sections, and is less than twenty four feet (24') in width, with or without a permanent
foundation.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK (TRAILER PARK): Any premises on which are parked two (2) or
more occupied manufactured homes, or any premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying to
the public a parking space for two (2) or more such trailers; does not include sales lots on which
automobiles or unoccupied trailers, new or used, are parked for purposes of inspection or sale.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: All manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or
assembly of products and materials that may emit objectionable and offensive influences beyond the
lot on which the use is located. Such uses include, but are not limited to, the following: sawmill,
papermills, boat manufacturing, refineries, commercial feedlots, acid, cement, explosives, flour, feed
and grain milling or storage, meat packing, slaughterhouses, coal or tar asphalt distillation, rendering
of fat, grease, lard or tallow, alcoholic beverages, poisons, exterminating agents, glue or size, lime,
gypsum, plaster of paris, tanneries, automobile parts, paper and paper products, glass, chemicals,
crude oil and petroleum products, including storage, electric power generation facilities, vinegar works,
junkyard, auto reduction yard, foundry, machine shop, forge, casting of metal products, rock, stone
and cement products, and including all uses permitted in the I-1 Industrial District.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: All uses which include the compounding, processing, packaging,
treatment or assembly of products and materials, provided such use will not generate offensive odors,
glare, smoke, dust, noise, vibrations or other objectionable influences that extend beyond the lot on
which the use is located. Generally, these are industries dependent upon raw materials refined
elsewhere. Such uses include, but are not limited to, the following: lumberyards, machine shops,
products assembly, sheet metal shops, plastics, electronics, general vehicle repair, bodywork and
painting, contractors' shops and storage yard, food and nonalcoholic beverages, signs and displays,
printing, publishing, fabricated metal parts, appliances, clothing, textiles, and used auto parts.
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET): A tower and associated equipment used primarily to measure
wind speed and directions, plus other pertinent data relevant to siting a wind energy conversion
system.
MISSISSIPPI HEADWATERS CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT: Any property annexed to the City
which, prior to the annexation, was subject to the Morrison County Mississippi headwaters ordinance.
MOTOR COURT, MOTEL HOTEL OR MOTEL: A building or group of buildings, other than a hotel,
used primarily as a temporary residence of a motorist.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 278/444
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is
transferred and stored for movement in intrastate or interstate shipment by motor truck.
MOTOR FUEL STATION: A retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels, but
also may be engaged in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and
maintenance of motor vehicles. These may include sales of petroleum products, sales and servicing of
tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items, washing and lubrication services, and
the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair.
MOTOR FUEL STATION CONVENIENCE STORE: A store operated in conjunction with a major motor
fuel station or truck stop for the purpose of offering for sale goods not essential to the motoring public.
NONCOMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (NCWECS): A wind energy conversion
system no greater than forty kilowatts (40 kW) in total nameplate generating capacity.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: Any structure which is existing upon the effective date hereof,
which would not conform to the applicable zoning laws and restrictions if the structure were to be
erected under the provisions of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE: The use of land, buildings or structures legally existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter, which does not comply with all the regulations of this chapter, or any
amendments hereto, governing the zoning district(s) in which such use is located.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIALS: Material capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental effects on the physical or economic wellbeing
of individuals.
NUDE OR NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: Means the showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than fully opaque covering of any part of the areola.
NURSERY, DAY: A use where care is provided for pay for three (3) or more children under
kindergarten age for periods of four (4) hours or more per day.
NURSERY, LANDSCAPE: A business growing and selling trees, flowering and decorative plants and
shrubs, and which may be conducted within a building or without.
NURSING HOME: A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm, or place of rest for
those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home does not contain equipment for surgical care or for the
treatment of disease or injury, nor does it include maternity care or care for mental illnesses or
infirmities.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land devoted to the display of goods for sale, rent, lease or trade, where such
goods are not enclosed within a building.
OPEN STORAGE: Storage of any material outside of a building.
OPEN USE: The use of a lot without a building, or including a building incidental to the open use with
a ground floor area equal to five percent (5%) or less of the area of the lot.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER LEVEL/MARK: The highest level which has been maintained for a
sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape. The ordinary high-water mark is
commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to
predominantly terrestrial. In areas where the ordinary high-water level is not evident, setbacks shall be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 279/444
measured from the stream bank of the following water bodies that have permanent flow or open water:
the main channel, adjoining side channels, backwaters and sloughs.
OUTDOOR BOILERS: A freestanding combustion unit located outside the home or structure to be
heated that consists of a firebox surrounded by a reservoir.
PARKING SPACE: A suitably surfaced and permanently maintained area on privately owned property,
either within or outside of a building of sufficient size to store one standard automobile.
PARTY WALL: A wall which divides two (2) independent structures.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: The criterion established to control noise, odor, toxic or noxious
matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards; or glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land
or buildings.
PERMITTED USE: A public or private use which, of itself, conforms with the purposes and objectives
of a particular district which conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards (if
any) of such districts.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: An urban development having two (2) or more principal uses or
structures on a single lot and developed according to an approved plan.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory
uses. A "principal use" may be either permitted or conditional.
PROPERTY LINE: The surveyed and legal boundaries of a parcel of property, which may also
coincide with a right-of-way of a road, cartway and the like.
PUBLIC HEARING: A meeting where data on a particular topic is heard, and said time, date, location
of meeting and topic has been advertised in the official newspaper of the City prior to hearing.
PUBLIC LAND: Land owned or operated by Municipal, school district, County, State or other
governmental units.
PUBLICATION: Notice placed in the official City newspaper stating time, location and date of meeting
and a description of the topic.
REAR YARD: A yard extending along the full width of the rear lot line between the side lot lines and
extending toward the front lot line for a depth as specified in the yard regulations for the district in
which such lot is located.
RECREATION EQUIPMENT (In Residential Districts): Play apparatus, such as swing sets and slides,
sandboxes, poles for nets, unoccupied boats and recreational vehicles not exceeding twenty six feet
(26') in length, picnic tables, lawn chairs, barbecue stands and similar equipment or structures but not
including tree houses, swimming pools, playhouses exceeding twenty five (25) square feet of floor
area, or sheds utilized for storage of equipment.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any type of structure or vehicle which can be readily adapted to or does
provide facilities for a person to eat or sleep, which is mounted on wheels or has provisions for
wheels, such as a motor home, travel trailer, camper or converted vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL FACILITY: Any facility, public or private, which for gain regularly provides one or more
persons with a twenty four (24) hour per day substitute for care, food, lodging, training, education,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation and treatment they need, but which for any reason cannot be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 280/444
furnished in the person's own home. "Residential facilities" include, but are not limited to, State
institutions under the control of the Commissioner of Human Services, foster homes, residential
treatment centers, maternity shelters, group homes, residential programs, supportive living residences
for functionally impaired adults or schools for handicapped children.
RETAIL SHOPPING: Stores and shops selling the personal services or goods over a counter. These
include antiques, art and school supplies, auto accessories, bakeries, barbershops, beauty shops,
bicycles, books and stationery, candy, cameras and photographical supplies, carpets and rugs,
catering establishments, china and glassware, Christmas tree sales, clothes pressing, clothing and
costume rental, custom dressmaking, department stores and junior department stores, drugs, dry
goods, electrical and household appliances, sales and repair, florist, food, furniture, furrier shops,
garden supplies (year round operation only), gifts, hardware, hats, hobby shops for retail of items to
be assembled or used away from the premises, household appliances, hotel and apartment hotels,
interior decorating, jewelry, including repair, laboratories, medical and dental research and testing,
laundry and dry cleaning pickup, processing to be done elsewhere, laundromat, leather goods and
luggage, locksmith shops, musical instruments, office supply equipment, optometrists, paint and
wallpaper, phonograph records, photography studios, service station, restaurant (when no
entertainment or dancing is provided), shoes, sporting goods, tailoring, theater (except open air drivein),
tobacco, toys, variety stores, wearing apparel and similar type uses.
RETENTION FACILITY: A permanent natural or manmade structure that provides for the storage of
stormwater runoff by means of a permanent or semi-permanent pool of water.
ROTOR DIAMETER: The diameter of the circle described by the moving rotor blades of the wind
energy conversion system.
SEMI-NUDE: Means a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals,
anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic area, vulva, and nipple of the female breast, as well as portion of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a building and street or property line. Distances
are to be measured perpendicularly from the property line to the most outwardly extended portion of
the structure at ground point.
SETBACK PUMP: The distance from the street right-of-way line to the centerline of the motor fuel
station pump island measured as perpendicular distance from the right-of-way.
SHELTER, FALLOUT OR BLAST: A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to
human life during periods of danger to human life from nuclear fallout, blasts, air raids, storms or other
emergencies.
SIDE YARD: A yard extending along the side lot line between the front and rear yards, having a width
as specified in the yard regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
SIGN: Any written announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or
illumination used to advertise or promote the interest of any person when the same is displayed or
placed out of doors in view of the general public and shall include every detached sign.
SIGN ADVERTISING (BILLBOARD): A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service
or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted or to a
commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 281/444
SIGN, FLASHING: An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained constant in
intensity and color at all times in which such sign is in use.
SIGN, GROSS AREA OF: The area within the frame shall be used to calculate the gross area, except
that the width of the frame in excess of twelve inches (12") shall be added thereto. When letters or
graphics are mounted without a frame, the gross area shall be the area bounded by straight lines six
inches (6") beyond the periphery of said letters or graphics. Each surface utilized to display a
message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign. However, only one side of
double faced signs shall be measured in computing the gross area thereof.
SIGN ILLUMINATED: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outline illuminated by
electric lights or luminous tubes.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: Any sign which states the name or address or both, of the business or
occupation of the lot where the sign is placed, or may be a directory listing the names, address and
business of occupants.
SIGNIFICANT CULTURAL SITE: Any archaeological or historic site, standing structure or any other
property that: a) is listed on the National Register of Historic Places; b) is listed in the State Register of
Historic Sites; c) is determined to meet the qualifications for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Register of Historic Sites after review by the Minnesota State Archaeologist or the
Director of the Minnesota Historical Society; or d) is determined by the City Council to be a significant
local heritage preservation landmark.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: The meaning given in Minnesota Statutes, section 237.162,
subdivision 11, as amended from time to time.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
and
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: A. Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals,
flagellation or torture in the text of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context
of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery,
coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism,
zooerasty; or
B. Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or
C. Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or
D. Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or
E. Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in
sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 282/444
fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such person; or
F. Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human
being; or
G. Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.
STAIRWAYS: Any structure providing access up or down a slope.
STEEP SLOPE: Land where agricultural activity or development is not recommended or described as
poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site's soil characteristics, as mapped and described in
available County soil surveys or other technical reports. Where specific information is not available,
"steep slopes" are lands having average slopes over twelve percent (12%) or more, and that are not
bluffs.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN: The plan that a designer formulates to manage urban
stormwater runoff for a particular project or drainage area. It typically addresses such subjects as
characterization of the site development grading plan; peak rates of runoff, flow duration, runoff
volumes for various return frequencies; locations, criteria and sizes of detention or retention ponds
and conveyances; runoff control features; land parcels, easement locations, opinions of probable
costs, measures to enhance runoff quality, salient regulations, and how the plan addresses them, and
consistency with secondary objectives such as public recreation, aesthetics, public safety, and
groundwater recharge. It is usually submitted to regulatory officials for their review for adoption.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it; or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above. A basement shall be counted as a story.
STREET: A public right-of-way not less than fifty feet (50') in width which affords a primary means of
access of abutting property, and shall also include avenue, highway or road, excepting existing public
rights-of-way of lesser width.
STREET SIDE GROUND FLOOR DWELLING UNITS: A dwelling unit contained within a larger
building structure which is designed or used for purposes of permanent or temporary residency and
located within the Central Business District B-1 whereby any part of the exterior wall of the dwelling
unit is adjacent to any street, avenue or alley.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the
ground, or attached to something having permanent location on the ground. This shall include signs.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: Cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas or any other
equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of telecommunications located or
installed on or adjacent to a tower or antenna support structure. The term does not include: a) a
satellite earth station antenna two meters (2 m) in diameter or less located in an industrial or
commercial district; b) a satellite earth station antenna one meter (1 m) or less in diameter, wherever
located; and c) a tower.
TOTAL HEIGHT: When referring to a wind turbine, the distance measured from ground level to the
blade extended at its highest point.
TOWER: Any ground or roof mounted pole, spire, structure, or combination thereof, that is designed
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 283/444
and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, electrical generator,
rotor blades or meteorological equipment, including guy towers, monopole towers and self-supporting
lattice towers, including any support thereto.
TOWER ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure located at the base of a tower for housing base on
transmitting equipment.
TOWER HEIGHT: The total height of a wind energy conversion system exclusive of the rotor blades.
TRUCK STOP: A motor fuel station devoted principally to the needs of tractor trailer units and trucks,
and which shall include eating and/or sleeping facilities.
USE: The purpose of activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged or
intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or maintained, and shall include the performance of such
activity or defined by the performance standards of this chapter.
VEGETATIVE BUFFER: A strip of well rooted, natural, chemically untreated vegetation, the width of
which is set forth in this chapter, consisting of a mixture of grasses, shrubs and trees, immediately
adjacent to the ordinary high-water level.
VETERINARY: Those uses concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and care of animals, including
animal or pet hospitals.
WAREHOUSING: The storage of materials or equipment within an enclosed building as a principal
use.
WETLANDS: Lands in transition between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is at or
near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. "Wetlands" are characterized by hydric soils,
saturated or inundated with surface water, have a frequency or duration of hydrophytic vegetation or
support a prevalence of such vegetation under normal circumstances. Wetlands may be counted
toward green space in a planned unit development.
WHOLESALING: The selling of goods, equipment and materials by bulk to another business that in
turn sells to the final customer.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): Any device or facility, such as a wind charger,
windmill or wind turbine, consisting of one or more wind turbines under common ownership or
operating control, and may include power lines, transformers, substations, meteorological towers,
cables/wires and other buildings accessory to such facility, whose main purpose is to convert wind
energy into electrical energy to supply electricity to an off-site customer or on site to an individual
system owner/property owner.
WIND TURBINE: Any piece of electrical generating equipment which captures and converts wind
energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator, and includes the turbine, blade,
tower, base and pad transformers, if any, and other related equipment.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any "personal wireless services", as defined by the Federal
Communication Act of 1996, including FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications
services, such as cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR),
enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), global system of mobile communications (GSM), paging
and similar services that currently exist or may be developed.
WIRELESS FACILITIES: The meaning given in Minnesota Statutes 237.162, subdivision 13, as
amended from time to time.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 284/444
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: The meaning given in Minnesota Statutes 237.162, subdivision
16, as amended from time to time.
YARD: A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure from its
lowest ground level to the sky, except as expressly permitted in this chapter. A yard shall extend along
a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the
district in which such lot is located.
ZONING DISTRICT: An area or areas within the limits of the zoning jurisdiction for which the
regulations and requirements governing use are uniform. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017; amd.
Ord. 2, 7th Series, eff. 11-6-2017; Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-18-2017; Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
11.03: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Application: In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be
the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter are either more restrictive or less
restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other law, ordinance, statute, resolution or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which impose higher
standards or requirements, shall prevail. No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or altered, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose, nor in any
manner, which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Nonconforming Uses And Structures:
1. Any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date hereof may be continued at the
size and in a manner of operation existing upon such date, except as hereinafter specified.
2. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when such
structure is declared unsafe by the building official.
3. When any unlawful nonconforming structure, or use of any structure or land, in any district, is
discontinued for a period of more than one year, or is changed to a conforming use, any future
use of said structure or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
4. When any nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire or other peril, such as collapse,
explosion, public enemy, act of war or act of God to the extent of greater than fifty percent (50%)
of its market value, is in need of replacement or substantial remodeling, and no building permit
has been applied for within one hundred eighty (180) days of when the property is damaged, in
this case, the City may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in order to mitigate
any newly created impact on adjacent property.
5. Any structure which will, under this chapter, become nonconforming but for which a building
permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date hereof, or of amendments thereto,
may be completed in accordance with the approved plans; provided construction is started within
sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof, or amendment thereof, and continues to completion
within one year. Such structure shall thereafter be a legally existing nonconforming structure.
6. A lawful nonconforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to a similar
nonconforming use or to a less intense nonconforming use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 285/444
7. Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful
nonconforming use is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental
alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming use.
8. Any alterations and additions made to a nonconforming structure or to a building located on a
nonconforming lot that contains lawful residential units which are not specifically allowed by
Minnesota Statutes 462.357, subdivision 1e shall require a variance.
C. Lot Provisions:
1. A lot of record existing upon the effective date hereof in any residential district, which does not
meet the requirements of this chapter as to area or width, may be utilized for single family
detached dwelling purposes, provided the measurements of such area and width are within
seventy percent (70%) of the requirements of this chapter and subject to other applicable
requirements of this chapter, but said lot of record shall not be more intensively developed
unless combined with one or more abutting lots or portions thereof so as to create a lot meeting
the requirements of this chapter.
A lot of record existing upon the effective date hereof in any business B or industrial I district,
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter as to area or width, may be developed,
provided the measurements of such area and width are within seventy percent (70%) of the
requirements of this chapter and subject to other applicable requirements of this chapter.
2. Except in the case of planned unit developments as provided for herein, or in zoning district B-2
Noncentral Business District by conditional use permit, not more than one principal building shall
be located on a zoning lot.
D. Accessory Buildings:
1. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot prior to the time of
construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, except up to one such building not
exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet in footprint and which is not on a permanent
foundation may be allowed.
2. No accessory building shall exceed the height of the principal building or eighteen feet (18'),
whichever is higher.
3. In all residential R districts, the maximum size of detached accessory structures (individually or
combined), as measured by the footprint of the structure, shall be no greater than as listed in the
following table:
Lot Size Maximum Footprint
0 - 12,000 square feet 1,400 square feet
12,001 - 21,780 square feet 1,600 square feet
21,781 - 43,559 square feet 1,800 square feet
Greater than 43,560 square feet 2,000 square feet
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 286/444
4. No detached garages or other accessory buildings shall be located other than within the
principal or accessory setback within any residential R district.
5. No cellar, basement, tent, recreational vehicle, manufactured home or accessory building shall
at any time be used as an occupied dwelling, except manufactured homes located in an
approved manufactured home park or as otherwise allowed by this Code.
6. Accessory buildings in the Central Business District B-1, Noncentral Business District B-2, and
Industrial District I-1, may be located any place to the rear of the principal building, subject to the
Building Code and the fire zone regulations. Accessory buildings in the Noncentral Business
District B-2 may be located beside or in front of the principal building by conditional use permit.
7. In all residential R districts accessory structures or buildings of a factory painted or vinyl coated
corrugated metal siding and/or roofing are permitted, but shall include boxed eaves if they are
greater than two hundred (200) square feet in total floor area.
E. Required Yards And Open Space:
1. No yard or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such yard or
other open space less than the minimum required by this chapter, and if the existing yard or
other open space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
2. No required yard or other open space allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be used to
satisfy yard, other open space or minimum lot area requirement for any other building.
3. The following shall not be considered to be encroachments on yard requirements required
elsewhere in this chapter:
a. Chimneys, flag poles, sidewalks up to five feet (5') in width, wheelchair ramps, trees, shrubs,
plants, mailboxes, awnings, open canopies, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, lintels,
ornamental features, mechanical devices, cornices, eaves, gutters and the like, provided they
do not extend more than two and one-half feet (21/2'), and off-street parking, except as
hereinafter regulated.
b. Yard lights and nameplate signs for one- and two-family dwellings, lights for illuminating
parking areas, loading areas or yards for safety and security purposes, provided the direct
source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property, may
be located to within five feet (5') of the front lot line.
c. Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, decks, stoops or similar structures, which do not extend
above the height of the ground floor level of the principal building and maintain a two foot (2')
minimum side yard and ten foot (10') street or avenue setback.
d. In side or rear yards only, bays not to exceed a depth of two feet (2') nor contain an area of
more than twenty (20) square feet, fire escapes not to exceed a width of three feet (3') and
open off street parking.
e. In rear yard only, balconies, accessory structures, except that no structure shall be closer than
ten feet (10') from the rear lot line, breezeways, detached outdoor picnic shelters and
recreational equipment, except as regulated hereinafter.
f. In side yards only, accessory structures, except that no accessory structure larger than forty
eight (48) square feet shall be closer than five feet (5') from any interior side lot line and on a
corner lot in all residential R districts, shall not be closer than fifteen feet (15') from a side lot
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 287/444
line adjacent to a street or avenue. Accessory structures forty eight (48) square feet shall be
closer than five feet (5') from any interior side lot line and on a corner lot in all residential R
districts, shall not be closer than fifteen feet (15') from a side lot line adjacent to a street or
avenue. Accessory structures forty eight (48) square feet or smaller shall be no closer than
two feet (2') from any interior or corner side lot line.
4. On a corner lot, nothing shall be placed or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially
impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets. For uncontrolled intersections, the regulated area
shall extend to the triangle created by connecting the end points of the lines within twenty five
feet (25') of the street intersecting right-of-way lines and for controlled intersections within ten
feet (10') of the street intersecting right-of-way lines.
5. In no event shall off street parking spaces, driveways, structures of any type, buildings or other
impervious features in any residential district where the use of the lot is for between one and four
(1 - 4) residential units which cover more than thirty three percent (33%) of up to the first twelve
thousand (12,000) square feet of lot area and an additional fifteen percent (15%) of any square
footage above twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. For all other uses, impervious coverage
shall be limited to seventy five percent (75%) provided that all requirements of section 11.40 of
this chapter are met.
6. Height limitations shall not apply to barns, silos and other structures on farms, to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, chimneys and smokestacks, flagpoles, public facilities
and public utility facilities, transmission towers of commercial and private radio broadcasting
stations, television antennas, and parapet walls extending not more than four feet (4') above the
limiting height of the building, except as hereinafter provided.
F. Annexed Territory: No annexation petition shall be approved unless and until a hearing has been
petitioned for placing the annexed territory in a zoning district or districts. In the event of an
involuntary annexation, the City Council or the Planning Commission shall commence proceedings
for placing the annexed territory in a zoning district or districts before the annexation becomes
final, and call for a hearing thereon. In the event of an orderly annexation agreement, the City
Council may zone the entire designated area subject to the orderly annexation after execution of
said agreement and a zoning public hearing is held on the same. No building permits shall be
issued in annexed territory until such hearing has been held and the territory assigned in a zoning
district or districts.
G. Farming Operations: All farm operations in existence on or before June 3, 1974, will be permitted to
continue operation, subject to the following conditions.
1. Agriculture, excepting commercial animal farms, fur farms, kennels and poultry farms, but
including truck gardening and other horticultural uses, is a permitted use in the district in which
an existing operation is located; provided, that any new private stable or other new building in
which farm animals are kept shall be a distance of sixty feet (60') or more from any other lot in a
residential R district.
2. Limited sales of products produced may be conducted on the premises from a roadside stand,
but such stand shall not exceed twelve feet (12') in height or five hundred (500) square feet in
floor area, and no portion of any such stand shall be located or erected nearer than forty feet
(40') from any street line.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 288/444
3. The City Council may require any farm operation to secure a conditional use permit to continue
said operation in the event the farming operations are so intensive as to constitute a feedlot or
an industrial type use consisting of the compounding, processing and packaging of products for
wholesale or retail trade; and further, that such operations may tend to become permanent
industrial type operations that cannot be terminated as can a normal farming operation.
H. Land Reclamation: Under this chapter, land reclamation is the reclaiming of land by depositing of
material so as to elevate the grade. Land reclamation shall be permitted only by conditional use
permit in all districts. Any lot or parcel upon which four hundred (400) cubic yards or more of fill is
to be deposited shall be land reclamation. The permit shall include as a condition thereof a finished
grade plan which will not adversely affect the adjacent land, and as conditions thereof shall
regulate the type of fill permitted, program for rodent control, plan for fire control and general
maintenance of the site, controls of vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of materials
disbursed by the wind or hauling of materials to or from the site.
I. Mining: The extraction of sand, gravel or other material from the land in the amount of four hundred
(400) cubic yards or more and removal thereof from the site without processing shall be mining. In
all districts, the conduct of mining shall be permitted only upon issuance of a conditional use
permit. Such permit shall include as a condition thereof, a plan for a finished grade which will not
adversely affect the surrounding land or the development of the site on which the mining is being
conducted and the route of trucks moving to and from the sites.
J. Soil Processing: The processing of sand, gravel or other material mined from the land shall be
permitted only by conditional use permit. Such conditional permit shall include a site plan where
the processing is to be done, showing the route of trucks moving to and from the site in removing
processed material from the site, the condition in which the site shall be left upon completion and
such permit shall not be granted for a period of longer than twelve (12) months.
K. Vacated Streets: Whenever any street, alley, easement or public way is vacated by official action,
the zoning district abutting the centerline of the said vacated area shall not be affected by such
processing.
L. Dwelling Units Prohibited: No cellar, garage, tent trailer, basement with unfinished structure above,
or accessory building, shall at any time be used as a dwelling unit, except trailers located in an
approved manufactured home park. The basement portion of a finished home or apartment
building may be used for normal eating and sleeping purposes, provided it is properly
dampproofed, has suitable fire protection and exits, and is otherwise approved by the building
inspector.
A recreational vehicle shall not be considered a dwelling unit if it is located on a property that
contains a primary dwelling (or where a dwelling is under active construction) for fourteen (14)
days or less and is road ready and currently licensed. This time frame may be extended up to one
hundred eighty (180) days between April 1 and October 31 upon approval by the Zoning
Administrator after a written request by the property owner has been made.
M. Relocated Structures: Before any house or other structure is moved onto a vacant lot, the Zoning
Administrator shall report to the City Council whether the structure will be compatible with other
development in the area. If the City Council concurs with the decision of the Zoning Administrator
that a structure would depreciate the area into which it is to be moved, it may withhold issuance of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 289/444
a permit for such relocation. The applicant shall submit photographs taken from two (2) or more
angles of the structure to be moved and photos of the lot on which the structure is to be located,
together with adjacent lots and structures. These requirements do not apply to construction sheds
or other temporary structures to be located on a lot for eighteen (18) months or less.
N. Fences: Fences shall be permitted in all yards, subject to the following:
1. Fences in residential districts must comply with the height and setback requirements as listed
below:
FENCE HEIGHT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Location
Maximum
Height1
Distance
From Lot Line2
Front yard 6 feet 2 feet unless fence can be maintained entirely from
1 side, and then 0 feet
Interior or street side
yard
6 feet 2 feet unless fence can be maintained entirely from
1 side, and then 0 feet
Rear yard
(nonshoreland)
6 feet 2 feet unless fence can be maintained entirely from
1 side, then 0 feet. If the property abuts an alley,
then 8 feet
Shoreland 6 feet No setback required to riverbank, except that
fences shall not be allowed within floodplain,
unless they are farm fences which do not obstruct
debris or water
Buildable area 8 feet Not applicable
Any property line
adjoining a business
or industrial zoned
property
6 feet unless
otherwise allowed
by conditional use
permit
2 feet unless fence can be maintained entirely from
1 side and then 0 feet
Notes:
1. As measured from 6 inches above the adjacent ground level.
2. Does not apply to a lot line which is also a public right-of-way.
2. Fences in business and industrial districts must comply with the height and setback
requirements as listed below:
FENCE HEIGHT IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
Location
Maximum Height1
Distance
From Lot Line2
Any lot 6 feet, unless otherwise allowed 2 feet unless fence can be maintained entirely
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 290/444
line by conditional use from 1 side, and then 0 feet
Notes:
1. As measured from 6 inches above the adjacent ground level.
2. Does not apply to a lot line which is also a public right-of-way.
3. Fences over thirty inches (30") in height shall require a permit approved by the Zoning
Administrator regardless of where on a property they are located, except that temporary fencing
not exceeding six feet (6') in height may be installed to secure the perimeter of a construction
site, provided that any such fencing is removed upon completion of the construction project.
Such fencing shall not be limited to the approved fencing materials noted below.
4. Approved fencing materials include stone, brick, finished wood, rigid plastic, chain link, split rail
fences or other materials commonly used for fencing. Other materials may only be approved by
conditional use permit, except that the following types of fencing are prohibited unless
specifically allowed otherwise: barbed wire, electrical fencing, razor wire, creosote lumber,
chicken wire (unless used for the enclosure of gardens), concrete block or poured concrete,
plastic webbing, plywood or pressed wood. Notwithstanding the above prohibitions,
commercially available snow fencing may be allowed between November 1 and March 15 of
each calendar year.
5. No fence may be erected on either street side of a corner lot that will obstruct or impede the
clear view of an intersection by approaching traffic, subject to the provisions of subsection E4 of
this section.
6. No fence shall be erected where it will impede, in the opinion of the City Engineer or their
designee the flow of water across or through a drainageway, drainage easement, wetland or a
required stormwater management facility, (i.e., water quality/detention pond, rain garden, etc.).
7. Notwithstanding height limitations elsewhere in this subsection, fences enclosing or adjacent to
sport courts or fields, in any zoning district, may be up to twelve feet (12') in height with a
minimum ten foot (10') setback from any property line. Such fences shall not exceed twenty five
percent (25%) opacity.
8. Prior to issuance of a fence permit, a certificate of survey may be required by the Zoning
Administrator for all fences, except for hedges and plantings, or walls to be constructed on a
property line or when the fence is not clearly entirely on the subject property. This requirement
for a certificate of survey may be waived if: a) stakes from a previously completed survey are in
place and marked and the property line can be reasonably determined from those stakes; or b) if
a signed, written statement from the neighboring property owner is submitted, indicating that
they do not dispute the location of the fence.
9. That side of the fence considered to be the face, the side not attached to the primary structural
supports, shall face the abutting property or street right-of-way.
10. Both sides of any fence or wall shall be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and
appearance by its owner and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of
disrepair or danger, or constitute a nuisance, public or private.
11. No barbed wire shall be used for fencing, except that it may be used on security fences on
business or industrial zoned properties which are at least six feet (6') high, exclusive of the
barbed wire or in the maintenance of existing barbed wire fences presently used in farming
operations. All other barbed wire fences shall be removed before April 1, 1982.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 291/444
12. Fence height shall be determined by the body of the fence, starting no greater than six inches
(6") above the natural grade. Fence posts may extend a maximum of twelve inches (12") above
the body of the fence.
O. Bulk Storage (Liquid): All uses associated with the bulk storage of oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer,
chemicals and similar liquids shall require a conditional use permit in order that the City Council
may have assurance that fire, explosion or water or soil contamination hazards are not present that
would be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. The City Council may require
the development of diking around said tanks, suitably sealed, to hold a leakage capacity equal to
one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the tank capacity.
P. Zoning And Comprehensive Plan: Any change in zoning granted by the City Council shall
automatically amend the Comprehensive Plan in accordance with said zoning change.
Q. Residential Structures: Unless located in a manufactured home park, all habitable dwellings shall
have a minimum width and length of twenty four feet (24') and a permanent foundation meeting the
latest edition of the Minnesota State Building Code. All habitable apartment or other multi-family
housing units may have lesser width or length than twenty four feet (24'), but shall have a minimum
floor space of five hundred seventy six (576) square feet.
R. Building Numbers: One principal building on each property shall display numbers on the street or
avenue side of the building according to their address and shall be readable from the street or
avenue by emergency vehicles. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (4") in height.
S. Setbacks Required: Regardless of whether a building permit is required under section 5.02 of this
Code or any other section of this Code, and unless specifically stated otherwise, all buildings and
other structures over thirty inches (30") in height shall meet any and all setbacks required under
this chapter. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.04: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Administrator: Zoning provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning
Administrator, who shall be appointed by the City Council, and may have other Municipal duties.
His duties, among others shall be to:
1. Determine that all building permits comply with the terms of this chapter.
2. Conduct inspections of buildings and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
3. Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including, but not limited to, all maps,
amendments and conditional uses, variances, appeals and applications therefor.
4. Receive, file and forward all applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses or other
matters to the designated official bodies.
5. Serve as an ex-officio nonvoting member of the Planning Commission.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 292/444
B. Appeals:
1. The Planning Commission is constituted the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall determine, in
harmony with the general purpose of this chapter and the Comprehensive Guide Plan, by
resolution, all appeals from any order, requirement, permit or decision made by the Zoning
Administrator under this chapter, and from any interpretation of the text of this chapter, or any
determination by the Zoning Administrator as to the location of the boundary of a zoning district
as shown on the zoning map.
2. At any time within ninety (90) days after the decision of the Zoning Administrator under the
provisions of this chapter, except in connection with prosecutions for violations thereof, the
applicant or other person or officers of the City affected thereby may appeal to the Planning
Commission by filing a written notice stating the grounds appealed from and stating the specific
grounds upon which the appeal is made.
3. The Planning Commission, as a Board of Appeals, shall conduct such hearings and shall mail
notice of the hearing to all appellants. In all cases involving determination of district boundary
lines, or interpretation of district boundary lines, or interpretation of the text of this chapter, ten
(10) days' published notice of hearing in the official newspaper shall be given as it may deem
advisable and shall prescribe what notice, if any, shall be given of such hearing.
4. The City Council shall review and revise any recommendation of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
In reviewing such recommendations, the City Council may set a date for hearing thereon, not
earlier than seven (7) days after nor more than thirty (30) days after the recommendation is
made by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
5. Notice of the hearing before the City Council shall be mailed to all appellants. In all cases
involving determination of district boundary lines, or interpretation of district boundary lines, or
interpretation of the text of this chapter, ten (10) days' published notice of hearing in the official
newspaper shall be given.
C. Variances:
1. Time Lines For Requests: The time lines for variance requests shall be governed by Minnesota
Statutes 15.99, as amended from time to time.
2. Processing: The processing of variances shall be government by Minnesota Statutes 462.357,
as amended from time to time.
3. Erection Or Alteration Of Building: The erection or alteration of a building pursuant to a granted
variance shall be completed within six (6) months of the date the variance was granted, unless a
building permit has been issued and the construction actually has begun within the six (6) month
period, and is thereafter diligently pursued. Failure to comply will leave the variance subject to
revocation as set forth herein.
4. Revocation: A variance may be revoked, suspended or amended by following the requirements
and procedures in subsection H of this section.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Purpose: In order to give the district use regulations of this chapter the flexibility necessary to
achieve the objectives of the Comprehensive Guide Plan, in certain districts conditional uses are
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 293/444
permitted, subject to the granting of a use permit. Conditional uses include those uses generally
not suitable in a particular zoning district, but which may, under some circumstances, be
suitable. When such circumstances exist, a conditional use permit may be granted. Conditions
may be applied to issuance of the permit and a periodic review of the permit may be required.
2. Application, Referral To Planning Commission, Planning Commission Recommendation And
City Council Action: Except as otherwise noted in this subsection, the application and
presentation requirements for conditional permits shall be the same as those for variances as
provided in subsection C of this section.
3. Review Criteria: In reviewing an application for a conditional use permit:
a. The following must be met:
(1) The use or development is an appropriate conditional use in the land use zone.
(2) The use or development, with conditions, conforms to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
(3) The use with conditions is compatible with the existing neighborhood.
(4) The use with conditions would not be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare,
decency, order, comfort, convenience, appearance or prosperity of the City.
b. The following must be considered:
(1) The conditional use should not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in
the immediate vicinity for the purpose permitted on that property, nor substantially diminish
or impair property values in the immediate vicinity.
(2) The conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement
of surrounding vacant property for uses predominant in the area.
(3) Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary facilities are in place or will
be provided.
(4) The conditional use will not incur public cost for public facilities and services that would be
detrimental to the economic welfare of the community.
(5) The conditional use will not create unusual traffic congestion on nearby public
thoroughfares.
(6) Adequate measures have been taken to provide sufficient off street parking and loading
space to serve the proposed use.
(7) Adequate measures have been taken or will be taken to prevent or control offensive odor,
fumes, dust, noise, and vibration, so none of these will constitute a nuisance or danger and
to control lights and signs in such a manner that no disturbance to neighboring properties
will result.
(8) The conditional use will not result in the unnecessary destruction, loss or damage of a
natural, scenic or historical feature of major significance.
(9) The conditional use will promote the prevention and control of pollution of the ground and
surface waters including sedimentation and control of nutrients.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 294/444
4. Additional Conditions: In permitting a new conditional use or the alteration of an existing
conditional use, the City Council may impose, in addition to those standards and requirements
expressly specified in this chapter, additional conditions which it considers necessary to protect
the best interest of the surrounding area or the community as a whole. These conditions may
include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Increasing the required lot size or yard dimensions;
b. Limiting the height, size or location of buildings;
c. Controlling the location and number of vehicle access points;
d. Increasing the street width;
e. Increasing the number of required off street parking spaces;
f. Limiting the number, size, location or lighting of signs;
g. Requiring diking, fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or
nearby property;
h. Designating sites for open space or preservation of natural features;
i. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, or deed restrictions; or
j. Limitations on future expansions to buildings, structures, or land uses associated with the
conditional use.
5. Future Additions/Expansions: Future additions and/or expansions to buildings, structures, land
uses or other improvements to a property may be allowed by the Planning Commission without
need for a new public hearing provided that the Planning Commission finds that the additions or
expansions would not create the need for additional parking, increase traffic or materially change
the existing/permitted use of the property, beyond what had been approved by a previous
conditional use permit.
6. Revocation: A conditional use permit may be revoked, suspended or amended by following
requirements and procedures in subsection H of this section.
7. Use Of Permit: If the conditional use authorized by said conditional use permit has not been
completed or the use granted has been discontinued for a continuous one-year period after
grant of the permit, then the conditional use permit shall be subject to revocation, suspension, or
amendment as set forth in subsection H of this section.
E. Amendments:
1. Amended According To City Charter: This chapter may be amended according to the provisions
of the City Charter.
2. Initiation: Proceedings for amendment of this chapter shall be initiated by: a) a petition of the
owner or owners of the actual property, the zoning of which is proposed to be changed; b) a
recommendation of the Planning Commission; or c) by action of the City Council.
3. Application: All applications for amendment which are initiated by the petition of the owners of
property shall be filed in the Office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by six
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 295/444
(6) copies of a set of plans and graphics containing the following information and folded, where
necessary, to the size of eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11"):
a. A generalized location map showing the location of the proposed site in relation to the City.
b. A scaled plot plan, with north indicated, of the proposed site showing all site dimensions.
c. All types of proposed uses.
d. Location of all buildings and structures on and within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed site.
e. Elevation drawings or illustrations indicating the architectural treatment of all proposed
buildings and structures.
f. Any plans for the modification of standards set by this chapter or any other provisions of this
Code.
g. Location and size of all required parking spaces.
h. Landscaping plans, including location, size and type of all proposed planting materials.
i. General floor plans of all proposed buildings and structures.
j. Indication of location, size and type of storage facilities for the storage of trash and waste
materials.
k. Design layout and size of all proposed signs.
l. Drainage plan of the proposed site and location and size of existing and proposed utilities.
4. Action By Planning Commission: Timelines for decisions on amendments to this chapter shall be
governed by Minnesota Statutes 15.99, as amended from time to time.
5. Referral To Planning Commission: The City Council shall not rezone any land or area in any
zoning district or make any other proposed amendment to this chapter without having first
referred it to the Planning Commission for their consideration and recommendation.
6. Effect Of Denial: Rezoning applications may be denied by motion of the City Council and such
motion shall constitute a finding and determination that the proposed rezoning is not in the best
interest for the physical development of the City. No application which has been denied wholly or
in part shall be resubmitted for a period of six (6) months from the date of said order of denial,
except on grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the
Planning Commission.
F. Fees: The fees for each application shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council, which may
be amended from time to time. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the
Zoning Administrator and are not refundable unless application is withdrawn prior to referral to the
Planning Commission. There shall be no fee in the case of application filed in the public interest by
the City Council or by the Planning Commission.
G. Conditional Use Permits And Variances Recorded: A certified copy of every conditional use permit
and variance granted shall be recorded with the County Recorder.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 296/444
H. Revocation, Suspension Or Amendment Of Previously Approved Variances And Conditional Use
Permits:
1. Jurisdiction: Upon obtaining information that indicates a basis for revocation, suspension or
amendment, the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee may initiate proceedings for
revocation, suspension or amendment if a warning or other corrective action is deemed to be
inappropriate or ineffective. If so, the matter shall be heard by the authority that originally
granted the applicable variance or permit. A decision on whether to revoke, suspend or amend a
permit that was originally issued by the Zoning Administrator shall be made by the Zoning
Administrator. All other revocations, suspensions or amendments shall be submitted for hearing
as indicated.
2. Hearing: The issuing authority shall establish a time, date and location for a hearing for
revocation, suspension or amendment, at the request of the Zoning Administrator or the
Administrator's designee. The Administrator or designee shall serve notice of the date of the
hearing to the permit or variance holder no less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the
hearing using the same process as is required for civil actions at law. Other interested parties
may be notified by first class mail or other appropriate means. At the hearing, the issuing entity
will take such evidence as it deems appropriate either personally or through an attorney. Should
the holder fail to appear in person or through counsel, the issuing entity shall still have the
authority to take evidence and make a decision upon the request for revocation, suspension or
amendment.
3. Findings At Hearing: Should the issuing authority find, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
the holder has failed to comply with the conditions set forth on the variance or permit, the issuing
party shall make that finding and state the reasons for its determination.
4. Remedies: Upon finding that the holder has failed to comply with the conditions set forth in the
variance, conditional use permit or other permit, the issuing entity may then determine
appropriate sanctions, if any, to impose. Sanctions may include, but not be limited to, revocation,
suspension or amendment to the previously imposed conditions. A variance, conditional use
permit or other permit may be suspended until such time as the holder comes into compliance
with the terms of their original approval. The criteria for determining the appropriate sanctions
shall include, but are not limited, to the length of time of the violation, the severity of the violation,
and risk to the health, welfare, and safety of the neighboring residents and/or community as a
whole. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.05: ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP:
A. Districts: For the purpose of this chapter, the City is hereby divided into the following use districts
and groups of use districts:
1. Residential Districts:
R-1 One and Two Family Residential District
R-1C Country Homes, One and Two Family Residential District
R-2 One and Two Family Residential District
R-3 Multiple Family Residential District
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 297/444
R-4 Manufactured Homes Residential District
2. Business Districts:
B-1 Central Business District
B-2 Noncentral Business District
3. Industrial Districts:
I-1 Industrial District
4. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District:
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District
5. Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District:
M Overlay District
B. Map: The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on that certain map
entitled "Zoning Districts of the City of Little Falls", dated August 2017, which map is properly
approved and filed, hereinafter referred to as the "zoning map". Said map, and all of the notations,
references and other information shown thereon, shall have the same force and effect as if fully set
down herein and are hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. All
amendments to the zoning map are on file in the City office.
C. Boundaries: Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of a boundary line, as shown on
said zoning map, the location of such line shall be determined by the City Council. District
boundary lines as indicated on said map follow lot lines, the centerline of streets or alleys, the
centerline of streets or alleys projected, the center of watercourses or the corporate limit lines, all
as they exist upon the effective date hereof. If districts boundary lines do not follow any of the
described lines, the district boundary lines are established as drawn on the zoning map.
D. R-1 One And Two Family Residential District:
1. Permitted Uses Within Any R-1 One And Two Family Residential District: No structure or land
shall be used, except for one or more of the following uses:
A home occupation upon issuance of a home occupation permit. All home occupation permits
must meet the following criteria:
a. The home occupation shall be engaged in only by persons residing within the dwelling or
building within which the home occupation is conducted;
b. The home occupation shall be conducted within the principal residence, within a
designated area not comprising more than ten percent (10%), or one room, of the total floor
area of the residence;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 298/444
c. There shall be no evidence of the home occupation, other than signs permitted within
residential or historic districts, visible outside the structures;
d. The home occupation shall not include over the counter, retail sales of merchandise
produced off the property;
e. No more than three (3) parking spaces shall be used by the persons conducting the
home occupation and customers at any one time;
f. The home occupation shall not generate additional motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic
beyond normal residential use;
g. No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation which generates noise,
vibration, glare, dust, fumes, odors, or creates visual or electrical interference with radio or
television reception outside the home;
h. No materials, supplies or stock in trade will be stored outside the area designed for the
home occupation;
i. The occupation shall not involve materials or mechanical equipment which are not part of
normal residential use;
j. The home occupation shall not involve commercial delivery service other than parcel
service and United States mail;
k. The home occupation shall not involve the use of explosives or highly combustible
materials or the storage of hazardous materials;
l. Home occupation permits are not transferable.
m. No home occupation shall be operated from an accessory structure or garage, except by
conditional use;
n. Home occupation permits are subject to review for compliance with this chapter. Should a
violation occur, the permit is subject to revocation.
Essential services, buildings and structures.
Fallout or blast shelter.
New small wireless facilities, provided that they shall be:
a. Not located within a historic district established by Federal or State law or City ordinance
as of the date of application for small wireless facility permit.
b. Attached to the roof of an existing building such that it does not have a height greater
than ten feet (10') above the highest point of the roofline or otherwise is not readily visible
from a public right-of-way or adjoining residential zoned property.
c. Served by underground power and communication lines, unless otherwise approve by the
Public Works Director where underground installation is not feasible.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 299/444
One- and two-family dwellings.
Public and private parks, playgrounds, athletic fields and other recreation uses of a supporting
nature to parks and playgrounds.
Residential and nonresidential programs as regulated by Minnesota Statutes 245A.11 and
245A.14, as amended, except where such programs are considered a multifamily residential
use by said statutes.
Rural and urban agriculture, market gardens, nurseries or greenhouses, including the sale of
products raised on the premises; provided, that no products are exhibited for sale within fifteen
feet (15') of any street right-of-way.
The renting of rooms by a resident family for lodging purposes only, and for not more than two
(2) rooms in a one-family dwelling.
2. Conditional Uses In Any R-1 One And Two Family Residential District: No structure or land shall
be used for the following uses, except by conditional use permit:
Bed and breakfasts are allowed by conditional use permit in an R-1 Zoning District as
regulated in this section, subject to the following conditions:
a. Parking must meet the requirements of section 11.07 of this chapter.
b. All guestrooms must be contained in the principal building.
c. Dining facilities are not open to the public but limited to residents, employees and
registered guests.
d. The facility must be licensed by Morrison County Public Health and/or the Minnesota
Department of Health.
e. Bed and breakfast uses in residential areas must be located at least six hundred feet
(600') apart (approximately 2 blocks).
f. The facility must be inspected by the State Fire Marshal and the City building inspector
every three (3) years at the time of license renewals by the Minnesota Department of
Health.
g. The facility, if located in a residential zone district, shall appear outwardly to be a singlefamily
dwelling, giving no appearance of a business use and is allowed a maximum of eight
(8) square feet of signage.
h. The conditional use permit shall be transferable with the property provided that any
conditions or other terms of the approval continue to be met.
Bed and breakfasts with additional food service are allowed by conditional use permit in an R-
1 Zoning District as regulated in this section, subject to the following conditions:
a. Parking must meet the requirements of section 11.07 of this chapter. In addition, must
provide off street parking for all dining guests.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 300/444
b. All guestrooms must be contained in the principal building.
c. Dining facilities are not open to the public but limited to residents, employees and
registered guests or dining guests by appointment only.
d. Hours for dining by appointment will be limited to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to four o'clock
(4:00) P.M.
e. Dining will be limited to ten (10) persons or less.
f. The facility must be licensed by Morrison County Public Health and/or the Minnesota
Department of Health.
g. Bed and breakfast uses in residential areas must be located at least six hundred feet
(600') apart (approximately 2 blocks).
h. The facility must be inspected by the State Fire Marshal and the City building inspector
every three (3) years at the time of license renewal by the Minnesota Department of Health.
i. The facility, if located in a residential zone district, shall appear outwardly to be a singlefamily
dwelling, giving no appearance of a business use and is allowed a maximum of eight
(8) square feet of signage.
j. The conditional use permit shall be transferable with the property provided that any
conditions or other terms of the approval continue to be met.
Buildings used exclusively for government purposes, whether City, County, State or Federal,
provided that no vehicle or equipment storage or repair shall be performed.
Churches, parish houses and other structures located on the same site which are integral
parts of the church proper.
Commercial daycares.
Conditional agricultural, rural.
Golf course and country club, including buildings for clubhouses, pro shop, vehicle storage,
equipment storage or repair shall be permitted on parcels of forty (40) acres or more.
Home occupations by conditional use permit, including licensed non-residential programs
considered a permitted multi-family use by Minnesota Statutes 245A.14, as amended from
time to time:
a. A home occupation which does not meet the criteria of a home occupation in subsection
D1 of this section may be conducted following the issuance of a conditional use permit for a
home occupation.
b. In reviewing an application for a conditional use permit for a home occupation, the City
shall consider the impact of the proposed home occupation on the character of the
neighborhood, and shall impose such conditions as shall limit or eliminate such impact. In
reviewing the impact of the proposed home occupation, the City shall consider such issues
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 301/444
as the amount of space devoted to the occupation, the number of individuals participating in
the occupation, the noise, glare and/or odor produced by the occupation, the street and/or
pedestrian traffic generated by the occupation, and any other factors which impact on the
residential character of the neighborhood. In the event that the City determines that the
adverse impact cannot be limited or eliminated, the City shall deny the conditional use
permit.
c. Conditional use permits for home occupations are not transferable and are subject to
revocation in the event that the permit holder conducts the home occupation contrary to the
conditions placed on it in the conditional use permit.
Hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged (including assisted living, memory care or
similar) and medical clinics along with associated accessory uses including heliports;
provided, that no building shall be located within fifty feet (50') of any property line.
Multiple dwellings containing not more than four (4) dwelling units; provided, however, that the
building to be used was in existence on the effective date hereof, and will provide a gross floor
area of at least five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit and the City Council finds that
by reason of its size and design or lack of demand, it cannot be beneficially used for any of the
purposes for which buildings may lawfully be used under the provisions of this subsection and
that when altered, in order to adopt it to the new use, the building will conform in character and
type to other residences in the immediate neighborhood; and further provided, that the house
to be converted is located on a lot with an area of at least nine thousand (9,000) square feet,
plus six hundred fifty (650) square feet for each dwelling unit.
Multiple dwellings; provided, however, that the building to be used for such conditional use
had prior thereto been used for a public school, a private school, a church or other church
purpose, excluding parish houses, an exclusive City, State or Federal government purpose, a
hospital, a nursing home, or a medical clinic.
New small wireless facilities or wireless support structure for the siting of small wireless
facilities, located in a historic district established by Federal or State law or City ordinance as
of the date of application for a small wireless facility permit, provided that the small wireless
facility or wireless support structure shall be:
a. No taller than forty feet (40') in height;
b. All communication equipment shall be attached to an engineered support structure in a
manner approved by the City's Heritage Preservation Commission and City Council.
c. Meet minimum setbacks from property lines that would be applicable to a sign under
section 5.30 of this Code.
d. Constructed of a material and color approved by the City's Heritage Preservation
Commission and the Public Works Director.
e. Served by underground power and communication lines. The structure shall not be
served by any above-ground power or communication lines; unless otherwise approved by
the City's Heritage Preservation Commission and the Public Works Director where
underground installation is not feasible.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 302/444
New small wireless facilities, when not otherwise considered a permitted use, or wireless
support structures for the siting of small wireless facilities provided that the small wireless
facility or wireless support structure shall:
a. Not be located in a historic district established by Federal or State law or City ordinance
as of the date of application for small wireless facility permit.
b. Be no taller than forty feet (40') in height.
c. Meet minimum setbacks from property lines that would be applicable to a sign under
section 5.30 of this Code.
d. To the extent possible, have an antenna that is shrouded or camouflaged.
e. Be an engineered pole or as otherwise approved by the Public Works Director.
f. Be served by underground power and communication lines, unless otherwise approved by
the Public Works Director where underground installation is not feasible.
Professional offices and offices or services of a general nature, including, but not limited to,
doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, accountants, insurance, real estate,
government and nonprofit organizations, but not including operations involving more than
ancillary retail sales related to the primary use, wholesale sales or warehousing; provided,
however, that the building to be used for such conditional use had prior thereto been legally
used for a business, a public school, a private school, a church or other church purpose,
excluding parish houses, an exclusive City, State or Federal government purpose, a hospital,
a nursing home, or a medical clinic and that the offices or services are housed within the same
gross floor area as had existed when the building was last used for the above-mentioned
purposes.
Public and private schools.
Other uses of the same general character as permitted or conditional uses listed above,
provided they are deemed fitting or compatible to the district by the City Council. In making its
determination, the City Council shall consider factors related to the intensity of use, parking
needs, level and type of traffic generated, hours of operation (including loading/unloading
times), noise, odor, glare and other nuisance characteristics, and other factors that may be
relevant to making a determination as to whether a particular use is of the same general
character as a permitted or conditional use. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 2,
7th Series, eff. 11-6-2017; Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-18-2017; Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-
2018)
3. Permitted Accessory Uses In Any R-1 One And Two Family Residential District: No accessory
structure or use of land shall be permitted, except for one or more of the following:
Buildings temporarily located for the purpose of construction on the premises for a period not
to exceed the time necessary for completion of said construction.
Private garages and parking spaces.
Private swimming pool, tennis court or other recreational activity intended for the private use
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 303/444
of the occupants of the dwellings located on the same site as the recreational use.
Signs as regulated in chapter 5 of this Code.
Any other use customarily considered to be accessory to the foregoing permitted uses. (Ord.
96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
4. Lot Area, Floor Area, Height, Lot Width And Yard Requirements:
a. No structure or building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height, except by
conditional use permit. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
b. The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications contained in this chapter:
Lot Size Lot Width
Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot
11,000 square feet 12,000 square feet 80 feet 80 feet
Front
Yard Setback
Rear
Yard Setback
Side
Yard Setback
Interior Lot
Side
Yard Setback
Exterior Lot
Principal structure 30 feet 35 feet 10 feet 15 feet
Accessory structure 30 feet 10 feet 5 feet 15 feet
Minimum gross floor area for single family dwelling: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
Minimum gross floor area for two family dwelling: One thousand six hundred (1,600) square
feet.
E. R-1C Country Homes, One And Two Family Residential District:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any use permitted in the R-1 One and Two Family Residential District.
2. Conditional Uses:
Any use permitted as a conditional use in the R-1 One and Two Family Residential District.
3. Permitted Accessory Uses:
Any accessory use permitted in the R-1 One and Two Family Residential District. (Ord. 96, 6th
Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 304/444
4. Lot Area, Floor Area, Height, Lot Width And Yard Requirements:
a. No structure or building shall exceed three (3) stories or forty feet (40') in height, except by
conditional use permit. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
b. The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications contained in this chapter:
Lot Size Lot Width
Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot
16,000 square feet 16,000 square feet 100 feet 100 feet
Front
Yard Setback
Rear
Yard Setback
Side
Yard Setback
Interior Lot
Side
Yard Setback
Exterior Lot
Principal structure 20 feet 10 feet 15 feet 15 feet
Accessory structure 20 feet 10 feet 5 feet 15 feet
c. Minimum floor area for single family dwelling:
(1) One story, single family dwelling: One thousand (1,000) square feet.
(2) One story, two family dwelling: One thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet.
(3) Split level or two-story dwellings: Eight hundred sixty four (864) square feet per level.
d. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a lot shall be considered conforming, provided:
(1) The lot is at least twelve thousand (12,000) square feet in area; and
(2) The lot was a recorded lot of record in separate ownership on or before September 1,
2003, or with its incorporation into the City; and
(3) The lot was in compliance with applicable zoning ordinances at the time of its creation; and
(4) Any new structures will meet applicable setbacks.
F. R-2 One And Two Family Residential District:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any use permitted in the R-1 District.
2. Conditional Uses:
Any use permitted as conditional in the R-1 District.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 305/444
Heliports.
Multiple dwellings containing not more than four (4) dwelling units; provided, however, that the
building to be used was in existence on the effective date hereof, and will provide a gross floor
area of at least five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit and the City Council finds that by
reason of its size and design or lack of demand, it cannot be beneficially used for any of the
purposes for which buildings may lawfully be used under the provisions of this subsection and
that when altered, in order to adopt it to the new use, the building will conform in character and
type to other residences in the immediate neighborhood; and further provided, that the house to
be converted is located on a lot with an area of at least nine thousand (9,000) square feet, plus
six hundred fifty (650) square feet for each dwelling unit.
Other uses of the same general character as permitted or conditional uses as listed above,
provided they are deemed fitting or compatible to the district by the City Council. In making its
determination, the City Council shall consider factors related to the intensity of the use, parking
needs, level and type of traffic generated, hours of operation (including loading/unloading times),
noise, odor, glare and other nuisance characteristics, pollution potential and other factors that
may be relevant to making a determination as to whether a particular use is of the same general
character as a permitted or conditional use.
3. Permitted Accessory Uses:
Any use permitted as accessory in the R-1 District.
4. Lots Area, Floor Area, Height, Lot Width And Yard Requirements: All uses in the R-2 District
shall comply with the requirements of the R-1 District of this section, except as hereinafter
modified:
Lot Size Lot Width
Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot
9,000 square feet 9,000 square feet 60 feet 60 feet
Front
Yard Setback
Rear
Yard Setback
Side
Yard Setback
Interior Lot
Side
Yard Setback
Exterior Lot
Principal structure 30 feet 30 feet 5 feet 15 feet
Accessory structure 30 feet 10 feet 5 feet 15 feet
G. R-3 Multiple Family Residential District:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any use permitted in the R-1 District.
Multiple dwellings.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 306/444
2. Conditional Uses:
Any use permitted as conditional in the R-1 District.
Commercial, retail and service facilities of an ancillary nature, housed within a multiple dwelling
complex, including daycare facilities, hospital, nursing home, or home for the aged, including
assisted living, memory care or similar.
Residential and nonresidential programs as regulated by Minnesota Statutes 245A.11 and
245A.14, as amended from time to time, including programs considered a multifamily residential
use by said statutes.
Other uses of the same general character as permitted or conditional uses listed above,
provided they are deemed fitting or compatible to the district by the City Council. In making its
determination, the City Council shall consider factors related to the intensity of the use, parking
needs, level and type of traffic generated, hours of operation (including loading/unloading times),
noise, odor, glare and other nuisance characteristics, pollution potential and other factors that
may be relevant to making a determination as to whether a particular use is of the same general
character as a permitted or conditional use.
3. Permitted Accessory Uses:
Any use permitted as accessory in the R-2 District.
4. Lot Area, Floor Area, Height, Lot Width And Yard Requirements:
a. There shall be no height restriction on buildings in the R-3 District, except that any structure
exceeding three (3) stories or forty five feet (45') shall be set back from the nearest property
line a distance equal to one-half (1/2) the building height.
b. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications contained in this chapter:
Lot Size Lot Width
Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior
Lot
Corner
Lot
One- and two-family
structures
9,000 square feet
9,000 square feet
60 feet 60 feet
Three and four family
structure
12,000 square
feet
12,000 square
feet
60 feet 60 feet
Five and higher family
structure
15,000 square
feet
15,000 square
feet
60 feet 60 feet
Principal Structure Front
Yard Setback
Rear
Yard Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Interior Lot
Side
Yard
Setback
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 307/444
Exterior Lot
One- and two-family structures
30 feet 30 feet 5 feet 15 feet
Three and four family
structures
30 feet 30 feet 10 feet 15 feet
Five or higher family structures
30 feet 30 feet 15 feet 15 feet
Accessory structure 30 feet 10 feet 5 feet 15 feet
H. R-4 Manufactured Homes Residential District:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any use permitted in the R-3 District.
"Manufactured homes", as defined in section 11.02 of this chapter.
Motels.
2. Conditional Uses:
Any use permitted as conditional in the R-3 District.
Recreation vehicles and manufactured home sales.
Retail or service outlets intended to serve occupants of the permitted uses.
3. Permitted Accessory Uses:
Administrative offices, recreation buildings and facilities, laundry and other uses of a supporting
nature to a manufactured home park.
Signs as regulated in chapter 5 of this Code.
Temporary parking of recreational vehicles for occupancy; provided, that recreational vehicles
shall be parked in a designated recreational camping area as defined in Minnesota Statutes
327.14, subdivision 8. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
4. Lot Area, Floor Area, Height, Lot Width And Yard Requirements:
a. No structure or building shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height, except by
conditional use permit. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
b. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications contained in this chapter.
(1) Minnesota Statutes 327.10 - 327.28 Manufactured Home Parks and Camping Area.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 308/444
(2) Minnesota Rule 4630 governing manufactured home parks and recreational camping area.
(Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
I. B-1 Central Business District:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any permitted or conditional use in the R-1, R-1C or R-3 District, except as limited in this
section.
Any business or commercial establishment that is not specifically prohibited and as otherwise
limited in this section, including retail establishments, food service establishments, on and/or
off sale liquor establishments, personal services, professional services, equipment and auto
repair services, entertainment and amusement services, lodging services including hotels and
motels.
Food trucks, for periods of time not exceeding twelve (12) hours on any calendar day,
provided that it is located on the same lot as an operating business.
New small wireless facilities, provided that they shall be:
a. Not located in a historic district established by Federal or State law or City ordinance as
of the date of application for a small wireless facility permit.
b. Attached to the roof of an existing building such that it does not have a height greater
than ten feet (10') above the highest point of the roofline or otherwise is not readily visible
from a public right-of-way or adjoining residential zoned property.
c. Attached to a tower, pole, sign, light or other similar structure which has been legally
permitted, which has been granted a conditional use permit, or which exists as a legal
conforming structure, such that it does not have a height greater than the maximum
allowable height for the zoning district in which it is constructed.
d. Served by underground power and communication lines, unless otherwise approved by
the Public Works Director where underground installation is not feasible.
New wireless support structures for the siting of small wireless facilities, provided that the
wireless support structure shall be:
a. Not located within a historic district established by Federal or State law or City ordinance
as of the date of application for a small wireless facility permit.
b. No taller than forty feet (40') in height.
c. Meet minimum setbacks from property lines that would be applicable to a sign under
section 5.30 of this Code.
d. To the extent possible, have an antenna that is shrouded or camouflaged.
e. Be an engineered pole or as otherwise approved by the Public Works Director.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 309/444
f. Served by underground power and communication lines. The structure shall not be served
by any above-ground power or communication lines, unless otherwise approved by the
Public Works Director where underground installation is not feasible.
Private clubs.
Public and semi-public buildings, including a post office, a fire hall, or a city hall. (Ord. 96, 6th
Series, eff. 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 2, 7th Series, eff. 11-6-2017; Ord. 4, 7th Series, eff. 12-18-
2017)
2. Conditional Uses:
Any use that provides more than fifty (50) parking spaces or is required to provide more than
fifty (50) parking spaces.
Any use where a drive-thru or drive-up window is within fifty feet (50') of a residentially used or
zoned property is not entirely screened from said residential property and public streets or
alleys within fifty feet (50') of said residential property.
Any use where outdoor storage will exceed five hundred (500) square feet or where outdoor
storage within fifty feet (50') of a residentially used or zoned property is not entirely screened
from said residential property and public streets or alleys within fifty feet (50') of said
residential property.
Communications towers, as regulated elsewhere in this chapter, when not located in a historic
district established by Federal or State law or City ordinance.
Light assembly or light manufacturing.
New small wireless facilities or wireless support structure for the siting of small wireless
facilities, located in a historic district established by Federal or State law or City ordinance as
of the date of application for a small wireless facility permit, provided that the small wireless
facility or wireless support structure shall be:
a. No taller than forty feet (40') in height.
b. All communication equipment shall be attached to an engineered support structure in a
manner approved by the City's Heritage Preservation Commission and City Council.
c. Meet minimum setbacks from property lines that would be applicable to a sign under
section 5.30 of this Code.
d. Constructed of a material and color approved by the City's Heritage Preservation
Commission and by the Public Works Director.
e. Served by underground power and communication lines. The structure shall not be
served by any above-ground power or communication lines, unless otherwise approved by
the Public Works Director where underground installation is not feasible.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 310/444
Other uses of the same general character as permitted or conditional uses listed above,
provided they are deemed fitting or compatible to the district by the City Council. In making its
determination, the City Council shall consider factors related to the intensity of the use,
parking needs, level and type of traffic generated, hours of operation, (including
loading/unloading times), noise, odor, glare and other nuisance characteristics, pollution
potential and other factors that may be relevant to making a determination as to whether a
particular use is of the same general character as a permitted or conditional use listed above,
provided they are deemed fitting or compatible to the district by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. 2, 7th Series, eff. 11-6-2017; Ord. 4, 7th Series,
eff. 12-18-2017; Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
3. Permitted Accessory Uses:
Any use permitted as accessory in the R-1 District as regulated herein.
4. Lot Area, Height, Lot Width And Yard Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall
be observed, subject to additional requirements, exceptions and modifications contained in this
chapter:
Lot Size Lot Width
Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot
2,000 square feet 3,000 square feet 25 feet 25 feet
Front
Yard Setback
Rear
Yard Setback
Side
Yard Setback
Interior Lot
Side
Yard Setback
Exterior Lot
Principal structure 0 feet 10 feet 0 feet 0 feet
Accessory structure 0 feet 10 feet 0 feet 0 feet
Maximum height forty feet (40'), except as allowed by conditional use permit.
J. B-2 Noncentral Business District:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any permitted use in the B-1 District, except as limited herein.
Light assembly or light manufacturing.
2. Conditional Uses:
Any use where outdoor storage will exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet or where outdoor
storage within fifty feet (50') of a residentially used or zoned property is not entirely screened
from said residential property and public streets or alleys within fifty feet (50') of said residential
property.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 311/444
Other uses of the same general character as permitted or conditional uses listed above,
provided they are deemed fitting or compatible to the district by the City Council. In making its
determination, the City Council shall consider factors related to the intensity of the use, parking
needs, level and type of traffic generated, hours of operation (including loading/unloading times),
noise, odor, glare and other nuisance characteristics, pollution potential and other factors that
may be relevant to making a determination as to whether a particular use is of the same general
character as a permitted or conditional use.
3. Permitted Accessory Uses:
Any use permitted as accessory in the B-1 District as regulated herein.
4. Lot Area, Height, Lot Width And Area Requirements:
a. Minimum Requirements: The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to
additional requirements, exceptions and modifications contained in this chapter:
Lot Size Lot Width
Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot
10,000 square feet 10,000 square feet 75 feet 75 feet
Front
Yard
Setback
Rear
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Interior Lot
Side
Yard
Setback
Exterior Lot
Side
Yard
Setback
Adjacent To
Residential
Zoned
Property
Principal structure
30 feet 30 feet 10 feet 30 feet 25 feet
Accessory
structure
30 feet 10 feet 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet
(1) Residential uses shall be governed by lot size and setback requirements as provided in R-
2 Districts.
(2) Businesses within a B-2 District may construct an overhead canopy or structure for
weather protection, attached or freestanding, as long as the structure maintains a ten foot
(10') setback from the street right-of-way line and a twenty foot (20') setback from an
adjacent property line. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
b. Height Restrictions: There shall be no height restrictions on buildings in the B-2 District,
except that for every foot that a building exceeds thirty feet (30'), an additional foot of setback
shall be provided from each property line. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
c. Landscaping For Commercial Uses:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 312/444
(1) Each site shall have a front yard not less than twenty feet (20') in depth across the entire
frontage; this yard shall be landscaped except for necessary driveway and sidewalk needs
which shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the width of the site.
(2) A minimum of five feet (5') of the side yard setback shall be landscaped and maintained as
green space along the total length of the side property lines.
(3) All areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscaping plan.
K. I-1 Industrial District:
1. Permitted Uses:
Any use permitted in a B business district.
Manufacturing.
Processing.
Research laboratories/facilities.
Warehousing and storage.
2. Conditional Uses:
Acid manufacture.
Auto wrecking or salvage yard, junkyard, used auto parts and similar uses; provided, that the
use is screened by a fence or compact evergreen hedge which is at least fifty percent (50%)
opaque and at least six feet (6') high.
Coal, tar, creosote or asphalt processing or distillation.
Commercial stockyards and slaughtering of animals.
Crude oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer or other liquid storage tanks containing hazardous, flammable
or otherwise potentially dangerous liquids or gases.
Incineration or reduction of waste material other than customarily incidental to a principal use.
Kilns or other heat processes fired by means other than electricity.
Storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which could decompose by
detonation, including, but not limited to, dynamite, trinitrotoluene (TNT), nitroglycerin, guncotton,
blasting caps and cartridge primers.
Other uses of the same general character as permitted or conditional uses listed above,
provided they are deemed fitting or compatible to the district by the City Council. In making its
determination, the City Council shall consider factors related to the intensity of the use, parking
needs, level and type of traffic generated, hours of operation (including loading/unloading times),
noise, odor, glare and other nuisance characteristics, pollution potential and other factors that
may be relevant to making a determination as to whether a particular use is of the same general
character as a permitted or conditional use.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 313/444
3. Permitted Accessory Uses:
Any use permitted as accessory in the B-2 District as regulated herein.
4. Lot Area, Height, Lot Width And Yard Requirements:
a. The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to additional requirements,
exceptions and modifications contained in this chapter:
Lot Size Lot Width
Interior Lot Corner Lot Interior Lot Corner Lot
24,000 square feet 24,000 square feet 100 feet 100 feet
Front
Yard
Setback
Rear
Yard
Setback
Side
Yard
Setback
Interior Lot
Side
Yard
Setback
Exterior Lot
Side
Yard
Setback
Adjacent To
Residential
Zoned
Property
Principal structure
40 feet 30 feet 30 feet 40 feet 40 feet
Accessory
structure
30 feet 10 feet 5 feet 5 feet 20 feet
b. There shall be no height restriction on buildings in the I-1 District.
L. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District:
1. Purpose: The Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District is established to permit a more
flexible means of land development and redevelopment so as to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare in a manner which promotes goals consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan in a manner which is equal to, or greater than, development which would
occur under the applicable primary zoning district. Administration and development within an
area zoned Planned Unit Development Overlay District shall be by conditional use and subject to
the specific standards outlined in subsection 11.07C of this chapter, and such additional
performance standards as the City may impose in the review and approval of the development.
M. M Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District:
1. Purpose; Scope; Applicability:
a. This subsection is intended to control development along the Mississippi River in areas which,
prior to their annexation, were subject to the Morrison County Mississippi headwaters
ordinance. This subsection is intended to regulate the area of lot, length of lot, width of lot at
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 314/444
the water line, setback of structures, sanitary waste treatment systems, structure height, and
to protect the quality of the Mississippi River and shorelines, its vegetation, soils, water quality,
floodplain areas and geology; and to regulate alterations of the shoreland vegetation and
topography; maintain property values and prevent uncontrolled or poorly planned
development; maintain property and sustainable development; prevent pollution and
overcrowding; protect and conserve the historic, recreational, archaeological, cultural, fish and
wildlife resources of the Mississippi River and adjacent lands. The subsection is also intended
to comply with Minnesota Statutes section 103F.221, "Municipal Shoreland Management", as
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and intended to
comply with Minnesota Statutes sections 103F.361 to 103F.377, as amended from time to
time.
b. Property within the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District may also be designated
as Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District.
c. In any case where there is a conflict between the requirements of this subsection and the
general zoning ordinances of the City, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
2. Compliance With Minnesota Laws And Regulations For Mississippi Headwaters Corridor
Overlay District: The use of lands within the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District,
the size and shape of the lot, the type, dimensions and location of structures on the lot, the
installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment facilities, the filling, grading,
lagooning or dredging of any Mississippi River area, the cutting of shoreland vegetation and the
subdivision of lots shall all be in full compliance with the term of this subsection, Minnesota
Rules, parts 7080.0010 through 7090.0210, as promulgated by the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency and Minnesota Rules chapter 4720, promulgated by the Minnesota Department of
Health, as presently adopted or hereafter amended. The use of shorelands shall be in
substantial compliance with Minnesota Rules, chapter 6120, as presently adopted and
hereinafter amended. These regulations are hereby adopted and made a part of this subsection
by reference.
3. Permitted And Conditional Uses Within Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District:
a. No structure or land shall be used within lands zoned Mississippi Headwaters Corridor
Overlay District, except those uses which are not inconsistent with the uses allowed in the
underlying primary zoning district. Uses which are permitted, conditional, interim or accessory
uses in the primary zoning district shall likewise be considered permitted, conditional, interim
or accessory uses in the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District.
4. Building Standards For Mississippi Headwaters Corridor For Lots Of Record In Office Of
Morrison County Recorder As Of January 1, 1981, Which Are Less Than One Acre In Area:
a. Minimum Setbacks And Lot Widths For Lots Of Record In The Office Of The Morrison County
Recorder As Of January 1, 1981, Within Any Zoning Classification In Mississippi Corridor:
(1) Structure Setback From Ordinary High-Water Mark: One hundred feet (100').
(2) Structure Setback From Top Of Bluff: Thirty feet (30'), unless a greater setback is imposed
by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
(3) Maximum Structure Height, Except For Churches: Thirty five feet (35').
(4) Lot Width Standards: The lot width standards for single, duplex, triplex, and quad
residential developments are:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 315/444
No Municipal Sewer Municipal Sewer
Single 150 feet 150 feet
Duplex 150 feet 150 feet
Triplex 200 feet 150 feet
Quad 250 feet 190 feet
(5) Annexed Property: Annexed property shall be serviced by Municipal sewer as soon as
practical.
(6) Conflict: Where there is a conflict between setbacks in this section, the most restrictive
setback shall control.
b. Conditional Use Permits For Substandard Lots Of Record As Of January 1, 1981, In Any
Zoning District In Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District: Lots of record in the Office
of the Morrison County Recorder as of January 1, 1981, which do not meet the requirements
of this subsection, may be allowed as building sites: if the use is allowed within the zoning
district; the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since January
1, 1981; was created compliant with official controls in effect at the time; and sewage
treatment and setback requirements of shoreland control were met. If, in a group of two (2) or
more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the
requirements of this section, the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for
the purposes of development. The lot must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots
so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of this section.
Additions to structures on substandard lots of record in the Office of the Morrison County
Recorder as of January 1, 1981, may be permitted under a conditional use permit.
Substandard lots may be used as a building site under a conditional use permit. In granting
the conditional use permit, the City Council shall consider whether any detrimental impacts to
water quality and the environment can be mitigated. In considering mitigation, the City Council
shall consider such factors as the direction of gutters to storm sewers or away from the river,
limitation of direct drainage into the Mississippi River, side yard plantings, reduction of tree
removal, correction of a failing sewage system, preparation of a natural landscape protection
plan, preparation of a stormwater management plan, decrease in impervious area on site,
shoreline maintenance pursuant to a plan approved by the Department of Natural Resources
or plantings approved by the Department of Natural Resources to improve fish or wildlife
habitat. In granting a conditional use permit, a primary consideration shall be maximization of
structure setback from the ordinary high-water mark and connection with Municipal sewer and
water service.
c. Minimum Standards For New Plats Or Subdivision Of Existing Lots Of Record In The Office Of
The Morrison County Recorder As Of January 1, 1981:
(1) Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size for a new plat or subdivision of an existing lot of
record in the Office of the Morrison County Recorder as of January 1, 1981, other than for a
planned unit development shall be one acre, excluding wetlands.
(2) Clustering And Planned Unit Development: The minimum lot size for new construction
planned unit development shall be one principal use allowed per 0.75 acres, consistent with
the zoning district. Planned unit developments shall emphasize clustering of development
and preservation of natural areas to preserve the quality of the Mississippi River.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 316/444
(3) Setbacks, Lot Widths And Structure Heights:
(A) Structure Setback From Top Of Bluff: Thirty feet (30'), unless a greater setback is
imposed by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.
(B) Maximum Structure Height, Except For Churches: Twenty five feet (25').
(C) Lot Width Standards: The lot width standards for single, duplex, triplex, and quad
residential developments are:
Municipal Sewer
Single 150 feet
Duplex 150 feet
Triplex 150 feet
Quad 190 feet
(D) New Developments: New developments shall be serviced by Municipal sewer.
(E) Setback Conflicts: Where there is a conflict between setbacks in this section, the most
restrictive setback shall control.
(4) Landscape Protection And Stormwater Management: A natural landscape protection plan
and stormwater management plan must be prepared and approved in connection with any
new development.
d. Minimum Standards For Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District:
(1) Natural Landscape Protection Plan: Before issuing a permit for expansion of a structure or
new construction, a natural landscape protection plan shall be submitted to and approved
by the City in compliance with this subsection.
(2) Significant Cultural Sites:
(A) Unplatted Cemetery: No structure shall be placed nearer than fifty feet (50') from the
boundary of an unplatted cemetery protected under Minnesota Statutes 307.08, as
amended for time to time, unless approval is obtained from the City or from the State
Archaeologist Office.
(B) Significant Cultural Sites: No structure shall be placed on a significant cultural site in a
manner that affects the value of the site, unless adequate information about the site has
been recovered and documented in a public repository as determined by the City.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 317/444
(C) Review For Presence Of Significant Cultural Sites: All zoning actions within the
Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District will be reviewed for the presence of
significant cultural sites.
(D) Notice Of Development Near Sites: Thirty (30) days' notice will be made to the State
Archaeologist Office of pending development on or near significant cultural sites.
(3) Bluff Impact Zone: Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, shall
not be placed within bluff impact zones.
(4) Steep Slopes: Before issuing a permit for the construction of roads, driveways, structures
or other improvements on steep slopes, the slope must be evaluated for possible soil
erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters. If necessary, the City shall
impose conditions to prevent erosion, preserve existing vegetative screening of structures,
assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation. No excavation shall be made between the building
line and the water.
(5) Stairways, Lifts And Landings:
(A) Stairway And Lift Width: Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet (4') in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for resort properties, public open space,
recreational properties and planned unit developments.
(B) Landing Area: Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed thirty
two (32) square feet in area.
(C) Construction Requirements: Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed
above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.
(D) Visibility Minimized: Stairways, lifts and landings must be located to minimize visibility
from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
(E) Canopies Or Roofs: Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings.
(F) Access Facilities: Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas; provided that
dimensional and performance standards are complied with.
(6) Decks: Decks not meeting the minimum structure setback requirement existing on January
1, 1981, may be added to, provided the following criteria are met:
(A) The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high-water level does not exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the existing shoreline setback from the ordinary high-water level, or
does not encroach closer than thirty feet (30'), whichever is more restrictive; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 318/444
(B) The deck is constructed primarily of untreated wood and is not roofed or screened.
(7) Commercial And Industrial Uses:
(A) No new commercial, business or industrial uses shall be permitted within any Mississippi
Headwaters Corridor Overlay District, except for home occupations permitted by
conditional use permit, and congregate living or foster care homes permitted by law.
(B) Nonconforming commercial, business or industrial uses in existence prior to their
incorporation into any Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District may be continued.
No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its nonconformity, except by conditional use permit. In granting the conditional use permit,
the City Council shall consider whether any detrimental impacts to water quality and the
environment can be mitigated. In considering mitigation, the City Council shall consider
such factors as the direction of gutters to storm sewers, limitation of direct drainage into
the Mississippi River, side yard plantings, reduction of tree removal, correction of a failing
sewage system, decrease in impervious area on site, shoreline maintenance pursuant to
a plat approved by the Department of Natural Resources or plantings, approved by the
Department of Natural Resources to improve fish or wildlife habitat.
(8) Municipal Services City Code Provisions: All lands within any Mississippi Headwaters
Corridor Overlay District shall be subject to the provisions of this Code relating to the public
water service and public sewerage service shall be serviced by public water service and
public sewerage service as soon as reasonably practical.
(9) Docks: Docks may be built in compliance with the Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources regulations.
5. Natural Landscape Protection Plan:
a. Requirement: If necessary to protect water quality and prevent shoreline erosion and agreed
to by the property owner, and the Morrison County Soil and Water Conservation District staff,
a natural landscape protection plan shall be completed and reviewed, consistent with the
provisions of this subsection.
b. Purpose: The purpose of a natural landscape protection plan is to:
(1) Retain or recreate original hydrologic conditions by minimizing use of pavements and
impervious surfaces and retaining original runoff volume and velocities;
(2) Confine development and construction activities to the least critical areas by avoiding
critical areas such as long, steep slopes, erodible soils, and fragile vegetation;
(3) Fit development to terrain;
(4) Preserve and utilize the natural drainage system; and
(5) Maintain a minimum twenty five foot (25') chemically untreated vegetative buffer zone at
the water's edge, as required in this section.
Alteration of vegetation and topography should be limited to prevention of erosion into public
waters, fixation of nutrients, stabilization of shorelines, preservation of historic, archeological
or cultural values, prevention of bank slumping, protection of fish and wildlife habitat and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 319/444
conservation of natural resources.
The landscape plan should be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the
extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential and reduce and delay runoff
volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and
facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.
c. Issues To Be Addressed: In achieving its purpose, the natural landscape protection plan shall
address the following issues:
(1) Topography: A topographic map showing the existing contour elevations at intervals of two
feet (2') is the basis of the natural landscape protection plan. It is important to note slope
steepness and slope length on this map. The longer and the steeper the slope, the greater
the erosion potential;
(2) Drainage Patterns: Locate and clearly mark all existing drainage swales and patterns on
the topographic map. Consider where water will concentrate on the property. Natural
drainage areas are overland flows, depressions, swales and natural watercourses. The
natural drainage should be used to convey runoff on and off the site, but increase runoff
should be limited so erosion does not occur;
(3) Soils: Determine and show major soil types on the topographic map. Plot directly on the
map at the same scale for ease of interpretation. Soil types should be evaluated for
potential for flood hazard, natural drainage, depth to seasonal water table, permeability,
shrink-swell potential, texture and erodibility;
(4) Ground Cover: Show the existing vegetation on the topographic map. Features such as
tree clusters, grassy areas and unique vegetation should be shown on the map. Any
denuded or exposed soil areas should also be shown on the topographic map. If at all
possible, existing vegetation should be maintained to minimize erosion. If existing
vegetation cannot be maintained then construction should be staged (1 site completed
before the second is begun) to minimize erosion. Alternatives are temporary seeding,
mulching or temporary structure controls, such as settling basins, silt fences or bale dams.
A vegetative buffer of natural grasses, shrubs and trees should be maintained for at least
twenty five feet (25') at the water's edge. This buffer zone helps protect water quality,
provide habitat for wildlife and maintains the natural aesthetics of the shoreline; and
(5) Adjacent Areas: Delineate areas adjacent to the site on the topographic map. Such
features as streams, roads, houses or other buildings and wooded areas should be shown.
Streams which will receive runoff from the site should be noted. Consider the potential for
increased runoff during the construction and where the runoff will go.
6. Accessory Uses Within Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District: All accessory uses
must meet or exceed structure setback standards. The term "accessory uses", as used herein,
does not include stairways, lifts and docks. Each residential lot may have one water oriented
accessory use if all of the following standards are met:
a. The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet (10') in height, exclusive of safety rails. The
structure or facility cannot occupy an area greater than two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
b. The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high-water mark shall not be less than
the setback of the primary building, except by conditional use permit.
c. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and
adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color or other means.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 320/444
d. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a
storage area.
e. The accessory use must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain
water supply or sewage treatment facilities.
7. Stormwater Management Plans In Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District:
a. Consideration: Proper stormwater management must be considered in all reviews, approvals
and permits related to this section. A stormwater management plan shall be submitted with
any application.
b. Review Provisions: The following provisions shall be considered in reviewing proper
stormwater management:
(1) Natural Features To Be Used: Existing natural drainageways, wetlands and vegetated soils
must be used to convey, store, filter and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public
waters.
(2) Constructed Facilities May Be Used: When development density, topographic features,
and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff
using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as
diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways and ponds may be used.
Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation and infiltration
rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and facilities.
(3) Minimize Disturbance: Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will
minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and
delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible
and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on site.
(4) New Development Or Expanded Development: New development must meet the following
standards.
(A) Impervious surface coverage of the lot must not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
total area;
(B) Facilities constructed for stormwater management must be consistent with the Field
Office Technical Guide of the Morrison County Soil and Water Conservation District;
(C) Stormwater outfalls to the Mississippi River must provide for filtering or settling of
suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge; and
(D) A natural landscape protection site plan must be prepared to guide construction and lot
development in accordance with this section.
8. Shoreland Alteration Within Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District:
a. Purpose: Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to prevent erosion to
public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent
bank slumping, preserve a corridor for movement of wildlife, protect fish and wildlife habitat,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 321/444
conserve cultural resources and to preserve the scenic and aesthetic character of the
shoreland within the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District.
b. Vegetative Management Provisions:
(1) Intensive Vegetation Clearing: Intensive vegetation clearing within the setback and bluff
impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed.
(2) Limited Clearing: In setback areas and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited
clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of trees is allowed to provide
a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of
stairways, landings and access paths; provided that:
(A) The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as viewed from the water,
assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is maintained; and
(B) Shading of the water surface is maintained; and
(C) The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs or branches that
are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
(3) Shoreland Alteration: Shoreland alteration should avoid negative impacts, such as use of
steep slopes; increased soil erosion; development visibility; preservation of existing
vegetative screening from the Mississippi River, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
avoidance of wetlands; avoidance of excavation between the building line and the
Mississippi River, avoidance of intensive vegetative clearing within the setback; shading of
water surfaces should be maintained or enhanced; limitation of impermeable material to no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the building site; management of long lived species
along the river front shall be directed toward promotion of large sized trees by using
rotations based on biological age rather than economic age; cutting shall be conducted in
compliance with a natural landscape protection plan and Best Management Practices.
9. Grading, Filling, Alterations In Bed Of Public Waters Within The Mississippi Headwaters Corridor
Overlay District:
a. Permit Required: Any grading or filling work done within the Mississippi Headwaters Corridor
Overlay District, controlled by this subsection, shall require a permit and shall comply with the
following:
(1) Grading and filling of the natural topography which is not accessory to a permitted or
conditional use may be permitted if consistent with the Natural Landscape Protection Plan;
(2) Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted or
conditional use shall not be conducted without a grading and filling permit. A grading and
filling permit may be issued only if the following conditions of subsection M9b of this section
are met. Grading and filling shall be performed in a manner which minimizes earthmoving,
erosion, stormwater runoff, tree clearing and the destruction of natural amenities.
Excavation on lots abutting the Mississippi River shall not be permitted between the building
line and the ordinary high-water mark.
b. Standards: Grading and filling of the natural topography shall also meet the following
standards:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 322/444
(1) The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible;
(2) Temporary ground cover, such as mulch, is used until a permanent ground cover, such as
sod, is planted;
(3) Methods to prevent erosion and to trap sediment are employed;
(4) Fill is stabilized to accepted engineering standards;
(5) Fill or excavated material is not placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;
(6) Plans to place fill or excavated materials on steep slopes is reviewed by a licensed
engineer for continued slope stability and in no case, may create finished slopes of thirty
percent (30%) or greater;
(7) Fill or excavated materials are not placed in bluff impact zones;
(8) Disturbed areas are restored in the same building season.
c. Altering Current Or Cross Section Of Public Waters: Excavation of material from filling in
construction of any permanent structures or navigational obstructions, or any work that will
change or diminish the course, current or cross section of the Mississippi River is prohibited,
unless authorized by a permit from the Commissioner of Natural Resources or the Army Corps
of Engineers.
d. Drainage Or Filling Of Wetlands: Drainage or filling in of wetland is not allowed within the
Mississippi Headwaters Corridor Overlay District under this section, except by conditional use
permit, and upon notification to and approval by the Morrison County Soil and Water
Conservation District.
N. Performance Standards And Special Provisions: All permitted uses, conditional uses and
accessory uses in the residential districts, the business districts and the Industrial District shall also
meet all of the requirements of sections 11.06 and 11.07 of this chapter. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-
5-2017)
11.06: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
A. Purpose: The guiding of urban development so as to develop a compatible relationship of uses
depends upon certain standards being maintained. Uses permitted in the various districts,
conditional uses and accessory uses shall conform to the following standards. These standards
shall apply in all districts.
B. Glare Or Heat: Any use requiring an operation producing an intense heat or light transmission shall
be performed with the necessary shielding to prevent such heat or light from being detectable at
the lot line of the site on which the use is located. Lighting in all instances shall be diffused or
directed away from residential R districts and public streets.
C. Explosives: Any use requiring the storage, utilization or manufacturing of products which could
decompose by detonation shall be located not less than four hundred feet (400') from any
residential R district lines; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to the storage or usage of
liquified petroleum or natural gas for normal residential or business purposes.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 323/444
D. Screening:
1. Where any business or industrial use (structure, parking or storage) is adjacent to property
zoned or developed for residential use, that business or industry shall provide screening along
the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business or
industry is across the street from a residential zone, but not on that side of a business or industry
considered to be the front as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
2. The screening required herein shall consist of a solid fence or wall at least fifty percent (50%)
opaque not less than five feet (5') nor more than six feet (6') in height, but shall not extend within
fifteen feet (15') of any street or driveway opening onto a street. The screening shall be placed
along the property lines or in case of screening along a street, fifteen feet (15') from the street
right-of-way, with landscaping (trees, shrubs, grass and other planting) between the screening
and the pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered solid if it blocks direct vision.
E. Exterior Storage: In all residential R districts, all materials and equipment shall be stored within a
building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties, except for the following:
laundry drying and recreational equipment, construction and landscaping materials and equipment
currently being used or intended for use on the premises and off-street parking, except as
otherwise regulated herein. Boats and unoccupied trailers, less than twenty feet (20') in length, are
permissible if stored in the rear yard more than ten feet (10') from any property line. Existing uses
shall comply with this provision within twelve (12) months following the effective date hereof.
F. Waste Material: Waste material shall not be washed into the public storm sewer system, nor the
sanitary sewer system, without first having received a permit to do so from the City. If said permit is
not granted, a method of disposal shall be devised which will not require continuous land
acquisition for permanent operation and will not cause a detrimental effect to the adjacent land.
Should the waste be of a solid form rather than fluid, the storage area shall be so located and
fenced as to be removed from public view. In all districts, waste materials, debris, refuse, garbage
and materials not currently in use for construction or otherwise regulated herein shall be kept in an
enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container for such purposes. The owner of
vacant land shall be responsible for keeping such vacant land free of waste material and noxious
weeds. Existing uses shall comply with this provision within six (6) months following the effective
date hereof.
G. Drainage: No land shall be developed and no use shall be permitted that results in water runoff
causing flooding, or erosion on adjacent properties. Such runoff shall be properly channeled into a
storm drain, watercourse, ponding area or other suitable facility.
H. Traffic Control: The traffic generated by any use shall be channelized and controlled in a manner
that will avoid congestion on public streets, safety hazards or excessive traffic through residential
areas. Traffic into and out of all business and industrial uses or areas shall in all cases be forward
moving with no backing onto streets or pedestrian ways. No access drive to any lot shall be
located within forty feet (40') of any two (2) intersecting major thoroughfare street right-of-way
lines.
I. Off Street Loading: Off street parking shall be provided for delivery or distribution of materials in
connection with construction of any building or structure. Off street parking so provided shall be in
accordance with this chapter. No deliveries or unloading of materials for construction shall occur
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 324/444
between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., if that noise is audible in
a residential district. Any variations from this standard shall be by conditional use.
J. Radiation And Electrical Emissions: No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous
radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting
the operation, at any point, of any equipment, including, but not limited to, radio and television
reception, other than that of the creator of the disturbance.
K. Other Nuisance Characteristics: No noise, odors, vibration, smoke, air pollution, liquid or solid
wastes, heat, glare, dust or other such adverse influences shall be permitted in any district that will
in any way have an objectionable effect upon adjacent or nearby property or violate any State
Statutes, codes or City ordinances. All wastes in all districts shall be disposed of in a manner that
is not dangerous to public health and safety, nor will damage public waste transmission or disposal
facilities. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.07: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
A. Off Street Parking And Loading Spaces:
1. Purpose And Intent: Regulations of off street parking and loading spaces in this section are to
alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and general
welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off street parking, loading and
unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land and
structures.
2. Requirements: The location, design and use of off street parking, driveways and loading spaces
shall be in compliance with the following requirements:
a. Application Of Off Street Parking Regulations: The regulations and requirements set forth in
this section shall apply to the required and nonrequired off street parking facilities in all zoning
districts.
(1) Site Plan Drawing Necessary: Applications for a change of use, new construction or
expansion in all zoning districts, except one and two family residential zoning districts, shall
be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned and indicating the location
of off street parking, loading spaces, driveways, and curb cuts in compliance with the
requirements set forth in this section.
(2) Exemptions For Parking Requirements: All uses located within the "1980 Parking Lot
District" inside the Central Business District B-1 Zoning District shall be exempt from the
following off-street parking requirements of this section.
b. General Parking Provisions:
(1) Permits Prior To Effective Date: Structures or uses for which a building permit has been
issued prior to the effective date hereof, but for which work has not been completed, shall
be exempt from the hereinafter stated parking requirements, if the structure is completed
within six (6) months after the effective date hereof.
(2) Reduction Of Existing Off-Street Parking Space: Off street parking spaces and loading
spaces existing upon the effective date hereof shall not be reduced in number or size unless
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 325/444
said number or size exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use. If
further development requires the removal of the minimum number of parking stalls for an
existing occupancy, replacement stalls must be provided to comply with the required off
street parking provisions of this section. Should a nonconforming structure be damaged or
destroyed, it may be reestablished if elsewhere permitted in these zoning regulations,
except that in doing so, any off-street parking or loading, which existed, shall be retained.
(3) Change Of Use Or Occupancy Of Buildings: Any change of use or occupancy of any
building or buildings including additions thereto requiring more parking area shall not be
permitted until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as required by this chapter.
(4) Use Of Parking Facilities: Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use shall be
utilized solely for parking of passenger automobiles, recreational vehicles, and/or one truck
not to exceed twelve thousand (12,000) pounds' gross weight rating for each dwelling. No
commercially licensed trailer shall be parked or stored in any residentially zoned district,
except when loading, unloading or rendering a service, except that one such vehicle with
trailer may be parked off the street or avenue while maintaining all off-street parking
setbacks at the residence of the owner or operator of said vehicle. Required off street
parking in the residential R zoned districts shall be on the same lot as the principal building.
(5) Use Of Parking Area: Required off street parking space in all zoning districts shall not be
utilized for open storage of goods, shipping containers or for the storage of vehicles, which
are inoperable, for lease, rent or sale. Under no circumstances shall open parking facilities
accessory to one and two family residential structures be used for open air parking of
automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants or customers of business or
manufacturing establishments.
(6) Snow Removal: Within forty eight (48) hours after snow has ceased to fall, the owner,
tenants or manager of any off-street parking area shall clear said parking area of snow so
that said parking area is available for parking the number of vehicles for which said parking
area was designed.
(7) Accessible Parking: Accessible parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided as
required by the State Building Code.
c. Calculating Space:
(1) Number Of Spaces: When determining the number of required off street parking spaces
results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall constitute another space.
(2) Gross Floor Area: The term "gross floor area" for the purposes of calculating the number of
off street parking spaces, shall be determined on the basis of the exterior floor dimensions
of the building, structure, or use, times the number of floors, minus ten percent (10%).
(3) Benches Or Similar Accommodations In Places Of Public Assembly: In stadiums, bars,
restaurants, churches and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators
occupy benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each twenty two inches (22") of
such seating facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of determining required
parking.
(4) Buildings With Two Or More Uses: Except as provided for under "joint parking facilities",
should a building contain two (2) or more types of use, each use shall be calculated
separately for determining the total off street parking spaces required. Warehouse areas
associated with retail uses shall have parking requirements calculated separately from the
retail requirements.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 326/444
d. Location Of Parking Facilities: Unless otherwise allowed subject to this chapter, all off street
parking spaces shall be located on the same tax parcel as the use which they serve, unless
otherwise approved by conditional use permit.
(1) Required off street parking in all zoning districts shall meet the following setback
requirements:
(A) Within all residential zoned districts, all vehicles normally owned or kept by the
occupants on the premises must have a garage stall or open parking space on the same
lot as the principal use served. Garage stalls accessory to residential structures or open
parking spaces may be located anywhere on the lot other than in the required yard
setback area, except that such garages or open parking spaces may be located to within
ten feet (10') of a rear lot line.
(B) Within the Central Business District B-1 and the Noncentral Business District B-2 off
street parking spaces shall not be less than twenty feet (20') from a street right-of-way
line nor less than five feet (5') from any interior side lot line, nor less than ten feet (10')
from any rear lot line, except where a side lot line is abutting any residential R zoned
district, then off street parking shall not be less than ten feet (10') from said lot lines.
(C) Within any Industrial I-1 zoned district, off street parking spaces shall be not less than
ten feet (10') from any street right-of-way line, nor less than five feet (5') from any interior
side or rear yard; except, where a front, side or rear yard is across the street from or
abutting any residential zoned district, no parking shall be less than twenty feet (20') from
the front lot line or lot line abutting a residential lot.
e. Joint Parking Facilities: The joint use of off street parking areas may be authorized by
conditional use permit for the following uses or activities under the following conditions:
(1) The proposed joint parking space shall begin one hundred feet (100') from the principal
use or building it serves and not more than four hundred feet (400') from principal use or
building served, unless otherwise approved in the conditional use permit.
(2) The applicant shall show that there is no significant overlap in the principal operating hours
of the two (2) or more buildings or uses for which joint use of off street parking facilities is
proposed. Where there are more than two (2) hours overlap between the daytime and
nighttime uses of the parking facilities, a conditional use permit may be required.
(3) When a side or rear lot line is abutting a One and Two Family Residential R-1 zoned
district, the joint parking facility shall be not less than ten feet (10') from said lot lines and
include screening between the parking area and lot lines.
(4) The affected landowners or their duly authorized agents shall sign an agreement
guaranteeing that joint parking will be available as long as the joint occupancies or
businesses exist. All parties that lease parking spaces must provide evidence of control of
required parking in the agreement. The City Attorney must approve such agreement. Said
agreement shall be filed and recorded in the Office of the Morrison County Recorder, and
evidence of properly filing shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to the
issuance of any permits or licenses.
f. Use Of Parking Areas For Storage: Use of parking areas or required off street parking spaces,
in all zoning districts, shall not be used for open storage of goods or for storage of vehicles
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 327/444
that are inoperable, for lease, rent or sale.
g. Design And Maintenance Of Off Street Parking Areas:
(1) Cars Backing Into Street/Avenue: All parking areas except those serving One and Two
Family Residential R-1 and R-2 zoned districts, on local streets shall be designed so that
cars shall not be required to back into the street/avenue. If deemed necessary for traffic
safety, the City Engineer may require some One and Two Family Residential R-1 and R-2
zoned districts to have turnaround areas on the property.
(2) Curb Cut, Driveway Access Location And Curb Cut Maximum: Access and parking areas
shall be designed so as to provide an adequate means of access to a public alley or street.
Said driveway access shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in width at the public street right-ofway
line for all zoning districts except curb cut width may be increased to a maximum of fifty
feet (50') for occupancies in the Industrial I District. All driveway access locations shall be so
limited so as to cause the least interference with the traffic movement. All public parking
areas shall have access off driveways and not directly off a public street. All outside parking
spaces shall be clearly marking on the pavement.
(3) Location: The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two (2) streets shall not be
less than twenty feet (20') measured from the intersection of the property or street right-ofway
lines to the nearest edge of the curb cut; provided however, that it, in the opinion of the
City Administrator or designee, present or future traffic conditions warrant greater or lesser
distances, such greater or lesser distances shall be required subject to approval by the City
Council.
(4) Curb Cut Setback: Curb cut openings for driveways shall be located at a minimum of ten
feet (10') from the side yard interior lot lines measured at the property line in all zoning
districts, except One and Two Family Residential R-2 and Multiple Family Residential R-3
Zoning Districts, where curb cut openings shall be a minimum of five feet (5'). The minimum
distance between driveways on the same property shall be twenty feet (20') measured
along the property or street right-of-way; provided, however, that if in the opinion of the City
Administrator or designee, present or future traffic conditions warrant greater distances,
such greater distances shall be required subject to approval by the City Council.
(5) Joint Driveway: There shall be no setback requirements from a shared lot line for
townhomes with shared walls. Joint driveways for zero foot (0') interior side yard setback
are permitted in all residential zoned districts if the joint driveway does not encroach within
drainage and utility easements. Multiple properties in commercial, business, and industrial
zoned districts may be allowed to share a driveway and the ten foot (10') setback required
in this section may be reduced from each property line to zero (0), through a conditional use
permit, provided:
(A) There is a reduction in the overall amount of allowed driveways for the properties served
and the installation of joint driveways and/or parking aisles will increase traffic safety.
(B) An access site plan for the areas to be served is provided to the City for review as part
of the conditional use permit application.
(C) A legal instrument setting forth ownership, maintenance, etc., duly approved as to form
by the City Attorney, is executed and recorded by the party(ies) concerned and an
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 328/444
attested copy filed with the City.
(D) The driveway or parking aisle meets all design standards set forth in this Code or other
design requirements as determined by the City Administrator or designee.
(E) The design or resulting development shall not cause any conflict with safe and orderly
traffic flow.
(F) Only one joint driveway or joint parking aisle shall serve any two (2) lots unless
approved under a planned unit development.
(G) That for a joint parking aisle, there is no practical space for the parking aisle as
determined by the City and the City determines the joint parking aisle is appropriate and
was not proposed just to avoid compliance with the ten foot (10') parking setback from the
property line.
(H) Joint driveways shall require a conditional use permit. Joint driveways in existence prior
to August 21, 2017, are classified as preexisting and will not be required to obtain a
conditional use permit, provided evidence of a previously recorded agreement detailing
the joint driveway is submitted to the City and determined adequate by the City Attorney.
(I) The maximum curb cut opening for shared driveways is listed in subsection A2g(2) of this
section.
(6) Driveway Angle: The minimum driveway angle to the street shall be seventy five degrees
(75) unless otherwise recommended by the City Administrator or designee and approved
by the City Council.
(7) Curbing: All open, off street parking areas designed to have head in parking along any lot
line shall provide a tire bumper or curb of adequate height and properly located to ensure
that no part of any car will project beyond the required setbacks as established in this
chapter. The tire bumper or curb will be designed so as not to damage the vehicle bumpers
or tires and still allow pedestrian traffic.
(8) Size: The minimum dimensions for required parking spaces are shown in table 8-1 of this
section. Minimum dimensions are exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps or columns. In
no case shall any part of the public right-of-way contribute toward required stall size. Ninety
degree (90) parking spaces that use a curb overhang over a landscaped area or a
minimum seven foot (7') wide sidewalk may be reduced to eighteen feet (18') in depth.
Parking stall dimensions are to be reviewed and approved by the City Administrator or
designee prior to the approval of a building permit.
TABLE 8-1
MINIMUM PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS GUIDELINES
Angle Width Curb Stall One-Way Two-Way
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 329/444
(A) (B) Length
(C)
Depth
(D)
Aisle Width
(E)
Aisle Width
(F)
0 parallel 9' 20' 9' 12' 24'
45 9' 12'8" 17'6" 12' 24'
60 9' 10'5" 19' 16' 24'
90 9' 9' 18'6" 26' 26'
PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSION
(9) Surfacing: All of the area intended to be utilized for parking space and driveways shall be
hard surfaced with material to control dust and drainage, and subject to approval of the City
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 330/444
Administrator or designee, except parking areas for less than four (4) vehicles. This
requirement also applies to open sales lots. Parking areas and driveways shall be kept free
of dirt, dust and debris and the pavement shall be maintained in good condition.
(A) All commercial and industrial off-street parking areas, all access drives leading to such
parking areas and all other areas upon which motor vehicles may be located shall be
surfaced with a dustless all weather hard surface material capable of carrying a wheel
load of four thousand (4,000) pounds.
(B) Acceptable surfacing materials shall include asphalt, concrete brick, cement pavers or
similar material installed and maintained per industry standards.
(C) Crushed rock shall not be considered an acceptable surfacing material on any public or
employee off street parking areas, or access drives leading to such parking areas or
garages, except as provided for elsewhere in this section.
(D) Within the Industrial I District, internal yard areas and/or loading areas are allowed to
have Class II (100 percent crushed) aggregate surface. Such internal yard areas shall be
located to the side or rear of the principal building. The internal yard area shall be clearly
separated from public areas by fencing or other acceptable means. Access drives that
serve loading areas shall be hard surfaced with either bituminous or concrete within the
required front or corner side building setback. A dust control plan shall be submitted and
approved by the City.
(10) Lighting: Exterior lighting shall not be directed upon adjacent lands or the right-of-way.
(11) Required Spaces: Parking shall be provided according to the following schedule:
Principal Use Or
Structure Served
Required Number Of Parking
Spaces (Open Or Enclosed)
Auto sales
building, auto
repair, bus
terminals, taxi
terminals,
recreational
vehicle sales,
garden supply
stores, building
materials sales
1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 2 spaces per service
bay (the service bay is not a parking space). 1 space per each 2,000
square feet of gross outdoor sales area
Banks or savings
institutions
1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Barbershop/beauty
salon
2 spaces per station plus 2 per 3 employees
Bed and breakfast At least 1 parking space per rental room, plus 2 for the owner or manager
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 331/444
if resident on premises
Boarding house 1 space per boarder plus 2 for owner or manager if resident on premises
Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each alley plus additional spaces as may be required herein
for additional uses plus 1 space per 2 employees
Car wash 2 spaces per facility plus adequate stacking
Colleges and
universities
1 space per 2 students based on the design capacity plus 1 space for
each employee plus 1 space for each classroom; auditorium or event
space shall be subject to separate additional calculations
Community center,
post office, public
and private clubs,
pool halls,
libraries, private
clubs, lodges,
museums, art
galleries
1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area in the principal
structure plus additional spaces as may be required for separate types of
uses or event spaces in the primary structure
Day nurseries,
commercial
daycare
1 space per teacher on the largest shift plus 1 space per 10 students
based on the maximum capacity of facility
Drive-in
establishments
1 space per 2 seats, plus 1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift
Dwelling, multifamily
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwelling, one and
two family
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Efficiency units 1 space per unit
Elderly (senior
citizen) housing,
retirement homes,
assisted living
facilities
1 space per each bedroom, plus 1 space per 2 employees on largest shift
Food service,
bakeries and other
takeout food
stores
1 space per 100 square feet of customer area
Furniture store,
household
appliances
1 space per 400 square feet of gross sales area
Golf courses, disc
golf courses,
miniature golf
2 spaces per golf hole, plus additional spaces as may be required herein
for related uses such as a restaurant, club rooms, bar or event spaces
Health clubs 1 space per 2 exercise stations plus 1 space per employee on largest
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 332/444
shift
Hospitals 1 space per 2 patient beds (excluding bassinets) plus 1 space per 2
employees on largest shift including visiting doctors, plus designated
parking for hospital vehicles. Loading and unloading spaces for
ambulance or similar vehicles are not included in these parking
requirements
Hotel, motels,
tourist homes and
cabins
1 space for each rental room/suite plus 1 space for each 8 units and 1
space per employee on largest shift
Liquor store, off
sale
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
Manufactured
home park
2 spaces per manufactured home unit
Manufacturing,
fabrication or
processing of a
product or material
1 space per 12 employees on the largest shift plus 1 truck space per
7,500 square feet of gross floor area in the principal structure
Motor fuel stations
and convenience
stores
At least 4 spaces plus 1 for each employee on the largest shift plus
additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses such as
retail sales
Nursing homes,
rest home,
convalescent
home, memory
care facility
1 space per 4 patients plus 1 space per 2 employees plus 1 space for
emergency vehicles
Office buildings,
animal hospitals
and clinics,
professional
offices and
medical clinics
1 space per 300 square feet of gross area plus 1 space per employee on
the largest shift
Open sales lot 3 spaces for each 5,000 square feet of the open sales lot
Places on worship,
civic centers,
auditoriums,
mortuaries,
theaters, stadiums,
sport arenas or
similar uses
At least 1 parking space for each 4 seats based on design capacity of
main assembly area, plus 1 space per 2 employees
Restaurants,
cafes, bars,
taverns and
nightclubs
1 space per 3 seats plus 1 space for each 2 seats in bar area plus 1
space per employee on largest shift
Restaurants, fast 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 333/444
food
Retail sales 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area excluding public plazas,
malls, pedestrian walkways for commercial structures 10,000 square feet
in size or less. Structures larger than 10,000 square feet shall have 1
space per 250 square feet of floor area excluding public plazas, malls,
and pedestrian walkways
Schools Elementary and junior high, 2 spaces per classroom; high school, 1 space
per teacher and staff members on largest shifts, plus 1 space per 5
students
Shopping centers 6 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area (exclusive of
common areas)
Skating rinks and
dance halls
100 spaces plus 1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area in the principal
building
Swimming pool 1 space per 100 square feet of pool area
Warehousing and
wholesaling
1 space per employee on largest shift plus 1 truck space per 7,500
square feet of gross principal structure
Special uses not
covered above
In the case of mixed uses, the parking facilities required shall be the sum
of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in
accordance with this section. Parking facilities for 1 use shall not be
considered as providing the required parking facilities for any other use
except that the City Administrator or designee may consider the joint use
of a parking area (other than residential) where it is known that because
of a time element, the parking facilities will not be needed by more than 1
of the uses thereof at one time
Other structures or
uses
For any and all uses or structures not specifically provided for in the
foregoing, such parking spaces as the City Administrator or designee
shall determine to be necessary considering all the parking generating
factors involved
h. Purpose Of Off Street Loading And Unloading Regulations: The regulations and requirements
set forth in this section are to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way so as to
promote the safety and welfare of the public. This section applies to loading and unloading
facilities in all districts. If, in the application of the requirements of this section, a fractional
number is obtained, one loading space shall be provided for a fraction of one-half (1/2) or
more, and no loading space shall be required for a fraction of less than one-half (1/2).
(1) Location: All loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the building or use to be
served. A loading berth shall be located twenty five feet (25') or more from the intersection
of two (2) street right-of-way lines and at twenty five feet (25') from any property line in
which the abutting property is a residential use. Loading berths shall not occupy any yard
requirements bordering a street.
(2) Size: Unless otherwise specified, a required loading berth shall not be less than twelve feet
(12') in width and twenty five feet (25') in length. All loading berths shall maintain a height of
fourteen feet (14') or more.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 334/444
(3) Access: Each loading berth shall be located with adequate means of access to a public
street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic.
(4) Surfacing: All loading berths and access ways shall be improved with a durable material to
control dust and drainage.
(5) Accessory Uses: Any area allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to
comply with the terms of this chapter shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable
vehicles nor be included as a part of the area necessary to meet the off-street parking area.
i. Number Of Required Loading Berths: The City Engineer shall determine the number of loading
spaces, if any, required for each business or structure. The following criteria shall be used to
make this determination:
(1) The size of both the building and parking areas.
(2) The volume of materials delivered to the building.
(3) The requirement that no delivery trucks shall need to back into or park in a public street or
near pedestrian walkway or entrance.
(4) The traffic flow both on site and in respect to adjacent public streets.
B. Motor Fuel Stations: Motor fuel stations in all districts shall be subject to the following standards:
1. The setback of any overhead canopy or weather protection, freestanding or projecting from the
station structure, shall be not less than ten feet (10') from the street right-of-way line, nor less
than twenty feet (20') from an adjacent property line.
2. Open/dead storage of motor vehicles, other than motor vehicles for rent, shall not be permitted
for a period of more than seven (7) days, unless screened from public view.
3. No sales of motor vehicles or trailers or campers shall be permitted.
4. Each motor fuel station shall be architecturally designed so as to be as compatible as possible
with the general architectural intent of the area in which it is located.
5. For the purpose of architectural appropriateness, each and every side of a motor fuel station
shall be considered as a front face.
6. The entire motor fuel station site, other than that part devoted to landscaping and structures,
shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous surfacing to control dust and provide adequate
drainage, and such surfaces shall be designed to meet the requirements of a minimum four (4)
ton axle load.
7. Wherever a motor fuel station abuts a residential R district, a fence or compact evergreen hedge
not less than fifty percent (50%) opaque, nor less than six feet (6') high, shall be erected and
maintained along the side and rear property line that abuts the residential R district. Application
of this provision shall not require a fence within fifteen feet (15') of any street right-of-way line.
8. All trash, waste materials and obsolete automobile parts shall be stored within a separate
enclosure near the principal structure of the motor fuel station. Trash or recycling receptacles
located between fuel pumps shall be allowed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 335/444
9. All interior curbs shall be constructed within the property lines to separate driving and parking
areas from landscaped area. Such curbing shall be constructed of concrete and shall be of six
inch (6") nonsurmountable design, except where allowed otherwise by the City Engineer.
10. All rental campers, trailers or motor vehicles shall be stored within the rear and/or side yard not
adjacent to the street. Said rentals shall not be stored within the front yard setback nor the side
yard adjacent to the street.
11. All outdoor illumination shall be provided with lenses, reflectors or shades which will
concentrate the light upon the premises so as to prevent any undue glare or rays of light
therefrom being directly visible upon any adjacent street, roadway or property occupied for
residential purposes.
12. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other sections of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall be observed as minimum property line setbacks for motor fuel
stations:
Pump Setback
Motor fuel station 25 feet
Truck stop 30 feet
C. Planned Unit Development:
1. Purpose And Intent: The purpose of a planned unit development (PUD) is:
a. To encourage a more creative and efficient development of land and its improvements than is
possible under the more restrictive application of zoning requirements such as lot sizes and
building setbacks, while at the same time meeting the standards and purposes of the
Comprehensive Plan and preserving the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Little
Falls.
b. To allow for a mixture of residential units in an integrated and well-planned area.
c. To ensure concentration of open space into more usable areas and the preservation of natural
resources of the site including wetlands, woodlands, steep slopes and scenic areas.
d. Facilitate the economical provision of streets and public utilities.
e. An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets thereby lowering
development costs and public investments.
f. Promotion of a desirable and creative environment that might be prevented through the strict
application on zoning and subdivision regulations of the City.
2. General Requirements: The City may approve a planned unit development (PUD) only if it is
found that the development satisfies all of the following standards:
a. Comprehensive Plan Conformance: The proposed planned unit development (PUD) is in
conformance with the Comprehensive Plan. At a minimum, the City shall find that the planned
unit development (PUD) does not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan with regard to the
following:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 336/444
(1) The use will not create an excessive burden on existing parks, schools, streets, and other
public facilities and utilities, which serve or are proposed to serve the area.
(2) The use is reasonably related to the overall needs of the City and is compatible with the
surrounding land use.
(3) The planned unit development (PUD) is an effective and unified treatment of development
possibilities on the project site and the development plans provide for the preservation of
unique natural amenities such as streams, stream banks, wooded cover, rough terrain, and
similar areas where feasible and appropriate, as determined by the City.
(4) The uses proposed will not have an undue and adverse impact on the reasonable
enjoyment of neighboring property, and will not be detrimental to surrounding uses.
b. Development Criteria: The planned unit development (PUD) meets or exceeds the following
development criteria:
(1) A minimum of two (2) or more principal structures is proposed.
(2) The tract is at least two (2) acres in size.
c. Uses: The uses within the PUD shall not be inconsistent with the uses allowed in the
underlying primary zoning district.
d. Existing Development: The planned unit development (PUD) can be planned and developed
to harmonize with any existing or proposed development in the areas surrounding the project
site.
e. Phases: Each phase of the proposed development is of sufficient size, composition, and
arrangement so that its construction, marketing, and operation are feasible as a complete unit
and that provision for and construction of dwelling units and common open space are
balanced and coordinated. In addition, the total development is designed in such a manner as
to form a desirable and unified environment within its own boundaries.
f. Financing: Financing is available to the applicant on conditions and in an amount which is
sufficient to assure completion of the planned unit development (PUD). To evidence this
finding, a written statement of financial feasibility, which is accepted by the City, shall be
submitted by the applicant.
g. Control: An individual or legal entity has been designated by the property owner(s) to be in
control of the development.
h. Architectural Diversity: The planned unit development (PUD) provides for architectural
diversity by way of varied building types and exterior building design.
i. Underground Utilities: In any planned unit development (PUD), all utilities, including but not
limited to, telephone, electricity, gas and cable television shall be installed underground.
j. Roadways, Private:
(1) Single Ownership: Private roadways shall only be allowed within a planned unit
development (PUD) if the property remains under the ownership of a single person, persons
or other legal entity; they shall not be allowed where the planned unit development (PUD)
involves individual lots that can be owned by different parties or where a homeowner
association owns the parcel containing the roadway.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 337/444
(2) Design: Private roadways within the project shall have an improved surface to twenty eight
feet (28') or more in width and shall be so designed as to permit the City fire trucks to
provide protection to each building.
(3) Parking: No portion of the required private road system may be used in calculating
required off street parking space or be used for parking.
k. Landscaping: In any planned unit development (PUD), landscaping shall be provided
according to a plan approved by the City Council, which shall include a detailed planting list
with sizes and species indicated as part of the final plan. In assessing the landscaping plan,
the City Council shall consider the natural features of the particular site, the architectural
characteristics of the proposed structures and the overall scheme of the planned unit
development plan.
l. Public Service: The proposed project shall be served by the City water and sewer system and
fire hydrants shall be installed at such locations as necessary to provide fire protection.
m. Refuse: Provision for trash pickup shall be provided according to a plan approved by the City
Council.
n. Best Management Practices: All planned unit developments shall meet the requirements of
the City's stormwater ordinances and where appropriate, incorporate Best Management
Practices for stormwater management, subject to review by the City Engineer and Planning
Commission and approval of the City Council.
o. Sidewalks And Trails: Except as otherwise determined by the City Council, concrete
sidewalks not less than five feet (5') in width and/or bituminous trails not less than eight feet
(8') in width shall be provided in accordance with the City's sidewalk and trails map.
p. Development Agreement: Prior to a rezoning or the issuance of a building permit as part of a
planned unit development (PUD), the developer shall execute a development agreement with
the City. The agreement shall detail all use restrictions and required improvements conditional
to the planned unit development (PUD) rezoning or conditional use permit approval. The
agreement shall provide for the installation within one year of the off-site and on-site
improvements as approved by the City Council, to ensure the City that such improvements will
be actually constructed and installed according to specifications and plans approved by the
City as expressed in such agreement. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be one and
one-half (11/2) times the estimated cost of the improvements as determined by the City.
3. General Standards For Common Open Space: No open area may be accepted as common
open space under the provisions of this chapter unless it meets the following standards:
a. The location, shape, size, and character of the common open space must be suitable for
planned development. At a minimum, fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the property
involved in the planned unit development shall be preserved as open space, unless otherwise
approved by the City Council, which shall take into consideration the dedication of any land as
public park land.
Land within ten feet (10') of any structure and any roadway shall not be included in the
computation of minimum open space. The City Council may also choose to not include areas
as open space which do not serve the overall intent and purposes of the open space
requirement.
b. Common open space must be used for amenity or recreational purposes. The uses
authorized for the common open space must be appropriate to the scale and character of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 338/444
planned development, considering the size, density, expected population, topography, and the
number and type of dwellings to be provided.
c. Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended use, but common open space
containing natural features worthy of preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings,
structures and improvements which are permitted in the common open space must be
appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the common open space and must conserve
and enhance the amenities of the common open space having regard to its topography and
unimproved condition.
4. Conveyance And Maintenance Of Common Open Space:
a. All land shown on the final plan as common open space must be conveyed under one of the
following methods at the discretion of the City.
(1) It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to maintain the common open
space and any buildings, structures, or improvements which have been placed on it.
(2) It may be conveyed to a homeowner association (incorporated or non-incorporated) or
trustee provided in an indenture establishing an association of similar organization for the
maintenance of the planned development. The common open space must be conveyed to
the party involved subject to covenants approved by the City Council which restrict the
common open space to the uses specified on the final development plan, and which provide
for the maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures its continuing
use for its intended purpose.
b. If the common open space is conveyed to a private party and is not maintained properly to
standards established by the City, the City shall have the authority to maintain the property
and assess the costs back to said private party.
5. Enforcement Of Development Schedule/Planned Unit Development Staging: The construction
and provision of all the common open spaces and public and private recreational facilities that
are shown on the final development plan must proceed at the same rate as development. At
least once every six (6) months following the approval of the final development plan, City staff
shall review all of the building permits issued for the planned development and examine the
construction that has taken place on the site. If it is found that the rate of development is faster
than the rate at which common open spaces and public and private recreational facilities have
been constructed and provided, this information shall be forwarded to the City Council, which
may revoke the conditional use permit. If the developer or landowners fail to complete the open
spaces and recreation areas within sixty (60) days after the completion of the remainder of the
project, the City may finish the open space areas and assess the cost back to the developer or
landowner.
6. Residential Density:
a. In order to encourage the protection of natural resources, to allow limited development in an
area with unusual building characteristics due to subsoil characteristics or to encourage
creative land use, a density transfer system may be allowed whereby lot sizes smaller than
that normally required in a district will be allowed on the developable land in return for leaving
the natural resource areas open from development. The number of dwelling units proposed for
the entire site shall not exceed the total number permitted under the density indicated in the
zoning district where the land is located.
b. The number of dwelling units which may be constructed within the planned unit development
(PUD) shall be determined by dividing the gross acreage of the project area by the minimum
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 339/444
allowable lot size for the underling primary zoning district. If the planned unit development
(PUD) is in more than one underlying primary zoning district, the number of allowable dwelling
units must be separately calculated for each zoning district and the allowable units located
within their respective zoning districts, unless specifically approved otherwise by the City
Council.
7. Residential Planned Unit Development/Conditional Use Permit Requirements:
a. Intent: It is the intent of this subsection C7 to establish special requirements for the granting of
a conditional use permit for residential planned unit development (PUD) projects which are in
compliance with the density, permitted and conditional uses allowed in a specific base district
including dwellings, offices and institutional uses of one or more buildings in relation to an
overall design and integrated physical plan.
b. Yards And Buildings:
(1) Setbacks, Periphery: The front and side yard restrictions at the periphery of the planned
unit development (PUD) site at a minimum shall be the same as imposed in the respective
districts, unless greater setbacks are required by the City to protect neighboring properties
from negative effects that might otherwise occur.
(2) Setback, Front: For portions of buildings which face the interior of the development, no
building shall be located less than twenty feet (20') from the road surface or back of the curb
line (whichever is more restrictive).
(3) Building Spacing: Buildings within a planned unit development shall be spaced consistent
with the minimum side yard setbacks of the underlying zoning district. This spacing shall not
apply to individual units that share walls or are otherwise built as an integrated unit.
c. Townhouses, Cooperatives, Condominiums:
(1) Frontage: Minimum unit lot frontage for townhouses shall be not less than twenty four feet
(24').
(2) Dwelling Unit: Dwelling unit and accessory use requirements are in compliance with the
district provisions in which the development is planned.
(3) Building Facade Treatment: Facades greater than forty eight feet (48') in length shall
incorporate wall plan projections or recesses having a depth of at least three feet (3') or
more, unless specifically approved otherwise by the City Council.
8. Commercial And Industrial Planned Unit Development/Conditional Use Permit Requirements:
a. Intent: The intent of this subsection C8 is to establish special requirements for the granting of
a conditional use permit to allow commercial or industrial planned unit development (PUD)
projects which are in compliance with the permitted and conditional uses allowed.
b. Surfacing And Drainage:
(1) Surfacing: The entire site other than that taken up by buildings or landscaping shall be
paved with concrete, bituminous or paving brick.
(2) Drainage: A drainage system subject to the approval of the City Engineer shall be installed.
c. Yards:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 340/444
(1) Setbacks, periphery of entire development property: The front and side yard setbacks shall
be the same as imposed in the underlying district.
9. Procedure For Processing A Planned Unit Development (PUD):
a. Stages Of Planned Unit Development (PUD): The processing steps for a planned unit
development (PUD) are intended to provide for an orderly development and progression of the
plan, with the greatest expenditure of developmental funds being made only after the City has
had ample opportunity for informed decisions as to the acceptability of the various segments
of the whole as the plan affects the public interest. The various steps represent separate
applications for purpose of review, compliant with Minnesota Statutes 15.99, outlined in detail
in the following sections:
(1) Pre-Application Meeting: Preliminary discussions.
(2) General Concept Plan Application: Consideration of overall concept and plan. The concept
plan review is voluntary but strongly recommended.
(3) Development Stage Plan Application: One or more detailed plans as part of the whole final
plan.
(4) Final Plan Application: The summary of the entire concept and each development stage
plan in an integrated complete and final plan.
b. Pre-Application Review: Prior to the submission of any plan to the Planning Commission, the
applicant shall meet with City staff to discuss the contemplated project relative to community
development objectives for the area in question and to learn the procedural steps and exhibits
required. This includes the procedural steps for a conditional use permit and a preliminary plat
as necessary. The applicant is urged to avail himself or herself of the advice and assistance
provided by City staff to facilitate the review of the proposed planned unit development (PUD).
10. General Concept Plan:
a. Elements Of Plan: The general concept plan provides an opportunity for the applicant to
submit a plan to the City showing their basic intent and the general nature of the entire
development before incurring substantial cost. This concept plan serves as the basis for public
comment so that the proposal may be publicly considered at an early stage. The following
elements of the proposed general concept plan represent the immediately significant elements
which the City shall review and for which a decision shall be rendered:
(1) Overall maximum planned unit development density range.
(2) Location of major streets and pedestrian ways.
(3) Location and extent of public and common open space.
(4) Location of residential and nonresidential land uses with approximate type and intensities
of development.
(5) Staging and time schedule of development.
(6) Other special criteria for development.
b. General Concept Plan Submission Information:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 341/444
(1) General Information:
(A) Owner: The landowner's name, address and telephone number and interest in the
subject property.
(B) Applicant: The applicant's name, address and telephone number if different from the
landowner. The applicant may designate an agent to be contacted by the City, who may
speak for the applicant.
(C) Consultants: The names and addresses of all professional consultants who have
contributed to the development of the planned unit development (PUD) plan being
submitted, including attorney, land planner, engineer, and surveyor.
(D) Title Of Applicant: Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the subject
property to effectuate the proposed planned unit development (PUD), including a
statement of all legal, beneficial, tenancy and contractual interests held in or affecting the
subject property and including an up-to-date certified abstract of title or registered
property report, and such other evidence as the City Attorney may require to show the
status of title or control of the subject property.
(2) Present Status Of Premises And Adjacent Properties:
(A) Description: The address and legal description of the subject property. A survey is
required.
(B) Zoning: The existing zoning classification and present use of the subject property and all
lands within five hundred feet (500') of the subject property.
(C) Map: A single reproducible map or aerial photograph at a scale of not less than one inch
(1") equals one hundred feet (100'), depicting the existing development of the subject
property, and all land within five hundred feet (500') thereof and showing the precise
location of existing streets.
(3) Narrative Description: A written statement generally describing the proposed planned unit
development (PUD) and the market which it is intended to serve, showing its relationship to
the City's Comprehensive Plan and how the proposed planned unit development (PUD) is to
be designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable regulations of the City.
(4) Site Conditions: Where deemed necessary by the City, graphic reproductions of the
existing site conditions at a scale of not less than one inch (1") equals one hundred feet
(100') shall be submitted and shall contain the following:
(A) Survey showing lot dimensions and existing easements and utilities.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 342/444
(B) Contours, minimum two foot (2') intervals.
(C) Location, type and extent of tree cover.
(D) Slope analysis.
(E) Location and extent of water bodies, wetlands, streams and floodplains along with
corresponding zoning overlays within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property.
(F) Existing drainage patterns.
(G) Vistas and significant views.
(H) Soil conditions as they affect development.
(I) All of the graphics should be the same scale as the final plan to allow easy cross
reference. The use of overlays is recommended for clear reference.
(5) Concept Drawing: Schematic drawing of the proposed development concept including, but
not limited to, the general location of major circulation elements, public and common open
space, residential and other land uses.
(6) Number Of Units: A statement of the estimated total number of dwellings and/or other units
proposed for the planned unit development (PUD) and a tabulation of the proposed
approximate locations of land use expressed in acres and as a percent of the total project
area, which shall include at least the following:
(A) Area devoted to residential uses.
(B) Area devoted to residential use by building or structure or use type.
(C) Area devoted to common open space.
(D) Area devoted to public open space.
(E) Approximate area devoted to streets.
(F) Approximate area, and potential floor area, devoted to commercial uses.
(G) Approximate area, and potential floor area, devoted to industrial or office uses.
(7) Staged Development: When the planned unit development (PUD) is to be constructed in
stages during a period of time extending beyond a single construction season, a schedule
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 343/444
for the development of such stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate
beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit and the proportion of the total
planned unit development (PUD) public or common open space and dwelling units to be
provided or constructed during each such stage and the overall chronology of development
to be followed from stage to stage.
(8) Common Areas: When the proposed planned unit development (PUD) includes provisions
for public or common open space or service facilities a statement describing the provision
that is to be made for the care and maintenance of such open space or service facilities is
required. If it is proposed that such open space be owned and/or maintained by any entity
other than a governmental authority, copies of the proposed articles of incorporation and
bylaws of such entity shall be submitted during the development stage.
(9) Covenants: General intent of any restrictive covenants that are to be recorded with respect
to property included in the proposed planned unit development (PUD).
(10) Market Feasibility: Where deemed necessary by City staff a market feasibility study
including an analysis of the proposal's economic impact on the City.
c. General Concept Plan Process:
(1) The developer shall submit five (5) copies of the general concept plan for distribution to the
Planning Commission.
(2) The applicant or a representative thereof, shall appear before the Planning Commission in
order to answer questions concerning the proposed development.
(3) Planning Commission shall review and make a recommendation to the City Council on the
general concept plan.
(4) City Council reviews all recommendations and indicates its support or concerns about the
general concept plan as presented or amended.
d. Optional Submission Of Development Stage Plan: In cases of single stage planned unit
development (PUD) or where the applicant wishes to begin the first stage of a multiple stage
plan for the proposed planned unit development (PUD) simultaneously with the submission of
the general concept plan. In such case, the applicant shall comply with all the provisions of
this chapter applicable to submission of the development stage plan. The Planning
Commission and City Council shall consider such plans simultaneously and shall grant or
deny development stage plan approval in accordance with the provisions of this section.
e. Effect Of Concept Approval: Planned unit development (PUD) concept approval only provides
direction for the applicant to proceed to planned unit development (PUD), development stage
plan submission. The concept plan approval does not convey any development rights or
privileges to the applicants.
11. Development Stage Plan: Development stage plan submissions shall depict and outline the
proposed implementation of the planned unit development (PUD) general concept stage.
Information from the general concept stage may be included for background and to provide a
basis for the submitted plan.
a. Application: Requests for planned unit development (PUD), development stage, as provided
within this chapter, shall be filed on an official application form. Such application shall be
accompanied by a fee as provided for by City ordinance. Such application shall also be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 344/444
accompanied by five (5) copies of detailed written and graphic materials fully explaining the
proposed change, development or use, as follows:
(1) Zoning Required: Zoning classification required for development stage submission and any
other public decisions necessary for implementation of the proposed plan.
(2) Site Plan/Preliminary Plat: Drawn to scale of one inch (1") equals one hundred feet (100')
or less, containing the following information:
(A) Project Name: Proposed name of the development, which shall not duplicate nor be
similar in pronunciation to the name of any plat theretofore recorded in Morrison County
where the subject property is situated.
(B) Survey: Property boundary lines and dimensions of the property and any significant
topographical or physical features of the property. An accurate legal description of the
entire area within the planned unit development (PUD), for which final plan approval is
sought, correlated to the legal description defining use districts in this chapter.
(C) Preliminary Plat: Preliminary plat, if applicable, shall comply with all the performance
standards of section 11.06 of this chapter.
(D) Buildings: The location, size, use and arrangement including height in stories and feet
and total square feet of ground area coverage and floor area, of proposed buildings, and
existing buildings which will remain, if any.
(E) Traffic Circulation: Location, dimensions and number of all driveways, entrances, curb
cuts, parking stalls, loading spaces and access aisles, and all other circulation elements
including bike and pedestrian and the total site coverage of all circulation elements.
(F) Sites Adjacent To DOT Right-Of-Way: Sites adjacent to Minnesota Department of
Transportation right-of-way shall identify the right-of-way location, dimension from the
center line of the highway to the Minnesota Department of Transportation right-of-way
line, along with existing and proposed ingress and egress.
(G) Submission To DOT: Site adjacent to Minnesota Department of Transportation right-ofway
shall be submitted to the Minnesota Department of Transportation for review and
approval.
(H) Common Areas: Location, designation and total area of all common open space.
(I) Public Open Space: Location, designation and total area proposed to be conveyed or
dedicated for public open space, including parks, playgrounds, school sites and
recreational facilities.
(J) Location Of Existing Structures: The location, use and size of structures and other land
uses on adjacent properties within one hundred feet (100') of the property boundaries.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 345/444
(3) Residential Tabulation: A tabulation indicating the number of residential dwelling units by
number of bedrooms and expected population/housing profile.
(4) Areas Of Use: A tabulation indicating the approximate gross square footage, if any, of
commercial and industrial floor space by type of use.
(5) Architectural Plans: Preliminary architectural plans indicating use, floor plan, elevations
and exterior wall finishes of proposed buildings and architectural guidelines for future
development phases.
(6) Landscape Plan: A detailed landscaping plan including the type, size and quantity of all
existing and proposed plantings.
(7) Grading And Drainage Plan: Preliminary grading and drainage plan illustrating changes to
existing topography and natural site vegetation. The plan should clearly reflect the site
treatment and its conformance with the approved concept plan.
(8) Erosion Control: An erosion control plan acceptable to watershed management
organization and any other agency with review authority clearly illustrating erosion control
measures to be used during construction and as permanent measures.
(9) Document Changes: A statement summarizing all changes which have been in any
document, plan, data or information previously submitted, together with revised copies of
any such document, plan or data.
(10) Preliminary Plat, If Applicable: A preliminary plat conforming to chapter 12 of this Code.
(11) Lighting Plan: A plan illustrating site lighting.
(12) Additional Data: Such other and further information as the City staff, Planning
Commission or City Council shall find necessary for a full consideration of the entire
proposed planned unit development (PUD) or any stage thereof.
b. Development Stage Plan Review Schedule:
(1) Filing: The applicant shall file the development stage application within six (6) months after
concept plan review, together with all supporting data and filing fee, as established by fee
schedule.
(2) Meeting With City Staff: It is recommended that the developer meets with City staff to
discuss specific development plans prior to submitting the development stage plan.
(3) Staff Review/Technical Assistance Reports: Upon receipt of an application for a planned
unit development (PUD), development stage plan, the request shall be referred to
appropriate City staff to ensure that informational requirements are complied with. When all
informational requirements have been complied with the request shall be considered
officially submitted.
(4) Other Agency Review: When appropriate, the planned unit development (PUD)
development stage plan application shall be forwarded to other special review agencies
such as the Department of Natural Resources, soil conservation services, highway
departments, or other agencies.
(5) Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be scheduled at a meeting of the Planning
Commission pursuant to the time periods established by Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 346/444
(6) Planning Commission Questions: The applicant or a representative thereof shall appear
before the Planning Commission in order to answer questions concerning the proposed
development.
(7) Recommendations To City Council: The Planning Commission shall review said reports
and plans and submit recommendations to the City Council. Such recommendations shall
contain the findings of the Planning Commission with respect to the conformity of the
development stage plan to the approved general concept plan. Should any changes be
found to exist, the Planning Commission shall comment with respect to the merit or lack of
merit of any departure of the development stage plan from substantial conformity with the
concept plan and with respect to the compliance of the development stage plan with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable Federal, State and local codes and
ordinances. If the Planning Commission shall find conformity or any changes merit approval
and the Planning Commission shall further find the development stage plan to be in all other
respects completed and in compliance with this chapter and other applicable Federal, State
and local codes and ordinances, it shall recommend approval. If the Planning Commission
fails to act within the time specified herein, it shall be deemed to have recommended the
plan for approval.
(8) Request On City Council Agenda: Upon receipt of the Planning Commission report and
recommendation, the request shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the City Council. The Planning Commission must act and report its
recommendations in a timely manner so that the City Council can act on the application
within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, unless the review period for the
application has been extended pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 15.99.
(9) Development Agreement: The City Attorney shall prepare a planned unit development
(PUD) development agreement which stipulates the specific terms and conditions approved
by the City Council and accepted by the applicant. This agreement shall be signed by the
Council President, City Administrator and the applicant within thirty (30) days of City Council
approval of the development stage plan. Where the development stage plan is to be
resubmitted or denied approval, the City Council action shall be by written report setting
forth the reasons for its action. In all cases, a copy of the document evidencing City Council
action shall be promptly delivered to the applicant.
(10) Limitation On Development Stage Plan Approval: Unless a final plan covering the area
designated in the development stage plan as the first stage of the planned unit development
(PUD) has been filed within six (6) months from the date the City Council grants
development stage plan approval, or in any case where the applicant fails to file final plans
and to proceed with development in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and/or
an approved development stage plan, the approval shall expire. Upon application by the
applicant, the City Council may at its discretion extend for not more than six (6) months, the
filing deadline for any final plan when, for good cause shown, such extension is necessary.
In any case where development stage plan approval expires, the City Council shall forthwith
adopt a resolution repealing the general concept plan approval and the development stage
plan approval for that portion of the planned unit development (PUD) that has received final
plan approval and reestablishing the zoning and other ordinance provisions that would
otherwise be applicable.
12. Final Plan: The final plan is to serve as a complete, thorough and permanent public record of
the planned unit development (PUD) and the manner in which it is to be developed. It shall
incorporate all prior approved plans and all approved modifications thereof resulting from the
planned unit development (PUD) process. It shall serve in conjunction with other City ordinances
and the land use regulations applicable to the planned unit development (PUD). The final plan is
intended only to add detail to, and to put in final form, the information contained in the general
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 347/444
concept plan and the development stage plan and shall conform to the development stage plan
in all respects.
a. Final Plan Submission Information: After review of a general concept plan for the planned unit
development (PUD) and approval of a development stage plan for a section or sections of the
proposed planned unit development (PUD), the applicant will submit the following materials for
review by City staff prior to issuance of a building permit:
(1) Filing: Upon approval of the development stage plan within the time established by this
chapter, the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator a final plan consisting of the
information and submissions required by this chapter for the entire planned unit
development (PUD) or for one or more stages. This application will be considered at the
next possible regular Planning Commission meeting. No public hearing shall be required.
(2) Planning Commission Action: The findings and recommendation of the Planning
Commission shall be forwarded to the City Council for consideration. If the Planning
Commission fails to act within the time specified herein, it shall be deemed to have
recommended the plan for approval.
(3) City Council Decision: Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete planned unit
development (PUD) final plan application, unless the review period is extended in
accordance with Minnesota Statutes 15.99, and receipt of the findings and
recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall grant approval or
denial of said request.
(4) Recording: The applicant shall cause the final plan, or such portions thereof as are
appropriate to be recorded with Morrison County. The applicant shall provide the City with a
signed copy verifying Morrison County recording within six (6) months from the date of
approval.
(5) Building And Other Permits: Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, upon
receiving notice from the Zoning Administrator that the approved final plan has been
recorded and upon application of the applicant pursuant to the requirements of the City, City
staff may issue building and other permits to the applicant for development, construction
and other work in the area encompassed by the approved final plan provided, however, that
no such permit shall be issued unless City staff is first satisfied that the requirements of all
codes and ordinances which are applicable to the permit sought, have been satisfied.
b. Limitation On Final Plan Approval: Within one year of the approval of a final plan for planned
unit development (PUD), or such shorter time as may be established by the approved
development schedule, construction shall commence in accordance with such approved plan.
Failure to commence construction within such period shall automatically render the planned
unit development (PUD) permit, and all approvals of the planned unit development (PUD) plan
and the area encompassed within the planned unit development (PUD) void. The property
shall thereafter be subject to those provisions of this Code, applicable in the district in which it
is located. In such case, the City Council shall forthwith adopt a resolution repealing the
planned unit development (PUD) permit and all planned unit development (PUD) approvals
and reestablishing the zoning and other ordinance provisions that would otherwise be
applicable. The time limit established by this section may, at the discretion of the City Council,
be extended for not more than one year by resolution duly adopted.
13. Coordination With Subdivision Resolution Regulations:
a. It is the intent of this chapter that subdivision review under chapter 12 of this Code be carried
out simultaneously with the review of a planned unit development (PUD) under this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 348/444
b. The plans required under this section must be submitted in a form which will satisfy the
requirements of chapter 12 of this Code for the preliminary and final plats required under
those regulations.
14. Planned Unit Development (PUD) Review And Amendments:
a. Annual Review: City staff and the Planning Commission shall review all uncompleted planned
unit developments (PUD) within the City by March 1 of each year and shall make a report to
the Planning Commission and City Council on the status of the development in each of the
planned unit developments. If the Planning Commission finds that development has not
occurred within one year after the original approval of the conditional use for the planned unit
development (PUD), the Planning Commission may recommend that the City Council revoke
the approval of the planned unit development.
b. Amendments To The Planned Unit Development (PUD):
(1) Amendment Required: Any deviation or modification from the terms or conditions of an
approved planned unit development (PUD), or any alteration in a project for which a
planned unit development (PUD) has been approved, shall require an amendment of the
original planned unit development (PUD). An application for an amendment specifying the
proposed alteration shall be submitted to the City, together with a fee as provided for by
resolution.
(2) Action By The Planning Commission And City Council: The same application and review
procedure shall be followed with respect to the applicant's initial request.
D. Fallout And Blast Shelters:
1. Purpose of this subsection is to establish provisions to permit the construction and maintenance
of fallout and blast shelters. Fallout or blast shelters are permitted as principal or accessory uses
and structures in any district, subject to the yard regulations of the district. Such shelters may
contain or be contained in other structures, or may be constructed separately and, in addition to
shelter use, may be used for any principal or accessory use permitted in the district, subject to
the district regulations on such use, but shall not be used for principal or accessory uses
prohibited expressly or by implications in the district.
2. The City Council may permit a fallout or blast shelter to be used also for other purposes which
are permitted, conditional or accessory uses in the district in which the shelter is located, if the
City Council finds that all of the general requirements of this chapter concerning such uses are
satisfied, and in addition establishes:
a. The use other than as a shelter is compatible with the shelter proposed.
b. The function as a shelter would not be materially impaired by the proposed use.
c. If a conditional use permit is required, this permit would have been granted regardless of
whether the shelter was involved.
E. Access Driveways:
1. The purpose of this subsection is to establish minimum standards for the design of safe ingress
and egress for uses oriented to serving the motoring public, but not including parking lots.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 349/444
2. The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two (2) streets shall not be less than twenty
feet (20') measured along the curb line with the property line and the point of tangency of the
curb lines with the curb return of the driveway; provided, however, that if, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, present or future traffic conditions warrant greater or lesser distances, such
greater or lesser distances shall be required subject to the approval by the City Council.
3. The minimum distance between driveways shall be twenty feet (20') measured at the property or
street right-of-way line; provided, however, that if, in the opinion of the City Engineer, present or
future traffic conditions warrant greater distances, such greater distances shall be required
subject to approval by the City Council.
4. The minimum driveway angle to the street shall be seventy five degrees (75), unless otherwise
recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City Council.
5. The distance from a driveway to the property line of an adjacent property shall not be less than
five feet (5') measured along the curb line between the point of intersection of the curb line with
the property lines extended and the point of tangency of the curb line with the curb return of the
driveway unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer and approved by the City
Council.
6. Access driveways, shall be thirty feet (30') wide measured along the property line between the
curb faces of the driveway, unless otherwise recommended by the City Engineer and approved
by the City Council.
F. Additional Requirements, Exceptions And Modifications: The requirements and regulations
specified heretofore in this chapter shall be subject to the following:
1. Height Limitations: Height limitations set forth elsewhere in this chapter may be increased as
follows:
a. Heights in excess of those allowed under this subsection and other sections shall be
permitted only by conditional use permit granted by motion of the City Council determining that
such structure would not be dangerous and would not adversely affect adjoining or adjacent
property.
b. On any lot sloping downhill from the street, which has an average ground slope on that portion
of the lot to be occupied by the main building of twenty five percent (25%) or more (measured
in the general direction of the side lot lines), an additional twelve feet (12') of height may be
permitted in such main building, provided the lowest floor shall not be less than ten feet (10')
below the average established property line grades along the front of the lot. The floor of the
basement shall be considered the lowest floor and a cellar floor shall not be counted.
2. Yard Requirements:
a. Buildings may be excluded from side yard requirements if party walls are utilized or if the
adjacent buildings are planned to be constructed as an integral structure.
b. Required yards in the districts specified shall be subject to the following additional
requirements:
(1) Through lots in any district shall have a required front yard on each street.
(2) In the business B and industrial I districts, where the average depth of at least two (2)
existing front yards for buildings, within the same block front of the lot in question is less or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 350/444
greater than the minimum front yard depth of such existing front yards, required front yards
shall not be less than the average depth of such existing front yards, however,
notwithstanding the foregoing, in no case shall the depth of a front yard be reduced by this
section to below twenty feet (20').
(3) In any residential R district, where the average depth of at least two (2) existing front yards
for buildings within the same block front of the lot in question is less or greater than the
minimum front yard depth required for the district, the required front yard shall not be less
than the average depth of such existing front yard, however, notwithstanding the foregoing,
in no case shall the depth of a front yard be reduced by this section to below fifteen feet
(15').
G. Outdoor Boilers:
1. The purpose of this subsection is to establish minimum standards for the placement and safe
use of outdoor boilers.
2. Outdoor boilers are permitted in any zoning district but must meet the requirements of this
subsection, except they may not be placed in the following zoning districts: Central Business
District B-1 and Noncentral Business District B-2.
3. Outdoor boilers permitted in other zoning districts must:
a. Be installed on a lot in area of five (5) acres or more; and
b. Be set back from the nearest property line by at least two hundred feet (200'); and
c. Burn only firewood or untreated lumber, no other biomass material is allowable; and
d. Be operated only between the days of October 1 and May 1; and
e. Be equipped with a properly functioning spark arrestor; and
f. The chimney shall extend a minimum of at least fifteen feet (15') above the ground surface, but
shall also extend at least as high as the height of the roofs of residents within five hundred feet
(500').
4. All outdoor boilers will require a conditional use permit before they are constructed.
H. Street Side Ground Floor Dwelling Units:
1. A "street side ground floor dwelling unit" is defined as a dwelling unit contained within a larger
building structure which is designed or used for purposes of permanent or temporary residency
and is located within the Central Business District B-1 whereby any part of the exterior wall of
the dwelling unit is adjacent to any street, avenue or alley.
2. Street side ground floor dwelling units shall not be permitted in any structure located within the
historic or preservation landmark districts, exhibit B on file in the City. All street side ground floor
dwelling units in existence prior to April 1, 2010, are grandfathered in and will be allowed to
continue with the parameters of a legal nonconforming use.
3. Street side ground floor dwelling units shall be permitted by a conditional use permit in any
Central Business District B-1 other than the historic or preservation landmark districts, provided:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 351/444
a. At least one off-street parking space must be provided for each dwelling unit. The parking
space must be available twenty four (24) hours each day and be located on the same parcel
as the dwelling unit.
b. Usable space in the dwelling unit shall be not less than two hundred (200) square feet in area
per occupant and have one kitchen sink, one water closet, one lavatory, and one bathtub or
shower. Kitchens and uninhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. Each
sleeping area or room shall have at least one operable emergency escape and rescue
opening. Such opening shall open directly into a public street, public alley, yard or court. The
openings shall meet all the requirements for emergency escape and rescue openings set forth
in section R310 of the current Minnesota State Building Codes.
c. No less than one exit door must be provided to each dwelling unit. The exit door shall provide
for direct access from the dwelling to the exterior without traveling through any other dwelling
unit or occupancy. The required exterior exit door shall be a side hinged door not less than
three feet (3') in width and six feet eight inches (6'8") in height.
d. All changes in occupancy must meet the current Minnesota Building Code requirements.
Dwelling unit separation from all existing occupancies must be reviewed for fire resistance
rated separation and opening protectives by a Minnesota licensed engineer or architect.
e. The exterior appearance of the building shall maintain a commercial appearance. Storefront
windows shall be covered on the interior side with translucent or opaque materials that have a
commercial appearance. Deliveries to street side ground floor dwelling units shall not be
permitted on the exterior of the building.
f. There shall be no existing violations currently on file with respect to subject property, which
have not been removed or remedied to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. However,
an applicant may be required by the City Council to remove or remedy said violation as a
condition of securing a conditional use permit.
g. For each block in the Central Business District B-1 Zoning District, the maximum percentage
of commercial structures which may be converted to provide residence facilities on the same
floor as a commercial business is twenty percent (20%). For the purpose of this chapter, a
percentage greater than the above shall be construed as detrimental and threatening to the
existing character, health, safety, and welfare of the district.
h. The City Council may impose additional reasonable conditions in order to protect the intent
and purpose of this option in the Central Business District B-1.
i. All requirements, changes and conditions imposed by the City Council shall be met before
occupancy of the newly created residential unit is allowed. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.08: RESERVED:
(Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.09: RESERVED:
(Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 352/444
11.10: MANUFACTURED HOME REQUIREMENTS; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Minimum Size: Unless located in a manufactured home park, all manufactured homes used for
living purposes shall be at least twenty four feet (24') wide and at least thirty feet (30') long, and
placed on a permanent foundation.
B. Prohibited Manufactured Homes: Manufactured homes shall be prohibited that:
1. Do not conform to the requirements of chapter 1350 of the Minnesota State Rules.
2. Are in an unsanitary condition.
C. Land Area: All land areas shall be properly maintained:
1. Adequately drained.
2. Free from dust.
3. Clean and free from refuse, garbage, rubbish or debris.
D. Tents: No tents shall be erected or occupied.
E. Outdoor Camping: There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in the manufactured home park.
F. Speaker System: No public address or loudspeaker system shall be permitted.
G. Access: Access to manufactured home parks shall be as approved by the City.
H. Registry: So as to assist emergency service providers, the operator of every manufactured home
park shall maintain a registry of the manufactured home park showing:
1. The name and address of each guest or permanent resident.
2. The make, type and license number of each manufactured home and automobile.
I. Map Displayed: A map of the manufactured home park shall be displayed at the entrance to the park
and be illuminated during all hours of darkness so as to be visible by emergency service providers.
J. Consent Required: No person shall erect, place, construct, reconstruct, relocate, alter, maintain, use
or occupy a cabana or structure in a manufactured home park without the written consent of the
owner or operator of the manufactured home park.
K. Building Permit Required: All structures (fences, roads, storage space, cabana, ramada or other)
shall require a building permit.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 353/444
L. Enclosed Area Under Home: The area beneath a manufactured home shall be enclosed, except
that such enclosure must be openable for inspection.
M. Clotheslines: Laundry and clothes shall be hung out to dry only on lines located in approved areas
established and maintained exclusively for that purpose.
N. Transient Trailer Sites: No building, cabana, ramada, carport, awning, storage closet, cupboard or
other structure shall be permitted on a transient trailer site, except plumbing and electrical service
connections.
O. Central Community Building: Where manufactured home park has a central community building
with the following features:
1. Laundry drying areas and machines;
2. Laundry washing machines;
3. Showers;
4. Public toilets and lavatories;
such buildings shall have central heating and be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary
condition.
P. Site Plan Requirements:
1. Five (5) copies of a plot plan of the proposed manufactured home park shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for its consideration. Said plot plan shall be drawn to scale and showing:
a. Legal description and size in acres of the proposed manufactured home park.
b. Location and size of all manufactured home sites, dead storage areas, recreation areas,
laundry drying areas, roadways, parking sites and all setback dimensions (parking spaces,
exact manufactured home sites, etc.).
c. Detailed landscaping plans and specifications.
d. Location and width of sidewalks.
e. Plans for sanitary sewage disposal, surface drainage, water systems, electrical service and
gas service.
f. Location, size and character of each cabana and cabana site.
g. Location and size of all streets abutting the manufactured home park and all driveways from
such streets to the manufactured home park.
h. Road construction plans and specifications.
i. Plans for any and all structures.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 354/444
j. Such other information as required or implied by these manufactured home park standards or
requested by City, County and State officials.
k. Name and address of developer.
l. Description of the method of disposing of garbage and refuse.
m. Detailed description of maintenance procedures and grounds supervision.
n. Description of construction plans, (i.e., time involved, cost estimates, stage development, if
any, and so on).
Q. Design Standards:
1. Site:
a. Each manufactured home site shall contain at least four thousand (4,000) square feet of land
for the exclusive use of the occupant:
(1) Width: No less than forty feet (40').
(2) Depth: No less than one hundred feet (100').
b. Each manufactured home site shall have the following features:
(1) Frontage on an approved roadway.
(2) A sidewalk along the entire frontage with a sidewalk connecting from the manufactured
home entrance to the frontage sidewalk. Sidewalk shall be hard surfaced.
c. The corners of each manufactured home site shall be clearly marked and each site shall be
numbered.
d. The area occupied by a manufactured home shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of
the total area of a manufactured home site; land may be occupied by a trailer, a vehicle, a
building, a cabana, a ramada, a carport, an awning, storage closet or cupboard, or any
structure; unoccupied land shall be landscaped.
2. Setbacks:
a. No manufactured home shall be parked closer than five feet (5') to the side lot lines, nor
closer than twenty feet (20') to the front lot line, or within twenty five feet (25') of the rear lot
line.
b. There shall be an open space of at least ten feet (10') between the sides of adjacent
manufactured homes.
c. Automobiles may park no closer than five feet (5') to the side of any manufactured home;
automobiles shall not, however, be parked nearer than five feet (5') to any side lot line.
d. No manufactured home, off street parking space or building shall be located within twenty feet
(20') of the exterior boundary of any manufactured home park.
e. Manufactured home sites with access to public streets shall conform to all setback and other
requirements of the zoning district in which said site is located.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 355/444
f. No manufactured home shall be closer than thirty feet (30') from the exterior property lines of
any manufactured home park.
3. Parking:
a. Each manufactured home site shall have a hard surfaced off-street parking space for two (2)
automobiles.
b. Each manufactured home park shall maintain a hard surface off street parking lot for guests or
occupants in the amount of one space for each five (5) manufactured home sites.
c. All manufactured home parks must have an area or areas set aside for dead storage and
"overload" parking.
d. Access drives, off roads, to all parking spaces and manufactured home sites shall be hard
surfaced.
4. Utilities:
a. All manufactured homes shall be connected to public water and sanitary sewer system, or a
water and sewer system approved by the Minnesota Department of Health.
b. All plans for disposal of surface stormwater must be approved by the City.
c. All utility connections shall be as approved by the City.
d. The source of fuel for cooking, heating or other purposes at each manufactured home site
shall be as approved by the City.
e. All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no overhead wires or supporting poles, except
those essential for street or other lighting purposes.
f. No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities
and related manufactured home equipment.
g. The proposed method of garbage, waste and trash disposal must be as approved by the City.
5. Internal Roads And Streets:
a. Roads shall be hard surfaced as approved by the City.
b. All roads shall have a hard surfaced (mountable roll type) curb and gutter.
c. Rights-of-way shall be no less than fifty feet (50') in width.
d. All streets shall be developed as approved by the City.
6. Sidewalks:
a. There shall be a hard-surfaced sidewalk across the front of each manufactured home site and
parallel to the street. Said sidewalk shall not be less than five feet (5') wide.
7. Recreation: All manufactured home parks shall have at least ten percent (10%) of the land areas
developed for recreational use (tennis courts, children's play equipment, swimming pool, golf
greens, etc.), developed and maintained at the owner/operator's expense.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 356/444
8. Landscaping:
a. Each site shall have a front yard not less than twenty feet (20') in depth across the entire
frontage; this yard shall be landscaped, except for necessary driveway and sidewalk needs
which shall not exceed one-half (1/2) the width of the site.
b. A landscaped rear yard shall be maintained to a depth of twenty five feet (25').
c. A five foot (5') landscaped side yard (both sides) shall be maintained.
d. A compact hedge, redwood fence or landscaped area shall be installed around each
manufactured home park and be maintained in first class condition at all times as approved.
e. All areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the City
Council.
9. Lighting:
a. Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all buildings containing public
toilets, laundry equipment and the like.
b. The manufactured home park grounds shall be lighted as approved by the City from sunset to
sunrise. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.11 - 11.19: RESERVED:
11.20: REGULATION OF ADULT USES:
A. Purposes And Intent: In the development and adoption of this section, it is recognized that:
1. There are some adult use establishments which have serious objectionable operational
characteristics, particularly when located in close proximity to residential neighborhoods.
2. These establishments have a deleterious impact upon property values.
3. These establishments frequently become places of criminality.
4. It is the intent of this chapter to protect the well-being of the youth of the community from
objectionable operational characteristics of these uses by regulating and restricting their close
proximity to established facilities such as, but not limited to churches, parks, schools, and
residential areas.
5. In recognition of the protections afforded to the citizens of the United States under the First and
Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution of the United States, it is neither the intent nor the
effect of this chapter to inhibit the freedom of speech or the press. The provisions herein have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials.
6. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. This
chapter represents a balancing of the legitimate ends of the City by imposing an incidental,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 357/444
content-neutral place, time and manner of regulation of sexually-oriented entertainment to
sexually-oriented establishments without limiting alternative avenues of communication, and at
the same time, requiring the establishments to carry their financial share of the law enforcement
activities. The special regulations deemed necessary to control the undesirable effects arising
from these enterprises are set forth in this chapter.
B. Findings:
1. The Little Falls City Council, in adopting this chapter, takes legislative notice of the existence
and content of the following studies concerning the adverse secondary side effects of adult use
establishments in other communities, including but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis,
Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden
Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle,
Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas;
Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County,
Wisconsin; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Business (June 5, 1989, State of Minnesota); on findings and
recommendations in Everything You Always Wanted to Know about Regulating Sex Businesses,
American Planning Association, Planning Advisory Service Report Number 495/496, December
2000; on decisions on these cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41
(1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S.
Ct. 1382 (2000); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 111 (1972); Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501
U.S. 560 (1991); Knudtson v. City of Coates, 519 N.W.2d 166 (Minnesota 1994); S.O.B., Inc. v.
County of Benton, 371F.3d 856 (8th Cir., Minnesota 2003); Jakes, Lt., Inc., v. City of Coates, 284
F.3d 884 (8th Cir., Minnesota 2002); and Kismet Investors v. County of Benton, 617 N.W.2d 85
(Minnesota App. 2000); and the City Council's knowledge of actual conditions within the City of
Little Falls and surrounding communities.
Based on these studies, cases and other documentation, the City Council hereby finds:
a. Establishments exist, have existed, or may exist within the City and nearby communities
where the primary or dominant theme, of all or part of the business, is the presentation,
display, depiction, or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as
those terms are defined in this chapter. These establishments include, but are not limited to
those:
(1) Distinguished by an emphasis on or the promotion of dancers, entertainers, performers, or
other individuals, who perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified
anatomical areas or are presented while simulating or engaging in specified sexual
activities;
(2) Where workers dance or perform in consideration for tips, remuneration or compensation
from or on behalf of those customers, or offer, solicit or contract to do the same, and the
product, service or entertainment is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to such customers;
(3) Where straddle dancing, lap dancing, private modeling, prostitution, unlawful drug
transactions, or lewd and lascivious touching occurs between customers and workers or
performers;
(4) Where sexually oriented media are offered for sale or rental;
(5) Where sexually oriented adult toys or novelties are offered for sale.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 358/444
b. Activities exist, have existed or may exist within the City and nearby communities where
sexually oriented physical contact or escort services are offered for pecuniary gain. The
people involved in such activities engage in physical contact or touching with customers,
including acts of prostitution, or encourage or entice customers to engage in acts of lewdness.
2. Adult uses, and the establishments in which they occur, are subject to regulation by the City in
the interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the City of Little Falls.
3. The general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of this City will be promoted by enactment
of this chapter.
4. Adult use establishments lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are
presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on
their premises.
5. When adult uses are present in establishments, activities which are illegal or unhealthful tend to
accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities
include, but are not limited to prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and
lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution, and
transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent
crimes against persons and property. There is a higher correlation between incidents of crime
and adult use establishments that involve on-premises entertainment of any kind, as compared
to those that do not have on-premises entertainment. Crime statistics show that all types of
crimes, specifically sex-related crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where adult
entertainment establishments are located, see, e.g., studies of the cities of Phoenix, Arizona;
Indianapolis, Indiana; and Austin, Texas.
6. When adult uses are present within establishments they tend to attract an undesirable number
of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower real property
values, and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations.
7. Real estate professionals believe that there is a negative impact of adult use establishments on
both nearby residential and business property value. There is an inverse correlation between the
level of impact and the distance between the business and other uses. In addition, the impacts
on residential properties are greater than on non-residential properties.
8. The proximity and concentration of adult use establishments adjacent to residential,
recreational, religious, education uses, as well as proximity to other adult use establishments
can have adverse secondary effects on local establishments and residences.
9. The locational requirements established by this chapter do not unreasonably restrict the
establishment or operation of constitutionally protected adult use establishments in the City of
Little Falls, and a sufficient reasonable number of appropriate locations for adult use
establishments are provided by this chapter.
10. The City Council in adopting operational standards, recognizes that these standards do not
preclude reasonable alternative avenues of communication. The City Council takes note of the
proliferation of adult material on the internet and its availability as an alternative avenue of
communication. The City Council also considers and relies on published decisions examining
the proliferation of communications on the internet. Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union
(1997) 521 U.S. 844 (the principal channel through which many Americans now transmit and
receive sexually explicit communication is the internet); see also: Anheuser-Busch v. Schmoke,
101 F.3d 325 329 (4th Cir.1996) rejecting First Amendment challenge to Baltimore ordinance
restricting alcohol advertisements on billboards and acknowledging that the internet is an
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 359/444
available channel of communication; U.S. v. Hockings, 129 F.3rd 1069 (9th Cir. 1997); and U.S.
v. Thomas, 74 F.3rd 701 (6th Cir. 1996) (cert. denied 519 U.S. 820). The emergence of the
internet provides a virtually unlimited additional source of adult oriented sexual material available
to persons without regard to geographical boundaries. An adult business no longer needs to be
actually physically located within a community to be available to the community.
11. The City Council also finds that locational criteria alone do not adequately protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Little Falls, and thus certain
requirements with respect to the ownership and operation of adult use establishments are in the
public interest. In addition to the findings and studies conducted in other cities regarding
increases in crime rates, decreases in property values and the blighting of areas in which such
businesses are located, the City Council also takes legislative notice of the facts recited in the
case of Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (1986), regarding how live adult entertainment
results in secondary effects such as prostitution, drug dealing, and other law enforcement
problems.
12. Alcohol consumption in adult use establishments increases the likelihood of crime, illegal drug
use, and illegal sexual activity, and encourages undesirable behavior that is not in the interest of
the public health, safety and welfare. See, e.g., Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner,
Robins, 223 F.3d 1306, 1309 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993, 996
(11th Cir. 1998), cert. denied, 529 U.S. 1052, 146 L. Ed. 2d 459, 120 S. Ct. 1553 (2000).
13. The concurrence of the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages with adult uses is
hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance, depreciates the value of
adjoining real property, harms the economic welfare of the City and adversely affects the public's
interest in the quality of life in the City.
14. In order to preserve and safeguard the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
people of the City, it is necessary and advisable for the City to prohibit the sale and consumption
of alcoholic beverages at or near establishments where adult uses occur.
15. The potential dangers to health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City posed by
permitting adult use establishments to operate without first obtaining a license and securing a
conditional use permit prior to their being allowed to operate. A thorough but prompt
investigation and review of the permit will facilitate this public purpose. Suspension or revocation
of adult entertainment licenses or conditional use permits at which violations of either the
licensing ordinance or the land use ordinance occur, upon adequate proof at administrative
proceedings of the occurrence of such acts, will serve to protect the community from such
danger by deterring or ending the use of the establishment for future specified acts which are
criminal or violate this chapter. Access to prompt judicial review for denial, suspension or
revocation of a license or land use permit will protect the rights of the licensee or applicant.
16. Prohibiting adult use establishments from operating within set distances of areas zoned for
residential use, religious institutions, and parks and other areas where minors are customarily
found, will serve to protect minors from the adverse secondary impacts that accompany such
establishments.
17. Adult use establishments involve activities that are pure conduct engaged in and for the
purpose of making a profit, rather than speech or expressive activity, and therefore are subject to
regulation to protect the health, welfare and safety of the community.
18. Operators or workers of adult entertainment establishments who have the authority to direct or
control other workers at, or the operation of, an adult entertainment establishment, should be
subject to penalties for allowing violations of either the licensing ordinance or the land use
ordinance to occur. This will discourage such operators from allowing or encouraging violations
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 360/444
of these ordinances for the purpose of increasing profits at the establishment to the detriment of
the community and contrary to the purposes of these ordinances.
19. Sexual acts, including masturbation, and/or anal sex, occur at adult entertainment
establishments, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos or live sex shows. See, e.g., California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 111 (1972);
see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377.
20. Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages such activities, which creates
unhealthy conditions. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on
Pornography (1986) at 376-77.
21. Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other adult entertainment
establishments, for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such adult
entertainment establishments. See, e.g., Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 698 (1986);
see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986) at 376-77.
22. At least fifty (50) communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in adult
entertainment establishments including, but not limited to, syphilis; gonorrhea; human
immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS); genital herpes; hepatitis B; Non A, Non B
amebiasis; salmonella infections; and shigella infections. See, e.g., Study of Fort Myers, Florida.
23. Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids, including semen and urine,
are found in the areas of adult entertainment establishments where persons view "adult"
oriented films. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography
(1986) at 377.
24. Nude dancing in adult use establishments encourages prostitution, increases sexual assaults,
and attracts other criminal activity. See, e.g., Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560, 583 (1991).
25. Nude dancing in adult use establishments increases the likelihood of drug-dealing and drug
use. See, e.g., Kev, Inc. vs. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1986).
26. Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on the premises with adult
booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult use establishments.
27. The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day
operations and maintenance of the adult entertainment establishment, where such information is
substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will
aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and criminal activity.
28. When more than one adult entertainment establishment use occupies the same location or
business address, the secondary effects caused by such businesses are increased. Secondary
effects are eliminated or controlled to a greater degree when only a single adult entertainment
establishment use is allowed to occupy the same location.
C. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted
as defined in section 11.02 of this chapter.
D. License Requirement:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 361/444
1. Required; Types: No person, firm or corporation shall operate or allow the operation of an adult
use establishment on property under the person's ownership or control without a validly issued
license as required by this subsection D. The license shall be one of the following types:
a. Principal adult use; or
b. Accessory adult use.
2. Application: The applicant for an adult use license shall complete an application on a form
provided by the City. This application shall include:
a. For all applicants:
(1) The parcel number and legal description of the property where the adult use establishment
is proposed.
(2) A detailed floor plan, drawn to scale, showing the type of activities, which will be conducted
in each area of the adult use establishment, including a statement of the total floor space
occupied by the business.
(3) The proposed hours of operation.
(4) A sewage treatment system design that meets the requirements of the City of Little Falls
and the State of Minnesota.
(5) A statement of the type of adult use license (principal or accessory) being applied for.
(6) Sufficient evidence that all setback requirements in this chapter will be met. When deemed
necessary, a survey of the property and proposed uses prepared by a qualified surveyor
may be required.
(7) Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership or other form of
organization.
(8) The name and street address of the business. If the business is to be conducted under a
designated name or style other than the name of the applicant, a certified copy of the
certificate required by Minnesota Statutes 333.01, as amended from time to time, shall be
submitted.
(9) Whether the applicant has had a previous adult use establishment license suspended or
revoked.
b. If the applicant is a natural person:
(1) The name, place and date of birth, street, city and mailing address, and phone number of
the applicant.
(2) Whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by a name other than the
applicant's name, and if so, the name or names used and information concerning dates and
places where used.
(3) The street and city addresses at which the applicant has lived during the preceding two (2)
years.
(4) The type, name and location of every business or occupation in which the applicant has
been engaged during the preceding two (2) years and name(s) and address(es) of the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 362/444
applicant's employer(s) and partner(s), if any for the preceding two (2) years.
(5) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gross misdemeanor or felony relating
to sex offenses, obscenity offenses, or adult use establishments.
c. If the applicant is a partnership:
(1) The name(s) and address(es) of the partnership, the name(s) and address(es) of all
partners and all of the information concerning each partner that is required of applicants in
this subsection D.
(2) Whether the partnership is general or limited.
(3) A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application. If the
partnership is required to file a certificate as to a trade name pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
333.01, as amended from time to time, a certified copy of the certificate shall be attached to
the application.
d. If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:
(1) The name of the corporation or business form, and if incorporated, the date and state of
incorporation.
(2) A true copy of the Certificate of Incorporation, Articles of Incorporation or Association
Agreement and Bylaws shall be attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign
corporation, a Certificate of Authority as required by Minnesota Statutes 303.06, as
amended from time to time, shall be attached. If the entity is a limited liability company, then
true and accurate copies of the Articles of Organization and any membership agreements
shall be attached to the application.
(3) The name of the manager(s), proprietor(s), or other agent(s) in charge of the business and
all of the information concerning each manager, proprietor or agent that is required of the
applicants in this subsection D.
(4) Accurate and complete business records, showing the names, addresses and dates of
birth of all officers, directors and controlling stockholders for the business.
(5) The name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for
service of process.
3. License Issuance, Expiration, Renewal, Suspension And Revocation:
a. License Eligibility:
(1) An applicant may qualify for a license:
(A) If they are at least twenty one (21) years of age; and
(B) If they are not overdue in payments to a city, county, state or Federal government of
taxes, fees, fines or penalties or charges for Municipal services and utilities assessed
against them or imposed upon them; and
(C) If they have not been convicted of a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or felony relating
to sex offenses, obscenity or adult use establishment; and
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 363/444
(D) If they are not an owner of five percent (5%) or more of a business entity which has
been convicted of a misdemeanor, gross misdemeanor or felony relating to sex offenses,
obscenity offenses, or adult use establishments; and
(E) If more than one year has elapsed in the case of a previous license revocation; and
(F) If more than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of
release from confinement, whichever is later, in the case of a misdemeanor or gross
misdemeanor offense; and
(G) If more than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date
of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is later, in the case of a felony
offense; and
(H) If more than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date
of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is later, if the conviction is
of two (2) or more misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor or gross misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
b. License Issuance:
(1) The City shall investigate all facts set out in the application. Each owner of the
establishment be it individual, or in the case of business entity owner, any owner of five
percent (5%) or more of the business entity, shall be subjected to a criminal history
background check by the Little Falls Police Chief or his designee. Costs of the criminal
history investigations shall be borne by the applicant according to the fee schedule
established by the City Council.
(2) The application for the adult use establishment license shall not be considered complete
until all required information has been furnished, the investigation has been completed by
the Police Chief, and a report provided to the City Administrator by the applicant.
(3) The City Council shall hold a public hearing with notification equivalent to that required for
a conditional use permit within thirty (30) days after receiving a complete application. At the
hearing opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard relating to the granting of the
license. The City Council shall grant or deny said adult use establishment licenses within
thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the hearing.
(A) Denial: The City will issue a license to an applicant unless one or more of the following
conditions exist:
(i) The applicant has not met the eligibility requirements as noted in this chapter;
(ii) The applicant failed to supply all of the information required on the license application;
(iii) The applicant gives false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the license
application;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 364/444
(iv) The adult use establishment is not in full compliance with this Code and all provisions
of County, State and Federal law;
(v) The applicant has not paid the required license fee;
(vi) The applicant has been denied a license by the City or any other Minnesota Municipal
corporation to operate an adult use establishment or such license has been suspended
or revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months;
(vii) The applicant is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
issued; or
(viii) The adult use establishment owner or operator holds an intoxicating liquor, beer or
wine license applicable to the premises.
(B) Expiration And Renewal:
(i) An adult use establishment license expires on December 31 of each calendar year.
(ii) A licensee may renew a license by completing an application as required for a new
license. The applicant will be allowed to continue business until the City has determined
whether the applicant meets the criteria for renewal of the license. If the City denies the
renewal, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
c. Suspension:
(1) The City may suspend a license beginning on January 1 if the licensee fails to make
application for renewal of the license. The suspension shall remain in effect until such time
as the applicant has made application and the license has been approved by the City, or
until the license has been revoked in accordance with this chapter;
(2) The City may suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if it determines
that the licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(A) Violated or is not in compliance with any provisions of this chapter;
(B) Allowed or engaged in the sale or use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult use
establishment premises other than at an adult hotel or motel;
(C) Refused to allow an inspection of the adult use establishment as authorized by this
chapter;
(D) Knowingly permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the adult use establishment
premises;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 365/444
A suspension by the City shall be preceded by written notice to the licensee and, except
in the case of failure to make application for renewal, a public hearing. The notice shall
give at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the
nature of the alleged violations of the licensee or their employee. The notice may be
served upon the licensee personally or by leaving the same at the licensed business
premises with the person in charge thereof, or by mailing the notice by United States mail
to the last known address of the owner or agent authorized to receive legal notices for the
business as listed on its license application.
d. Revocation:
(1) The City may revoke a license if:
(A) A licensee fails to make application for renewal of the license by February 28 of the year
after the previous license has expired;
(B) A cause of suspension occurs and the license has been suspended at least once before
within the preceding twelve (12) months;
(C) It determines that:
(i) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the City
during the application process;
(ii) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(iii) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(iv) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in this subsection D3 for which the
time period required has not elapsed; or
(v) Except in the case of an adult hotel or motel, a licensee or an employee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur
in or on the licensed premises.
(2) The fact that a conviction for an offense listed in this chapter, is being appealed shall have
no effect on the revocation of the licensee.
(3) When the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the
licensee shall not be issued an adult use establishment license for one year from the date
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City finds that the basis for
the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the
license is revoked due to a criminal conviction under this subsection D3, an applicant may
not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under this
subsection D3 has elapsed.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 366/444
e. Procedures For Appeal: Nonrenewals, suspensions and revocations of an adult use
establishment license are governed by the following:
(1) In the event that the City proposed to not renew, to suspend or to revoke a license, the City
will notify the licensee in writing of the basis for the action. The City will hold a hearing for
the purpose of determining whether to not renew, to suspend or to revoke the license,
except in the case of failure to apply for renewal of the license by February 28 following the
date the license expires. The hearing must be within thirty (30) days of the date of the
notice. The City Council must determine whether to not review, to suspend or to revoke a
license within thirty (30) days after the close of the hearing or within sixty (60) days of the
date of the notice, whichever is sooner. The City must notify the licensee of its decisions
within that period.
(2) If the City determines to suspend or revoke a license, the suspension or revocation is not
effective until fifteen (15) days after notification of the decision to the licensee. If, within
fifteen (15) days, the licensee files and serves an action in State or Federal court
challenging the City's action the suspension or revocation is stayed until the conclusion of
such action.
(3) If the City Council determines not to renew a license, the licensee may continue its
business for fifteen (15) days after receiving notice of such nonrenewal, if the licensee files
and serves an action in State or Federal court within the fifteen (15) days for the purpose of
determining whether the City acted properly, the licensee may continue in business until the
conclusion of the action.
(4) After denial of an application or a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of
any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
f. Inspection:
(1) An applicant or licensee shall permit health officials, representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Department and building inspector, to inspect the premises of an adult use
establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied
or open for business. The licensee is at all times responsible for the conduct, activity and
operation of the business.
(2) Refusal to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by health officials, representatives of
the Police Department, Fire Department and building inspector, to inspect the premises of
an adult use establishment for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time
it is occupied or open for business is a violation of this chapter. Refusal to permit
inspections may result in nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of the license.
(3) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult hotel or motel that are
currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.
Temporary habitation is defined as a period of time at least twelve (12) hours.
g. Transfer Of License: A licensee shall not transfer this license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate an adult use establishment under the authority of a license at any place other than the
address designated in the application.
h. Changes In Design Or Use:
(1) If an applicant makes any changes in the proposed design or use of the property, or any
other changes to the information submitted in the application, before a license is issued, the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 367/444
applicant shall submit the proposed changes in writing to the City.
(2) If an adult use licensee proposes changes in the design, construction or use of an already
permitted adult use, the license holder must submit to the City of Little Falls a detailed
description of the proposed change in writing and no change can be made unless and until
the City issues a written opinion that the change complies to all requirements of this chapter.
i. Granting Of Permit:
(1) The City shall issue a license only to the owner of the real property or to an applicant who
has express written permission from the owner to use the land for an adult use.
(2) An adult use license shall be valid only for the specific building and type of use described
in the application.
(3) Adult uses are subject to the location restrictions, performance standards, and conditions
listed in this chapter.
(4) The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person or entity to whom it is
granted, the expiration date, and the address of the adult use establishment. The license
must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult use
establishment.
(5) The licensee must keep itemized written records of all transactions involving the sale,
rental or loan of any items or merchandise for at least twelve (12) months after the
transaction. At a minimum those records must describe the date of the transaction, a
description of the transaction, the purchase or rental price, and a detailed description of the
item or merchandise that is being purchased or rented. These written records must be
provided to the City or to law enforcement upon request.
j. Responsibility To Obtain Other Permits/Licenses: The granting of any permit or license
pursuant to requirements of this chapter, or other applicable City of Little Falls ordinances,
shall not relieve applicants of their responsibility to obtain any required County, State and
Federal permits and/or licenses.
E. License Fees: Each application for an adult use license shall be accompanied by the required fee.
All fees shall be paid at the time of application.
The annual license fee for adult use establishment is set annually by the City Council by resolution.
If eight (8) months of any licensing year have elapsed when an application is made, the fee shall
be reduced to one-half (1/2) of the regular amount. The fee is nonrefundable.
F. Location Restrictions: The City may issue an adult use license to businesses, subject to the
following conditions:
1. General Prohibitions:
a. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statutes, section 617.241, as
amended from time to time, or successor statutes, are not permitted and are prohibited.
b. No principal adult use shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other person to
engage in any activity or conduct in or about the adult use establishment that is prohibited by
any applicable ordinance of the City of Little Falls, Morrison County, the laws of the State of
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 368/444
Minnesota or the United States of America. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing or permitting conduct that is prohibited or regulated by other statutes or ordinance
prohibiting the exhibition, sale or distribution of obscene materials generally, or the exhibition,
sale or distribution of specified materials to minors.
c. No principal adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the perception of
observation from any property not containing a licensed adult use establishment of any
materials depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" by any visual or auditory media, including display, decoration, sign, show
window, sound transmission or other means.
d. A building owner or operator may not have more than one adult use present in the same
building or structure.
2. Location Restrictions:
a. All Adult Use Establishments (Principal Or Accessory):
(1) Adult use establishments may only be located in business or industrial zoned districts.
(2) Adult uses shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival,
theatrical or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors
are permitted or where such activity would reasonably be visible by minors.
b. Principal Adult Use:
(1) A principal adult use shall be set back a minimum of one thousand seven hundred feet
(1,700') from the following land uses:
(A) Any other principal adult use or accessory adult use;
(B) Church;
(C) School;
(D) Public library;
(E) Public park;
(F) Pool hall, video arcade or other entertainment facility open to minors;
(G) Hotel or motel;
(H) Licensed daycare/child care home or center;
(I) Licensed group family daycare home or center; or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 369/444
(J) Any building that contains a business that sells or dispenses nonintoxicating or
intoxicating liquors or holds a consumption and display permit.
c. Accessory Adult Use: An accessory adult use shall meet the same setback as is required for
structures within the applicable zoning district.
If such setbacks effectively eliminate all areas within the City to locate an adult use
establishment, the City shall reduce the required setback only so much as is necessary to
reasonably allow for the use and may require fencing, screening or other conditions of the
approval as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In no case
shall the setback be reduced to less than what is required for a structure in the relevant zoning
district, without application for and approval of a variance.
Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to township, City or County
boundaries, intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point of the building or
structure used as a part of the premises where a principal adult use or accessory adult use is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of the uses listed.
3. Liquor:
a. A principal adult use shall not sell or dispense nonintoxicating liquors or hold a consumption
and display permit, as those terms are defined in Minnesota Statutes 340A, nor shall an adult
use be located in a building that contains a business that sells or dispenses nonintoxicating or
intoxicating liquors or holds a consumption and display permit.
b. A principal adult use shall not allow the consumption of nonintoxicating or intoxicating liquors
anywhere on a parcel containing that use or business.
4. Building And Property Standards:
a. Lighting: All parking lots and exterior business premises shall be lit in such a way so that they
are visible to law enforcement without the aid of flashlights and/or spotlights.
b. Entrances: All entrances to a principal adult use, with the exception of emergency fire exits
that are not useable by patrons to enter the business, shall be visible from a public right-ofway.
G. Hours Of Operation: Principal adult uses shall not be open at any time on Sunday nor between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on the days of Monday
through Saturday.
H. Adult Cabarets: The following additional conditions apply to adult cabarets:
1. No dancers, live entertainer, performer or patron shall be under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. All dancing or live entertainment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose and which is
raised at least two feet (2') from the level of the floor.
3. No dancer, live entertainers or performer shall perform or dance closer than ten feet (10') from
any patron unless such dancer or performer is enclosed behind a floor to ceiling glass or other
partition.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 370/444
4. No dancer or performer shall fondle, caress or touch any patron and no patron shall fondle,
caress or touch any dancer or performer.
5. An adult cabaret shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses
and ages of all persons engaged, hired or employed as dancers or performers by a licensee.
I. Viewing Booths: The following additional regulations apply to viewing booths:
1. Individual motion picture viewing booths must be without doors and the occupant must be visible
at all times.
2. Only one person may be in a viewing booth at a time.
3. Walls separating booths must be such that the occupants cannot engage in sexual activity.
4. Each booth must be kept clean and sanitary.
5. The booths shall be adequately lit such that the occupant is visible at all times.
J. Nudity Prohibited: No person may be nude on the premises of any adult use establishment.
K. Sign Restrictions: Signs identifying or advertising adult use establishments must comply with the
following restrictions:
1. Signs shall be limited to the size, number of signs and other performance standards that are
permitted in the district in which the use is located.
2. No photos, pictures, digital representations or visual depictions of any person, product, device or
service relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" shall be displayed
on any sign.
3. No merchandise, photos, illustrations, representations or pictures of the sexually oriented
products, activities or entertainment offered on the premises of the adult use may be displayed
in an area where such items can be viewed from a sidewalk, public right-of-way or any building
or structure adjoining or adjacent to the adult use establishment.
L. Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be subject to the penalties for a misdemeanor as prescribed by State law.
Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate misdemeanor offense punishable
by a separate misdemeanor penalty. The City may also enforce any provision of this chapter by
mandamus injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.21 - 11.29: RESERVED:
11.30: COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS:
A. Purpose And Intent:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 371/444
1. The Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996
(the "new Act"), governs the construction, placement and modification of personal wireless
facilities.
2. Consistent with the Act, the general purpose of this section is to manage the placement,
construction and modification of telecommunications towers and related facilities in order to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while not unreasonably interfering with the
development of the competitive wireless communications marketplace in the City.
3. In furtherance of the goals of the City and within the framework of the Act and State law, the City
will give due consideration to the City Comprehensive Plan, zoning districts, existing land uses
and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
Specifically, the purposes of this section are to:
a. Accommodate the communication needs of the residents and businesses.
b. Facilitate the provision of wireless communication facilities through careful siting and design
standards.
c. Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications towers and facilities through design,
siting, landscaping and innovation camouflaging techniques.
d. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from the construction and operation of wireless
communications facilities through structural standards and setback requirements and ensuring
that those structures are promptly and safely removed when no longer used or when
determined to be structurally unsound.
e. Maximize the use of existing and approved towers, buildings or structures to accommodate
new wireless communications antennas to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the
industry.
B. General Requirements:
1. All towers and antennas shall comply with all Federal Communications Commission and Federal
Aviation Administration rules and regulations.
2. Design and installation of all towers and antennas shall comply with the manufacturer's
specifications and with ANS/TIA/EIA standards. Plans shall be designed, stamped and signed by
a State licensed professional engineer.
3. Installation of all towers and antennas shall comply with all applicable State and local Building
and Electrical Codes.
4. For leased sites, written authorization for locating the wireless communication facilities from the
property owner (fee title holder), must be provided as set forth in subsection G of this section.
5. All wireless communication facilities must be adequately insured for injury and property damage.
Proof of insurance with the City of Little Falls named as an additional insured shall be provided.
6. All communication towers shall require a building permit before construction is allowed in any
zoning district, and shall be anchored in a stationary position. Manufacturer's specifications for
the antenna and supporting structure shall be attached to the building permit application.
7. Proposals to erect new towers and antennas shall be accompanied by any required Federal,
State or local agency licenses or applications for such licenses.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 372/444
8. Only one tower is permitted on a parcel of land. Additional towers may be permitted with a
conditional use permit if the additional tower is located within two hundred feet (200') of the
existing tower and all other requirements of this chapter are met.
9. Tower designs are required to be an open framework or monopole configuration without the use
of guy wires. The use of guy wires is prohibited in the design of new towers. Permanent
platforms or structures, exclusive of antennas that serve to increase off site visibility, are
prohibited.
C. Prohibitions:
1. No tower shall be over two hundred feet (200') in height.
2. All towers that exceed forty feet (40') in height shall stay a minimum of six hundred feet (600')
from all residentially zoned property lines and public parks.
3. No advertising message or sign shall be affixed to any tower or antenna.
4. Towers and antennas shall not be artificially illuminated unless required by Federal
Communications Commission or Federal Aviation Administration regulations.
5. No part of any tower, antenna or other components shall extend across or over any right-of-way,
public street, highway, sidewalk or property.
6. No part of any tower, antenna or other components shall extend beyond the fence enclosure as
required under subsection F6 of this section.
7. No temporary mobile communications sites are permitted, except in the case of equipment
failure, equipment testing, equipment replacement, or in the case of an emergency situation
authorized by the City Council or their designated representative.
D. District Requirements, Placement, Setbacks And Height:
1. Residential Districts:
a. Placement: Communications towers such as television antennas, HAM radio towers, etc.,
shall be situated in the rear or side yard without encroaching on the front yard area.
b. Setbacks: Minimum setbacks of a tower from any lot line shall be ten feet (10'). If a tower
and/or antenna are not rigidly attached to a building, then the minimum setback shall be equal
to the height of the tower and/or antenna. However, if a tower and antenna are rigidly attached
to a building and the tower base is on the ground, the minimum setback may be equal to the
distance from the highest point of attachment to the top of the tower and/or antenna.
c. Tower Height: The maximum height of the tower and/or antenna shall be forty feet (40') from
average grade around the principal structures, or twenty feet (20') above the roof ridgeline of
the principal structure on said lot. There shall be no more than one communication tower per
parcel.
2. Business Districts:
a. Placement: Towers erected in business districts shall require a conditional use permit and be
situated in rear and side yards, without encroachment into front yard areas.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 373/444
b. Setbacks:
(1) Towers shall meet the principal structure setbacks of the underlying zoning district.
Setbacks from the property line and public rights-of-way to base perimeter of the tower shall
be one hundred twenty five percent (125%) or greater of the tower and/or antenna height.
This setback may be reduced if the tower is designed to collapse half the distance of the
total height of the tower through engineered design, then the tower setback will be one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of half the tower and/or antenna height to the property
line and/or public rights-of-way and planned public rights-of-way. The applicant must submit
a report stamped by a State licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Minnesota that certifies that the tower is designed and engineered to collapse half the
height of the tower upon failure, if the reduction of the setback is applied. Setback
requirements may be reduced to property lines abutting property that cannot be developed
due to the presence of wetlands or similar limitations by variance, if the intent of this
subsection would be better served thereby.
(2) Towers shall not encroach any easements. Towers shall not be located closer to a public
street than a principal structure, with the following exceptions: a) on sites adjacent to public
streets on all sides, towers may be placed within a side yard abutting a local street; b)
setback distances shall be measured starting from the base of the tower located nearest the
property line; and c) a tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public
street varied, at the sole discretion of the City Council, to allow the integration of a tower
onto an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line
support device, or similar structure.
c. Tower Height: The maximum height, including antenna height, shall be one hundred feet
(100') from the ground level. No tower height shall exceed the distance from the base of the
tower to the nearest overhead electrical power line. This setback may be reduced to one-half
(1/2) the height of the tower if the applicant submits a report stamped by a State licensed
professional engineer that certifies that the tower is designed and engineered to collapse upon
failure within the distance from the tower to the overhead electrical power line.
3. Industrial Zones:
a. Placement: Towers erected in the Industrial District shall require a conditional use permit and
be situated in rear and side yards, without encroachment into front yard areas.
b. Setbacks:
(1) Towers shall meet the principal structure setbacks of the underlying zoning district.
Setbacks from the property line and public rights-of-way to base perimeter of the tower shall
be one hundred twenty five percent (125%) or greater of the tower and/or antenna height.
This setback may be reduced if the tower is designed to collapse half of the distance of the
total height of the tower through engineered design, then the tower setback will be one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of half the tower and/or antenna height to the property
line and/or public rights-of-way and planned public rights-of-way. The applicant must submit
a report stamped by a State licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Minnesota that certifies that the tower is designed and engineered to collapse half the
height of the tower upon failure, if the reduction of the setback is applied. Setback
requirements may be reduced to property lines abutting property that cannot be developed
due to the presence of wetlands or similar limitations by variance, if the intent of this
subsection would be better served thereby.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 374/444
(2) Towers shall not encroach upon any easements. Towers shall not be located closer to a
public street than a principal structure with the following exceptions: a) on sites adjacent to
public streets on all sides, towers may be placed within a side yard abutting a local street; b)
setback distances shall be measured starting from the base of the tower located nearest the
property lines; and c) a tower's setback may be reduced or its location in relation to a public
street varied, at the sole discretion of the City Council to allow the integration of a tower
onto an existing or proposed structure such as a church steeple, light standard, power line
support device or similar structure.
c. Tower Height: Maximum tower height shall be two hundred feet (200') in industrial zoned
areas. No tower height shall exceed the distance from the base of the tower to the nearest
overhead electrical power line. This setback may be reduced to one-half (1/2) the height of the
tower if the applicant submits a report stamped by a State licensed professional engineer that
certifies that the tower is designed and engineered to collapse upon failure within the distance
from the tower to the overhead electrical power line.
4. Historical District: All communication towers in or near historic preservation landmarks and
districts and in or near potential historic preservation landmarks and districts shall be reviewed
for approval by the City's Heritage Preservation Commission and the Minnesota State Historical
Society prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit.
E. Construction Requirements:
1. Structural Standards And Wind Loading:
a. Residential Districts: Support structures taller than thirty five feet (35') shall be mounted in
concrete and designed to withstand a wind velocity of at least seventy (70) miles per hour.
b. Business And Industrial Districts: Each tower shall be designed and built to withstand an
eighty (80) mile per hour baseline wind speed with a minimum of one-half inch (1/2") radial ice.
If industry standards increase these requirements, all new or rebuilt towers shall conform to
the new standards.
c. Towers: Tower designs shall conform to the latest structural standards and wind loading
requirements of the most current Minnesota State Building Code. Support structures shall be
grounded following manufacturer's specifications for grounds. Towers and antennas shall be
designed to conform to accepted electrical engineering methods and practices and to comply
with the most current provisions of the National Electrical Code. All towers shall be
constructed to conform to the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA). Metal towers shall be constructed of or treated with corrosive resistant
material. Wood poles shall be impregnated with decay resistant substances.
2. Antennas Mounted On Roofs, Walls And Existing Towers: The placement of a tower or antenna
on roofs, walls and existing towers may be approved by building permit issuance, provided the
towers or antennas meet the requirements of this chapter, after submittal of: a) a final site and
building plan; and b) a report prepared by a State licensed professional engineer indicating that
the existing structure or tower's suitability to accept the antenna, and the proposed method of
affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete details of all fixtures and couplings, and the
precise point of attachment shall be indicated.
F. General Standards And Design Requirements:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 375/444
1. Colocation: A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall not
be approved unless the City Council or their designated representative finds that the
telecommunication equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an
existing or approved tower within a one mile search radius (1/2 mile for towers under 200 feet in
height, 1/4 mile for towers under 80 feet in height) of the proposed tower due to one or more of
the following reasons:
a. Structural Capacity: The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a State licensed professional
engineer, and the existing or approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified or replaced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
b. Interference: The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as documented by a
qualified and State licensed professional engineer, and the interference cannot be prevented
at a reasonable cost.
c. Height: Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function reasonably as
documented by a qualified and State licensed professional engineer to serve commercial and
residential needs in the City corporate boundaries.
d. Other Unforeseen Reasons: Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
planned telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
e. Additional Users: Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall
be designed structurally, electrically, and all respects, to accommodate both the applicant's
antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users if the tower is over
one hundred feet (100') in height, or for at least one additional user if the tower is over sixty
feet (60') in height. Towers must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas
upon the tower. The additional users shall be allowed to mount antennas upon the tower. The
additional users shall be allowed to mount antennas of varying heights when the design is
approved. Applicants for future antennas cannot be denied space on an existing tower unless
mechanical, structural and regulatory factors prevent sharing. The tower owner and his or her
successors shall allow the shared use of the tower if the additional users agree in writing to
meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
2. Tower And Antenna Design Requirements:
a. Location And Design: Communication towers shall be located and designed to reduce the
visual impact from adjacent properties at street level from public streets through the hue of
color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated
by Federal and State authorities such as the Federal Aviation Administration.
b. Installation: Tower installation shall be designed to be compatible with the underlying site plan.
The base of the tower and any accessory structures shall be landscaped. Accessory
structures will be designed to be architecturally compatible with the principal structures on the
site.
c. Alternative Design: The towers shall be freestanding and commercial wireless
communications towers in business and residential zones shall be of monopole design, unless
the City Council or their designated representative determines that an alternative design would
be acceptable and blend with the surrounding environment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 376/444
3. Lighting: Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights,
unless the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communications Commission or other
Federal or State authority for the particular tower specifically requires such lighting. When
incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ballfield,
parking lots or similar areas may be attached to the tower.
4. Signs And Advertising: The use of any portion of a tower for signs, other than warning
equipment signs, is prohibited. No advertising messages or identification shall be placed on the
tower, antennas or other attachments, unless the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal
Communications Commission requires such messaging or identification.
5. Accessory Utility Buildings:
a. Use: Accessory structures shall enclose transmission equipment, power equipment or any
equipment located on the ground near the tower.
b. Design Setbacks: All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the
minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
6. Security Fencing:
a. Unauthorized Access: All towers shall be reasonably protected against unauthorized access.
The bottom of the tower from ground level to twelve feet (12') aboveground shall be designed
to preclude unauthorized climbing. The area on which the commercial use antenna tower is
located shall have a minimum six foot (6') high chain link fence with locked gate.
b. Security Lighting: Security lighting for on ground facilities and equipment is permitted as long
as it is down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site.
c. Signs: Signs shall be mounted on the fenced enclosure and on or adjacent to the gate
prohibiting entry without authorization, warning of the danger from electrical equipment and/or
unauthorized climbing of the tower, and identifying the leaseholder of the tower, and telephone
number for contact in case of emergency.
7. Screening And Landscaping:
a. Tower Locations: Tower locations should provide the maximum amount of screening possible
for off-site view of the facility.
b. Existing Vegetation: Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
c. Accessory Buildings; Ground Mounted Equipment: Accessory utility buildings and ground
mounted equipment shall be screened from view from abutting rights-of-way and from abutting
residentially zoned property by suitable vegetation at least five feet (5') in height, except where
a design of nonvegetative screen better reflects and complements the architectural character
of the surrounding area.
8. Existing Antennas And Towers: Antennas and towers existing as of the effective date hereof,
which do not conform to or comply with this chapter, may be continued, including through repair,
replacement, maintenance or improvement, but not including expansion, unless: a) the
nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or b) any
nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than fifty percent
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 377/444
(50%) of its market value, and no building permit has been applied for within one hundred eighty
(180) days of when the property is damaged.
9. Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Portion Of Towers:
a. Obsolete, Unused Towers:
(1) Removal Required; Nuisance Declared: All obsolete or unused towers and accompanying
accessory facilities shall be removed within six (6) months of the cessation of the operations
at the site, unless a time extension is approved by the City Council. If a time extension is not
approved, the tower may be deemed hazardous, substandard and/or a nuisance pursuant
to Minnesota Statutes 463.15, 561.01 through 561.03, 429.101, and applicable City
ordinances. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original condition
or to an improved condition, and anchoring elements shall be removed from the average
finish grade to a minimum of three feet (3') below ground level. The existence of the
remaining footing elements, if not removed, shall be disclosed and evidenced on the deed
recorded at the Morrison County Recorder's Office. If removal and/or restoration are not
completed within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the six (6) month period specified
herein, the City is authorized to complete the removal and site restorations, and the costs
shall be assessed against the property as a special assessment.
(2) Abatement By City: In the event a tower is determined to be a nuisance, the City may act
to abate such nuisance and require removal of the tower at the leaseholder's or property
owner's expense.
b. Notice Of Intent To Cease Operations:
(1) Notice Required: The leaseholder shall provide the City with a copy of the notice and date
of the Federal Communications Commission's intent to cease operations and shall be given
six (6) months from the date of ceasing operations to remove the obsolete tower and all
accessory structures.
(2) Multiple Users: In the case of multiple operators sharing the use of a single tower, this
provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations for a period of six (6)
months.
(3) Ground Equipment: The equipment on the ground is not to be removed until the tower
structure has first been dismantled.
(4) Restoration Of Site: After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original
or an improved state.
G. Permit Required:
1. Construction, Installation: The construction or installation of any wireless communications facility
requires a building and/or conditional use permit under this chapter.
2. Building Permits: Use and facilities permitted under this subsection may be authorized by the
City Council or their designated representative upon the submittal and approval of a properly
completed application for a building permit. Construction must be initiated within one hundred
eighty (180) days of approval.
3. Conditional Use Permits: Use and facilities requiring a conditional use permit under this
subsection shall be considered by the City Council or their designated representative upon
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 378/444
submittal and approval of the properly completed application and conditional use permit being
paid.
4. Applications: In addition to the application requirements, all applications for building permits or
conditional use permits for new wireless communications facilities shall include the following
information:
a. Professional Report: A report stamped by a State licensed professional engineer and other
professionals which: 1) certifies that a detailed engineering soils report has been completed
and that the design of the tower foundation is based on that report; 2) describes the tower
height and design, including a cross section, elevation and foundation design; 3) certifies that
facility's compliance with structural and electrical standards; 4) describes the tower's capacity,
including the potential number and type of antennas that it can accommodate; 5) identifies the
location of all sites that were considered as possible alternatives to the site applied for; 6)
describes the lighting and/or painting to be placed on the tower if required by the Federal
Communications Commission or Federal Aviation Administration; 7) certifies that the applicant
or tenant has a valid license from the Federal Communications Commission to operate the
proposed facilities and identifies both the class of the license and the license holders; and 8)
describes how the requirements and standards of this chapter will be met by the proposed
facilities.
b. Landowner Acknowledgement: Written acknowledgement by the landowner (fee title holder) is
needed, of a leased site that he/she will abide by all applicable terms and reclamation
requirements of this subsection. Such acknowledgement shall be applicable to all future
landowners (fee title holders).
c. Facility Plan: Each applicant shall include a facility plan. The City will maintain an inventory of
all existing and proposed wireless communications site installations and all providers shall
provide the following information in each plan (the plan must be updated with each submittal
as necessary): 1) written description of the type of consumer services each provider will
provide to its customers (cellular, PCS, SMR, ESMR, paging or other anticipated wireless
communications services); 2) provide a list of all existing sites, existing sites to be upgraded or
replaced, and proposed cell sites within the City and within ten (10) miles of the City for these
services to be provided; and 3) provide a map of the City and within ten (10) miles of the City
which shows the geographic service areas of the existing and proposed cell sites.
d. Additional Information And Analysis:
(1) A copy of all required Federal, State or local agency licenses and/or compliance approvals
shall be submitted with the permit application. The City Council or their designated
representative may, at their discretion, require visual impact demonstrations including mockups
and/or photographic images, screening plans, network maps, alternate site analysis,
lists of other nearby wireless communications facilities or facility design alternatives for the
proposed facilities.
(2) The City Council or their designated representative may employ, on behalf of the City, an
independent technical expert to review technical materials submitted by the applicant or to
prepare any technical materials required but not submitted by the applicant. The applicant
shall pay the reasonable costs of such review and/or independent analysis.
e. Expiration Of Permit: A building permit for a telecommunications facility shall expire six (6)
months after issuance, if the tower and/or supporting facilities have not been erected. An
extension of time, not to exceed six (6) months per request, may be granted by the City
Council or their designated representative, due to unforeseen or extenuating circumstances.
No fee will be charged for an extension.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 379/444
f. Denial In Writing: Denial of an application for a permit shall be in writing.
H. Additional Requirements:
1. Structural Inspections:
a. The City may conduct inspections at any time upon reasonable notice to the property owner
and the tower owner for the purpose of determining if it complies with the Minnesota Building
Code and other construction standards provided for in this Code, and Federal and State laws.
The City's expense related to such inspection may be borne by the tower owner or property
owner. Based upon the results of an inspection, the City Council or their designated
representative may require repair, modification or removal of a tower.
b. Deviation from original construction for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of
this subsection.
c. Notice of violation will be sent by postal mail to the owner and the owner will have thirty (30)
days from the date the notification is issued to make repairs.
2. Radiation Emission Inspections: The owner of a telecommunications facility shall provide the
City current, technical evidence of compliance with Federal Communications Commission
radiation emissions requirements at the City's reasonable request.
3. Maintenance: Towers and telecommunications facilities must be maintained in accordance with
the following provisions:
a. Tower owners must employ ordinary and reasonable care in construction and use commonly
accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause
damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.
b. Tower owners must install and maintain towers, telecommunications facilities, wires, cables,
fixtures and other equipment in compliance with the requirements of the National Electrical
Code and all Federal Communications Commission, State and local regulations, and in such a
manner that they will not interfere with the use of other property.
c. Towers, telecommunications facilities and antenna support structures must be kept and
maintained in good condition, order and repair.
d. Maintenance or construction on a tower, telecommunications facilities or antenna support
structure must be performed by qualified maintenance and construction personnel.
e. All tenants on towers must comply with radio frequency emissions standards of the Federal
Communications Commission. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.31: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS:
A. Purpose And Intent:
1. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the installation and operation of wind
energy conversion systems within the City not otherwise subject to regulation and oversight by
the State, to:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 380/444
a. Facilitate the provision of wind energy conversion systems (WECS) and meteorological
towers (MET) in locations and circumstances under which the use may be established without
detriment to the public health, safety and general welfare of neighboring property owners or
occupants; and
b. Minimize adverse visual impacts of these systems through careful design, siting and
landscaping standards; and
c. Ensure that these systems are promptly and safely removed when no longer used or when
determined to be structurally unsound.
2. The City will give due consideration to the City Comprehensive Plan, zoning districts, existing
land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas when considering approval for the location of
these systems. Permitting is subject to the regulations and requirements of this section and
other provisions of this Code, provided the property upon which the system is to be located is at
least two and one-half (21/2) acres in size. No person shall construct or operate a wind energy
conversion system without having fully complied with the provisions of this section.
B. District Regulations: Wind energy conversion systems and meteorological tower systems shall be
considered as an accessory use and may be allowed as a permitted, temporary or conditional use,
or not permitted based on the generating capacity and/or zoning district as established in the table
below, subject to the requirements of this section and other provisions of this Code. Minimum lot
size for locating a wind energy conversion and meteorological tower is two and one-half (21/2)
acres.
P = Permitted C = Conditional use permit
PTU = Permitted temporary use NP = Not permitted
Zoning District
NCWES
(10 - 40 kW)
CWECS
(40 - 100 kW) MET
R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 NP NP NP
R-1C NP NP NP
B-1 and B-2 C NP PTU1
I-1 P C PTU1
Note:
1. Temporary use up to 18 months.
C. General Requirements:
1. All wind energy conversion systems facilities shall comply with all Federal and State regulatory
standards, rules and regulations, including the Federal Communications Commissions, Federal
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 381/444
Aviation Administration, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and the Minnesota Department of
Transportation.
2. All wind energy conversion systems facilities shall be designed, stamped and signed by a State
licensed professional engineer.
3. All wind energy conversion systems facilities shall comply with all applicable State and local
Building and Electrical Codes.
4. All wind energy conversion systems facilities shall require a building permit prior to construction
in any zoning district. Towers shall be anchored in a stationary position. Manufacturer's
specifications for the wind energy conversion systems and supporting structures shall be
submitted with the building permit, including data and calculations regarding wind and icing
loads.
5. For leased sites, written authorization for locating the wind energy conversion systems facilities
from the owner (fee title holder) must be provided as set forth in subsection J13 of this section.
6. Proposals to erect new wind energy conversion systems shall be accompanied by any required
Federal, State or local agency licenses or applications for such licenses. (Ord. 96, 6th Series,
eff. 9-5-2017)
7. Wind energy conversion systems shall have one sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet, posted
at the base of the tower stating the manufacturer's name, emergency telephone number,
shutdown procedures and high voltage warning. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
8. The City's building and zoning officials shall be notified in writing of any change in ownership of
wind energy conversion systems or meteorological facility. All conditions imposed as a part of
the original permit approval shall not be affected by the change.
9. Wind energy conversion systems shall be located on a parcel of land so as to have the least
wind development impact on adjoining properties, and any negative impact of the wind energy
conversion systems shall be confined as much as possible to the property on which the facility is
located. Landscaping may be required in order to minimize the visual impact of the wind energy
conversion system.
10. Wind energy conversion systems consisting of multiple wind turbines shall be located at least
one and one-fourth (11/4) times the total height of the wind energy conversion systems from
others proposed, or any other existing wind energy conversion systems.
11. Wind energy conversion systems designs are required to be an open framework or monopole
configuration, and use of guy wires is prohibited. Permanent platforms or structures exclusive of
the wind energy conversion systems that serve to increase off site visibility are prohibited.
12. The applicant shall provide documentation or other evidence from the dealer or manufacturer
that the wind energy conversion systems have been successfully operated in atmospheric
conditions similar to conditions found within the City.
13. The owner of the wind energy conversion systems facility shall provide, at their expense, any
specialized training and equipment required to provide emergency services.
14. All wind energy conversion systems shall not have rotor dimensions greater than thirty feet
(30') in diameter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 382/444
15. Wind energy conversion systems facilities shall utilize building materials, colors and textures
that are compatible with the existing principal structure and that effectively blend the system
facilities into the surrounding setting and environment to the greatest extent possible. Rotor
blades shall be nonmetallic to prevent communication signal interference. Metal towers shall be
constructed of or treated with corrosive resistant material. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
D. Prohibitions:
1. No wind energy conversion systems or meteorological towers shall have a total height over one
hundred fifty feet (150') in a business zoned district, or have a total height over two hundred feet
(200') in an industrial zoned district. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
2. No wind energy conversion systems or meteorological tower facility shall be approved for
installation in a residential zoned district in the City.
3. No advertising message or sign shall be affixed to any wind energy conversion systems or
meteorological tower.
4. Wind energy conversion systems shall not be artificially lighted, except to the extent required by
the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable authority.
5. No part of any wind energy conversion system shall extend across or over any right-of-way,
public street, highway, sidewalk or property, or within a public or private utility and drainage
easement.
6. Electrical controls and control wiring and power lines shall be wireless or not aboveground,
except where a wind farm collector is brought together for connection to the transmission or
distribution network, adjacent to that network.
7. Wind energy conversion systems shall not interfere with hospital helicopter approach or
departure corridors. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
E. Design And Performance Standards:
1. Setbacks: The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all meteorological
towers and wind energy conversion systems facilities; provided, however, that the City Council
may reduce the standard setbacks and separation requirements by variance if the intent of this
section would be better served thereby. All required setbacks shall be measured from the base
of the wind energy conversion systems or meteorological towers. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-
2018)
a. Inhabited Structures:
(1) Meteorological towers, noncommercial and commercial wind energy conversion systems
facilities shall be set back from the nearest residential zoning district boundary line, school,
hospital, church, public building or public park, a distance no less than two thousand feet
(2,000'). Setbacks to principal structures on the property shall be distance of no less than
one and one-half (11/2) times the total height.
(2) All new residential dwellings must be set back six hundred feet (600') from any wind
energy conversion system wind turbine or meteorological tower, unless the dwelling owner
and turbine/tower owner is the same. In such case, the dwelling setback shall be no less
than one and one-half (11/2) times the total height.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 383/444
b. Property Lines: Each wind turbine shall be set back from the nearest property line a distance
no less than two (2) times its total height.
c. Public Roads: Each wind turbine shall be set back from the nearest public road a distance no
less than one and one-fourth (11/4) times its total height, determined at the nearest boundary
of the underlying right-of-way for such public road or planned public road.
d. Communications And Electrical Lines: Each wind energy conversion system wind turbine shall
be set back from the nearest aboveground public electric power line or communication lines a
distance no less than one and one-fourth (11/4) times its total height, determined from the
existing overhead power line or communication lines.
e. Historic Districts: All wind energy conversion systems facilities proposed to be located in or
near historic preservation landmarks and districts and in or near potential historical
preservation landmarks and districts, shall be reviewed for approval by the City's Heritage
Preservation Commission and the Minnesota Historical Preservation Office prior to the
approval of a building permit.
2. Noise:
a. A wind energy conversion system facility permit shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed project complies with all noise regulations as required. (Ord.
96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
b. The applicant shall submit a noise study, prepared by a qualified professional, as applicable.
The City Council or their representative shall determine the adequacy of the noise study and,
if necessary, require further submissions. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
c. The City Council may impose a noise setback that exceeds the other setbacks set in this
section, if they deem that such greater setbacks are necessary to protect the public health and
safety of the community.
d. In the event the noise levels resulting from the wind energy conversion systems exceed the
criteria listed above, a waiver to said levels may be granted by the City Council; provided, that
the following has been accomplished:
(1) Written consent from the affected property owners has been obtained stating that they are
aware of the wind energy conversion system and the noise limitations imposed by this
section, and that consent is granted to allow noise levels to exceed the maximum limits
otherwise allowed; and
(2) If the applicant wishes the waiver to apply to succeeding owners of the property, a
permanent noise impact easement is required to be recorded with the City and at the
Morrison County Recorder's Office, which describes the benefited and burdened properties
and which advises all subsequent owners of the burdened property that noise levels in
excess of those permitted by this section may exist on or at the burdened property.
3. Minimum Ground Clearance: The rotor blade arc created by the wind energy conversion system
shall have a minimum of thirty feet (30') of clearance over any structure and vegetation and
between the rotor blade's lowest point and the ground.
4. Signal Interference: The applicant shall minimize or mitigate any interference with
communications facilities, such as radio, cell tower systems, microwaves and telephone or
television signals caused by any wind energy conversion system. Disturbances shall be reduced
to the satisfaction of the affected parties and City Council. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 384/444
5. Safety:
a. All wiring between wind turbine towers and the wind energy conversion systems substation
shall be underground. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
b. Wind turbine towers and meteorological towers shall not be climbable up to twelve feet (12')
above the ground level.
c. All access doors to wind turbine towers or meteorological and electrical equipment shall be
lockable and locked during unattended times.
d. Appropriate warning signage shall be placed on wind turbine towers, electrical equipment, and
wind energy conversion systems entrances.
e. The City Council may require that wind energy conversion systems or meteorological sites be
enclosed by security fencing and be equipped to deter the general public from obtaining
access to the site. All access gates, doors and cabinets to the wind turbine towers and
electrical equipment shall be lockable and locked when not attended.
f. Each wind energy conversion system shall be equipped with both a manual and automatic
braking system.
F. Application: Building permits, conditional use permits and variances shall be applied for and
reviewed under the procedures of this section and other provisions of this chapter.
1. A building permit is required prior to the construction or installation of any wind energy
conversion system or meteorological facility.
2. Wind energy conversion system uses and facilities requiring a conditional use permit under this
section shall be considered by the Planning Commission and the City Council upon submittal
and approval of a properly completed application. The City Council may impose such conditions
on the granting of a conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry out the purpose and
intent of this section, and to maintain compatibility with the City's Comprehensive Plan and
provisions of this Code.
3. In addition to the application required, established elsewhere in this section, all permit
applications for new wind energy conversion system facilities shall include the following
information:
a. Site Plan: A scaled site plan of the project site. In addition to requirements found elsewhere in
this section, the site plan shall indicate the project area boundaries, wind turbine locations,
roads, transformers, power lines, communication lines, interconnection points with
transmission lines, and other ancillary facilities or structures. The applicant shall also provide a
detailed aerial photo of the surrounding area within one thousand three hundred twenty feet
(1,320') of the proposed wind energy conversion system location. The photo shall clearly show
location and distances to wetlands, rivers and streams, lakes, scenic and natural areas; and
significant or potential historic sites; all public parks, and distances to residential dwellings,
structures and other structures.
b. Stamped Report: A report stamped by a State licensed professional engineer and other
professionals which:
(1) Certifies that a detailed engineering soils report has been completed and that the design of
the tower foundation is based on that report. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 385/444
(2) Describes the number of structures, structure total height and tower height and design,
including a cross section, rotor diameter and direction, elevation and foundation design.
(3) Specific information on the type size, height, color, rotor material, rated power output,
performance, safety, and noise characteristics of each commercial wind turbine model,
tower and electrical transmission equipment. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
(4) Certifies the structure's compliance with structural and electrical standards.
(5) Identifies the location of all sites that were considered as possible alternatives to the site
applied for.
(6) Describes the lighting and/or painting to be placed on the structure if required by the
Federal Aviation Administration.
(7) Describes how the requirements and standards of this section will be met by the proposed
facilities.
c. Landowner Acknowledgment: Written acknowledgement by the landowner (fee title holder) of
a leased site is needed, that he/she will abide by all applicable terms and conditions of the
building and/or conditional use permit, including the restoration and reclamation requirements
of this section. Such acknowledgement shall be applicable to all future landowners (fee title
holders).
d. Noise Report: A noise report that shall, at minimum, include the following:
(1) A description and map of the project's noise producing features, including the range of
noise levels expected, and the tonal and frequency characteristics expected, and the basis
of the expectation; and
(2) A description and map of the noise sensitive environment, including any sensitive noise
receptors, (i.e., residences, hospitals, libraries, schools, places of worship and other
facilities where quiet is important within 1 mile of the proposed facility); and
(3) A list of the applicable noise laws, plans and ordinances; and
(4) A survey and report prepared by a qualified professional engineer that analyzes the
preexisting ambient noise regime, including seasonal variation, but not limited to separate
measurements of low frequency and A-weighted noise levels across a range of wind
speeds, including near cut-in, turbulence measurements, distance from the turbines,
location of sensitive receptors relative to wind direction; and
(5) A description and map of the cumulative noise impacts; and
(6) A description of the project's proposed noise control features, including specific measures
proposed to protect workers, and specified measures proposed to mitigate noise impacts for
sensitive receptors to a level of insignificance; and
(7) Identification of any problem areas; and
(8) Summary of project developer's proposed noise compliant resolution program; and
(9) Manufacturer's noise design and field testing data, both audible (dBA) and low frequency
(deep based vibration) for all proposed structures.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 386/444
e. Ice Throws: A report from a State professional engineer that calculates the maximum distance
that ice from the turbine blades could be thrown. The basis of the calculation and all
assumptions must be disclosed and the incidence of reported ice throws and the conditions
reported at the time of the ice throw.
f. Location Of Airports: Location of all known public or private airports or heliports within five (5)
miles of the proposed wind energy conversion system.
g. Application: A wind energy conversion system application shall include a plan outlining the
anticipated life of the project and the means and estimated costs, including identified financial
resources available, for removing the wind energy conversion system at the end of
serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use. The cost estimates shall be made by a
competent party, such as a professional engineer or a contractor capable of decommissions or
a person with suitable expertise or experience with decommissioning.
h. Power: Evidence of power purchase contracts and power transmission contracts, and means
of interconnecting with an electrical grid, if applicable, or documentation that the power will be
utilized on site.
i. Additional Information: Additional information and analysis:
(1) A copy of all required Federal, State or local agency licenses and/or compliance approvals
shall be submitted with the permit application.
(2) A copy of notifications sent by the applicant to all communication tower operators within
two (2) miles of the proposed wind energy conversion system location.
(3) The City Council or their representative may, at their discretion, require visual impact
demonstrations, including mockups and/or photo images, screening and required signage
plans, alternate site analysis, lists of other nearby wind energy conversion systems facilities,
or design alternatives for the proposed facilities.
(4) The City Council or their representative may employ, on behalf of the City, an independent
technical expert to review technical materials submitted by the applicant or to prepare any
technical materials required but not submitted by the applicant. The applicant shall pay the
reasonable costs of such review and/or independent analysis.
4. A building permit for a wind energy conversion system facility shall expire six (6) months after
issuance if the wind energy conversion system and/or supporting facilities have not been
erected. The City Council or their representative, due to unforeseen or extenuating
circumstances, may grant an extension of time not to exceed six (6) months per request. No fee
will be charged for an extension.
G. Abandoned Or Unused Wind Energy Conversion System Or Portion Thereof:
1. Obsolete Wind Energy Conversion Systems:
a. All obsolete or unused wind energy conversion systems and accompanying accessory
facilities shall be removed within six (6) months of the cessation of operations, unless a time
extension is approved by the City Council. If a time extension is not approved, the facilities
may be deemed hazardous, substandard and/or nuisance pursuant to Minnesota Statutes
463.15, 561.01 through 561.03, and 429.101, as amended from time to time, and all
applicable laws under this Code. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to
its original condition or to an improved condition, and anchoring elements shall be removed
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 387/444
from the average finish grade to a minimum of three feet (3') below ground level. The
existence of the remaining footing elements, if not removed, shall be disclosed and evidenced
on the deed recorded at the Morrison County Recorder's Office. If removal and/or restoration
are not completed within ninety (90) days of the expiration of the six (6) month period specified
herein, the City is authorized to complete the removal and site restoration, with all costs being
assessed against the property as a special assessment.
b. In the event a wind energy conversion system is determined to be a nuisance, the City may
act to abate such nuisance and required removal of the facility at the leaseholder's or property
owner's expense.
2. Notice Of Intent To Cease Operations:
a. The leaseholder shall provide the City with a copy of the notice and date of intent to cease
operations, and shall give six (6) months from the date the operations cease to remove the
obsolete wind energy conversion system and all accessory structures.
b. The equipment on the ground is not to be removed until the wind energy conversion system
structure has first been dismantled. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
c. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or to an improved
condition. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
H. Additional Requirements:
1. Structural Inspections:
a. The City may conduct inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the property owner
and the wind energy conversion system owner for the purpose of determining if it complies
with the Minnesota State Building Code and all other construction standards provided for in
Federal and State law, as well as this Code. The City expenses related to such inspections
may be borne by the wind energy conversion system owner or property owner. Based upon
the results of an inspection, the City may require repair, modification or removal of the
facilities.
b. Deviation from original construction for which a permit is obtained constitutes a violation of
this section.
c. Notice of violation will be sent by postal mail to the owner and the owner will have thirty (30)
days from the date the notification was issued to make repairs.
2. Maintenance: Wind energy conversion system facilities must be maintained in accordance with
the following provisions:
a. Owners must install and maintain wind energy conversion system facilities in compliance with
the requirements of the National Electrical Code, and all Federal, State and local regulations,
and in such a manner that they will not interfere with the use of other property, nor cause
damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.
b. Wind energy conversion system facilities and support structures must be kept and maintained
in good condition, order and repair.
c. Maintenance or construction of a wind energy conversion system facility support structure
must be performed by qualified maintenance and construction personnel. (Ord. 96, 6th Series,
eff. 9-5-2017)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 388/444
I. Building Mounted Wind Energy Conversion System Facilities: Notwithstanding the height limitations
of the zoning district, and where not specially prohibited by this section, building mounted wind
energy conversion system facilities shall be allowed in business and industrial zoning districts.
Permitting is subject to administrative review and approval of a properly completed application by
the City Council or their representative, under the provision of this section and as established in
this section and this Code. In addition, all building mounted wind energy conversion system
facilities shall comply with the following standards and regulations: (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-
2018)
1. A building permit is required prior to the construction or installation of any building mounted wind
energy conversion system facility.
2. Building mounted wind energy conversion system facilities shall be prohibited on structures less
than forty two feet (42') in height, based on the average grade surrounding the building.
3. Building mounted wind energy conversion system facilities shall be installed above the roof
surface.
4. The total height of the building mounted wind energy conversion system facilities shall not
exceed fifteen feet (15') above the highest point of the roofline. Evidence will be provided
showing adequate clearance and protection from the rotor blade rotation as approved by the City
Council or their representative.
5. Building mounted wind energy conversion system facilities shall be set back at least twenty feet
(20') from the front walls and fifteen feet (15') from the side and rear walls of the structure upon
which it would be mounted. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
6. The applicant will provide plans and evidence to the City Council or their representative's
satisfaction, that the structure upon which the proposed wind energy conversion system facility
is to be mounted shall have the structural integrity to carry the weight and wind loads of the wind
energy conversion system and have minimal vibration impacts on the structure. Wind energy
conversion system facilities shall comply with all applicable State and local Building and
Electrical Codes. (Ord. 5, 7th Series, eff. 1-2-2018)
7. Evidence of power purchase contracts and power transmission contracts and means of
interconnecting with an electrical grid, if applicable, or documentation that the power will be
utilized on site.
8. Building mounted wind energy conversion system facilities shall be prohibited in the Mississippi
Headwaters Corridor Overlay District.
J. Temporary Meteorological Equipment: Temporary meteorological equipment located upon a
temporary tower used on a temporary basis to gather wind and meteorological data to determine
feasibility of a wind energy conversion system shall require a permit to allow temporary use under
this section. Permitting is subject to administrative review and approval of a properly completed
application by the City Council or their representative, under provisions of this section and as
established in this section and under this Code. In addition, all meteorological facilities shall
comply with the following standards and requirements:
1. A building permit is required prior to the construction or installation of any meteorological facility.
2. No more than one such meteorological facility shall be permitted on a lot at one time.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 389/444
3. The meteorological facility shall be placed on property for no longer than eighteen (18) months
from the date of permit issuance. Any abandoned or obsolete temporary tower and associated
equipment shall be removed within thirty (30) days from the cessation of operation at the site. If
removal and restoration are not completed within the period specified herein, the City is
authorized to complete the removal and site restoration at the leaseholder's or property owner's
expense.
4. The tower shall be temporary by nature and shall not have permanent foundations. Guy wires
may be used as long as the connections to the ground are temporary and the wires are
designed to support the wind and ice load of the tower.
5. The tower and any related guy wire should be protected against unauthorized climbing.
6. The tower shall meet all setback requirements of this section.
7. The tower shall be grounded and shielded to protect against natural lightning strikes, in
conformance with the National Electrical Code.
8. No tower shall have affixed or attached lights, reflectors, flashers, or any other illumination,
except for those devices required or approved by the Federal Aviation Administration.
9. Meteorological generators shall comply with all Minnesota Rules 7030, as amended, governing
noise and this Code, as amended and applicable.
10. The color of the meteorological facility shall be nonreflective and nonobtrusive.
11. Warning signs with the telephone number of the owner shall be displayed at the site.
12. Qualified maintenance and/or construction personnel must perform maintenance and
construction of meteorological facility. Commonly accepted methods and devices must be
employed to prevent failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injuries or
nuisances to the public.
13. In addition to the application requirements established elsewhere in this section, all permit
applications for temporary meteorological facilities shall include the following information:
a. In addition to requirements found elsewhere in this section, the scaled site plan shall indicate
the project area boundaries, wind turbine locations, roads, transformers, power lines,
interconnection points with transmission lines, and other ancillary facilities or structures. The
applicant shall also provide a detailed aerial photo of the area within one thousand three
hundred twenty feet (1,320') of the proposed temporary surrounding meteorological facility
location. The photo shall clearly show location and distances to wetlands, rivers and streams,
lakes, scenic and natural areas, significant or potential historic sites, all public parks, and
distances to residential dwellings, structures and other structures.
b. Written acknowledgement by the landowner (fee title holder) is required on a leased site that
they will abide by all applicable terms and conditions of all permits, including the restoration
and reclamation requirements of this section. Such acknowledgement shall be applicable to all
future landowners (fee title holders).
c. Submittal of a report stamped by a State licensed professional engineer and other
professionals which:
(1) Certifies that a detailed engineering soils report has been completed and that the design of
the temporary meteorological facility is based on that report;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 390/444
(2) Certifies the structure's compliance with structural and electrical standards;
(3) Describes the lighting and/or painting to be placed on the structure, if needed, by the
Federal Aviation Administration; and
(4) Describes how the requirements and standards of this section will be met by the proposed
temporary meteorological facility.
d. A copy of all required Federal, State and/or local agency licenses and/or compliance
approvals shall be submitted with the permit application.
K. Liability Insurance: All wind energy conversion systems or meteorological facilities must be
adequately insured for injury and property damage. Proof of insurance with the City named as an
additional insured is required to be provided.
L. Transferability: All permits issued under this section shall be made transferable, and all subsequent
holders of such permits shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this section as a whole,
and any permit conditions that may exist. Written notice shall be made to the City Council within
thirty (30) days of such transfer. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.32 - 11.39: RESERVED:
11.40: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources
within the City and protect them from adverse effects occasioned by poorly sited development or
incompatible activities by regulating land disturbing or development activities that would have an
adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and unique and fragile environmentally
sensitive land; by minimizing conflicts and encouraging compatibility between urban growth and
development and protection of water quality and natural areas; by preventing periodic local
flooding by designing areas for ponding and retention of stormwater.
B. Applicability: Every applicant for a building permit, not exempted by subsection D of this section, or
subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities, must submit a stormwater
management plan to the City. No building permit, subdivision approval or permit to allow land
disturbing or development activities shall be issued until approval of the stormwater management
plan or waiver of the approval requirement has been obtained in conformance with the provisions
of this section.
C. Plan Approval: All plans shall be subject to approval by the City. The City shall consider issues of
land usage, overall drainage for the City and existing stormwater facilities in approving any
drainage plan. The City may reject any proposed plans if they do not meet the overall purpose of
this section.
D. Exemptions: The provisions of this section do not apply to:
1. Any permit or approval by the City prior to the effective date hereof;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 391/444
2. Installation of fences, signs, telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles;
3. Construction of a single-family home or a single duplex;
4. An addition to an existing building that does not require a conditional use permit and is less than
ten percent (10%) of the total floor area of the existing building;
5. Construction of a detached accessory building that does not require a conditional use permit;
6. Emergency work to protect life, limb or property;
7. Land disturbing activities conducted by the City affecting less than five (5) acres.
E. Waiver: The City Council may waive any requirement of this section upon making a finding that
compliance will impose an unnecessary hardship or the project does not have any significant
alterations of existing stormwater conditions, and the waiver of such requirements will not
adversely affect the standards and requirements of this section. The City Council may require as a
condition of the waiver such dedication or construction as may be necessary to adequately meet
said standards and requirements. The City Council may require as condition of the waiver that the
applicant make an in kind or monetary contribution to the development and maintenance of
community stormwater management activities as designated by the City Council.
F. Application: A written application signed by a licensed professional engineer in the State of
Minnesota for stormwater management plan approval shall be submitted with the proposed land
disturbing or development activities to the City. The application shall include a statement indicating
the grounds upon which the approval is requested, a statement that the proposed use is permitted
within the underlying zoning district and adequate evidence showing that the proposed use will
conform to the standards set forth in this section.
G. Stormwater Management Plan: At a minimum, the stormwater management plan shall abide by the
Minnesota National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) construction general permit,
and contain the following information:
1. Site map showing the site and immediately adjacent areas, existing topography with contour
intervals appropriate to the topography of the land, delineation of all streams, public waters and
wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, location and dimensions of existing
stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the
site showing in which direction and what rate stormwater is conveyed from the site, a description
of the soils on the site, vegetative cover delineating the vegetation proposed for removal, 100-
year floodplain, flood fringes, floodways and a watershed boundary map;
2. Site construction plan, including location and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing or
development activities, and any phasing of those activities, locations and dimensions of all
temporary soil or dirt stockpiles, locations and dimensions of all construction and erosion control
measures, schedule of anticipated starting and completion date of each land disturbing or
development activity, provisions for maintenance of the construction and erosion control
measures during construction; geotechnical report examining groundwater versus basement
floors and intended discharge of detention basins (infiltration versus piped discharge);
3. Final site conditions plan, including finished grade and contours, landscape plan, drainage plan
delineating at what rate stormwater will be conveyed from the site, and setting forth the areas of
the site where stormwater will be allowed to collect, proposed size, alignment and intended use
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 392/444
of any structure to be erected on the site, delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be
paved or other impervious surfaces, including a description of the surfacing materials to be used,
and any other pertinent information, which is necessary for the review of the project.
4. A written report summary discussing pre- and post-development hydrology and hydraulic
analysis, erosion and sedimentation control measures to be used during and after construction,
protection measures for proposed and existing structures, and water quality concerns. If
structural Best Management Practices effectiveness is not as planned, the applicant/owner shall
implement additional Best Management Practices to ensure postconstruction stormwater
management conditions are met.
H. Site Erosion Control: The following criteria applies to construction activities that result in runoff
leaving the construction site: 1) channelized turnoff from adjacent areas passing through the site
shall be directed around disturbed areas, if practical; and 2) all activities on the site shall be
conducted in sequence to minimize the area of bare soil exposed at one time.
I. Criteria For Permanent Facilities:
1. An applicant engaged in land disturbing or development activities shall construct all stormwater
management facilities necessary to manage increased runoff so that the peak discharge rates
for a 2-year, 10-year and 100-year, 24-hour event, existing before the proposed development,
shall not be increased and accelerated channel erosion shall not occur as a result of the
proposed land disturbing or development activities.
2. The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the need for stormwater management
facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover, such as wetlands,
ponds, natural swales and depressions, as they exist before development, to the degree that
they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality
of the wetland or pond.
3. The following stormwater management practices shall be investigated in the development of a
stormwater management plan in the following descending order of preference:
a. Natural infiltration by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions;
b. Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions; and
c. Stormwater detention facilities.
4. A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control
requirements specified above. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for the method
selected.
J. Design Standards: Stormwater detention facilities constructed in the City shall be designed
according to the most current technology as reflected in the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's
Publication "Protection of Water Quality in Urban Areas", and shall contain at a minimum the
following design factors:
1. A permanent pond surface area equal to two percent (2%) of the impervious area draining to the
pond or one percent (1%) of the entire area draining to the pond, whichever amount is greater;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 393/444
2. An average permanent pool depth of four feet to ten feet (4' - 10'), not including sediment
storage;
3. A permanent pool length to width ratio of three to one (3:1) or greater;
4. A minimum protective shelf extending ten feet (10') into the permanent pool with a slope of ten
to one (10:1), beyond which slopes should not exceed three to one (3:1);
5. A protective buffer strip of vegetation surrounding the permanent pool at a minimum width of
one rod (16.5 feet);
6. All stormwater detention facilities shall have a device to keep oil, grease and other floatable
materials from moving downstream as a result of normal operations;
7. All stormwater detention facilities must have a forebay (i.e., preliminary sedimentation basin), to
remove coarse grained particles prior to discharge into a watercourse or storage basin;
8. All stormwater ponds shall be designed to account for twenty five (25) year sediment storage;
9. Retention basins shall be designed to hold a 100-year storm event back to back and maintain
one foot (1') freeboard to the emergency overflow outlet;
10. Infiltration rates shall assume fifty percent (50%) clogging;
11. Design and construct stormwater management practices that manage rainfall on site, and
prevent the off-site discharge of the precipitation from the first one inch (1") of runoff from the
new impervious surfaces created by the project. Discharge volume reduction can be achieved by
engineered infiltration, canopy interception, soil amendments, evaporation, rainfall harvesting,
and/or evapotranspiration and any combination of the aforementioned practices. This first one
inch (1") of rainfall must be one hundred percent (100%) managed with no discharge to surface
waters.
K. Wetlands:
1. Runoff shall not be discharged directly into wetlands without presettlement of the runoff.
2. A protective buffer strip of natural vegetation at one rod (16.5 feet) in width shall surround all
wetlands.
3. Wetlands must not be drained or filled, wholly or partially, unless replaced by restoring or
creating wetland areas of at least equal public value as determined by the City Council.
L. Steep Slopes: No land disturbing or development activities shall be allowed on slopes of eighteen
percent (18%) or more.
M. Catch Basins: All newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins that discharge to stormwater ponds
or waters of the State, shall be provided with a sump area for the collection of coarse grained
materials and shall be cleaned when they are half filled with material.
N. Drain Leaders: All newly constructed and reconstructed buildings shall route roof drain leaders to
pervious areas wherein the runoff can be allowed to infiltrate.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 394/444
O. Inspection And Maintenance: All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize
the need of maintenance, to provide access for maintenance purposes and to be structurally
sound. All stormwater management facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that
assures continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater management facilities. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easement or other property
interest to allow access to the stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance
purposes. All privately owned Best Management Practices shall have a maintenance agreement
with the City of Little Falls.
P. Easements And Outlots: The City may require easements or outlots which cover the stormwater
infrastructure, as deemed necessary to protect the City's interest.
Q. Mitigation: In the event TSS and/or TP reduction requirements cannot be met through on-site
treatment, the applicant, with City approval, can construct off site mitigation to address the required
TSS and/or TP requirements.
Mitigation project areas are selected in the following order of preference:
1. Locations that yield benefits to the same receiving water that receives runoff from the original
construction activity;
2. Locations within the same Department of Natural Resources catchment area as the original
construction activity;
3. Locations in the next adjacent Department of Natural Resources catchment area upstream;
4. Locations anywhere within the City's jurisdiction.
Mitigation projects must involve the creation of new structural stormwater Best Management
Practices or the retrofit of existing structural stormwater Best Management Practices or the use
of a properly designed regional structural stormwater Best Management Practice.
Routine maintenance of structural stormwater Best Management Practices already required by
this permit cannot be used to meet mitigation requirements of this subsection.
Mitigation projects shall be completed within twenty four (24) months after the start of the original
construction activity.
R. Approval: Stormwater management plans meeting the requirements of this section shall be
submitted to the Public Works Director/City Engineer for review and compliance with the standards
of this section. The Public Works Director/City Engineer shall approve, with conditions or deny the
stormwater management plan. If a particular stormwater management plan involves a complex
application or has the potential for significant controversy, a public hearing may be scheduled
before the Planning Commission for public input.
S. Duration: Approval of any plan submitted under the provisions of this section shall expire one year
after the date of approval unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan.
However, if prior to the expiration of approval, the applicant makes a written request to the Public
Works Director/City Engineer for an extension of time to commence construction setting forth the
reasons for the requested extension, the Public Works Director/City Engineer may grant one
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 395/444
extension of not greater than one year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be
acknowledged by the City within fifteen (15) calendar days. The Public Works Director/City
Engineer shall make a decision on the extension within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt. Any
plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved. Any denied application may be
resubmitted with additional information addressing the concerns contained within the denial. The
resubmitted plan is subject to all applicable fees and shall be considered a new application.
T. Conditions: A stormwater management plan may be approved subject to compliance with conditions
reasonable and necessary to ensure that the requirements contained in this section are met. Such
conditions may, among other matters, limit the size, kind or character of the proposed
development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other
facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the
work over time, require alteration of the site design to ensure buffering, require the acquisition of
certain lands or easements, and require the conveyance to the City of Little Falls or other public
entity of certain lands or interest therein. The City may specify special requirements for specific
watershed within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The nature of these requirements will
be subject to the unique environmental and natural resources environment of each subwatershed.
Approval of a plan shall bind the applicant to perform all of the conditions and requirements of the
plan prior to any land disturbing activities. A plan issued under this section runs with the land and
is a condition of plat approval. Any owner or subsequent owner of any parcel within the plat must
comply with the plan or any approval revision or modification of the plan.
U. Record Drawings: Upon completion of construction activities, the applicant shall submit the final
stormwater management plan to document any change to the original stormwater management
concept. The final plan shall contain record drawings, in paper and in electronic format (AutoCAD),
sharing the final configuration of all improvements. The final plan shall be certified by the
registered professional engineer in the State of Minnesota. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.41 - 11.49: RESERVED:
11.50: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT:
Sections 11.50 through 11.63 of this chapter shall comprise of the provision of the floodplain
management regulations. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.51: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE:
A. Statutory Authorization: The Legislature of the State of Minnesota has in Minnesota Statutes
chapter 103F and chapter 462, delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt
regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Little Falls,
Minnesota, does ordain as follows.
B. Purpose:
1. Regulations: Floodplain management regulations regulate development in the flood hazard
areas of the City. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may result
in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 396/444
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base. It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
2. National Flood Insurance Program Compliance: Floodplain management regulations are
adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program
codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations parts 59-78, as amended, so as to maintain the
City's eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
3. Preservation: Floodplain management regulations are also intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and
stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian
habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.52: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Lands To Which These Provisions Apply: These provisions apply to all lands within the jurisdiction
of the City of Little Falls which are located within the boundaries of the Floodway and Flood Fringe
Districts. The boundaries of the zoning districts are determined by scaling distances on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, or as modified in accordance with subsection A2 of this section.
1. The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts are overlay districts that are
superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are
in addition to any other requirements in this chapter. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive
standards will apply.
2. Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the official floodplain maps
and actual field conditions, the flood elevations shall be the governing factor in locating the
regulatory floodplain limits.
3. Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity
to present their case to the Planning and/or Board of Adjustment, and to submit technical
evidence.
B. Incorporation Of Maps By Reference: The following maps together with all materials are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the official Zoning Map and this chapter. The
attached materials include the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Little Falls prepared by the
Federal Insurance Administration dated November 1979, the Flood Insurance Study for Morrison
County, Minnesota, and incorporated areas, dated December 15, 1980, and the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps identified below. These materials and the
official zoning map are on file in the Office of the City Administrator.
FIRM Panel Number Effective Date
2706170200B June 15, 1981
2706170280B May 1, 1980
2702990001B May 1, 1980
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 397/444
FBFM Panel Number Effective Date
2706170280B June 15, 1981
2702990001 May 1, 1980
C. Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: It is not intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants or other private agreements. However, where these
regulations impose greater restrictions, these provisions prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent
with these regulations are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
D. Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: These sections do not imply that areas outside the floodplain
districts of land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages.
These sections do not create liability on the part of the City of Little Falls or its officers or
employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on these regulations or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
E. Severability: If any section, clause, provision, or portion of these regulations is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of these regulations shall not be affected
and shall remain in full force.
F. Definitions: Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these regulations shall be
interpreted so as to give them their most reasonable application:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation of the "regional flood". The term "base flood
elevation" is used in the flood insurance survey.
BASEMENT: Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade
(below ground level) on all four (4) sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground
level.
CONDITIONAL USE: A specific type of structure or land use listed in the official control that may
be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and with appropriate conditions or
restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or Building Codes and upon a finding that:
1. Certain conditions as detailed in this chapter exist; and
2. The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and
are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 398/444
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
buildings or other structures mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT: A method of determining the location of floodway
boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a
proportionate share of flood flows.
FARM FENCE: A fence as defined by Minnesota Statute section 344.02, subdivision 1(a) - (d).
An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be structure under these regulations.
Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls,
are related as structures under these regulations.
FLOOD: A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream, or in the state of a wetland or
lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or
discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: The portion of the special flood hazard area (1 percent annual chance flood)
located outside of the floodway. "Flood fringe" is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe"
used in the applicable Flood Insurance Studies for the City of Little Falls, Minnesota.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: An official map on which the Federal Insurance Administrator
has delineated the special hazard areas applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been
made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
FLOODPLAIN: The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which
have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
FLOODWAY: The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions
of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood
discharge.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided that such is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of 44 Code of Federal Regulations, part 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include the term
"recreational vehicle".
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures, including additions and improvements, and placement of
manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective
date of these regulations.
OBSTRUCTION: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection,
excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or
matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel watercourse, or regulatory floodplain
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 399/444
which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN: Lands inundated by the "regional flood" (see definition).
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE: All uses or structures that are not accessory uses or
structures.
REACH: A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river
influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or
river between two (2) consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is four hundred (400)
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be selfpropelled
or permanently towable by a light duty truck and is designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use. For the purposes of these regulations, the term recreational vehicle is
synonymous with the term "travel trailer/travel vehicle".
REGIONAL FLOOD: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred
generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an
average frequency in the magnitude of the one percent (1%) chance or 100-year recurrence
interval. "Regional flood" is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a flood insurance
study.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE): An elevation not less than one foot
(1') above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by
encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate
occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each flood event
on the average equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: A term used for flood insurance purposes synonymous with
"100-year floodplain".
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvements
that occurred before the permit's expiration date. The actual start is either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers,
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or
onsite utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins,
manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 400/444
section 11.59 of this chapter and other similar items.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost
of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, including normal maintenance and repair, repair after damage, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term
includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local
Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which have been identified by the local Code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
2. Any alterations of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". For the purpose of these
regulations, "historic structure", is as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, part 59.1.
G. Annexations: The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into subsection B of this
section may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the City of Little
Falls at the time of adoption of the floodplain management regulations. If any of these floodplain
land areas are annexed into the City of Little Falls after the date of adoption of these regulations,
the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of these sections immediately
upon the date of annexation. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.53: ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS:
A. Districts:
1. Floodway District: The Floodway District includes those areas within Zone A7 delineated within
floodway areas as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway
Maps adopted in subsection 11.52B of this chapter.
2. Flood Fringe District: The Flood Fringe District includes areas on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps adopted in subsection 11.52B of this chapter but
located outside of the floodway.
3. General Floodplain District: The General Floodplain District includes those areas within (Zone A)
that do not have a floodway delineated, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in
subsection 11.52B of this chapter.
B. Applicability: Where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are delineated on the floodplain maps, the
standards in section 11.54 or 11.55 of this chapter will apply, depending on the location of a
property. Locations where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are not delineated on the floodplain
maps are considered to fall within the General Floodplain District. Within the General Floodplain
District, the Floodway District standards in section 11.54 of this chapter apply unless the floodway
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 401/444
boundary is determined, accordance to the process outlined in subsection 11.56B of this chapter.
(Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.535: REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS:
A. Permit Required: A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator to verify if a
development meets the standards outlined in these regulations prior to conducting the following
activities:
1. The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or alteration of any building, structure, or
portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately
or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in
these regulations.
2. The use or change of use of a building, structure or land.
3. The construction of a dam, onsite septic system or fence.
4. The change or extension of a nonconforming use.
5. The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source.
6. The placement of fill, excavation of materials or the storage of materials or equipment within the
floodplain.
7. Relocation or alteration of a watercourse, including new or replacement culverts and bridges,
unless a public waters work permit has been applied for.
8. Any other type of "development" as defined in these regulations.
B. Building Sites: If a proposed building site is in a floodplain area, all new construction and
substantial improvements (including the placement of manufactured homes) must be:
1. Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy;
2. Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
3. Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and
4. Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
C. Flood Capacity: In no cases shall floodplain development adversely affect the efficiency or unduly
restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries to the main stream, drainage
ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems.
D. Prohibited: The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable,
explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited. (Ord. 10, 7th Series,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 402/444
eff. 7-2-2018)
11.54: FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW):
A. Permitted Uses: The following uses, subject to the standards set forth in subsection B of this
section, are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable
overlay district.
1. General farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences only when legally existed prior to July 1, 2018,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
2. Industrial - commercial loading area, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
3. Open space uses, including but not limited to private and public golf courses, tennis courts,
driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks,
wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and
fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
4. Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
5. Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines, provided that the Department
of Natural Resources' area hydrologist is notified at least ten (10) days prior to issuance of any
permit.
6. Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the exception standards in subsection 11.59B2 of
this chapter.
B. Standards For Floodway Permitted Uses:
1. The use must have a low flood damage potential.
2. The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any increase in flood elevations, and must not
involve structures, obstructions or storage of materials or equipment.
3. Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public must be designed with a flood
warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth
and velocity such that the depth, in feet, multiplied by the velocity, in feet per second, would
exceed a product of 4 upon occurrence of the regional flood (1 percent flood).
C. Conditional Uses: The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses following the standards
and procedures set forth in these regulations and further subject to the standards set forth in
subsection D of this section, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable
overlay district.
1. Structures accessory to the uses listed in subsections A1 through A3 of this section, and the
uses listed in subsections C2 through C3 of this section.
2. Extraction, fill and storage of soil, sand, gravel, and other materials.
3. Marinas, boat rentals, permanent docks, piers, wharves and water control structures.
4. Storage yards for equipment, machinery or materials.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 403/444
5. Construction of fences that obstruct flood flows, including farm fences.
6. Placement of fill.
7. Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less
than the 10-year frequency flood event.
D. Standards For Floodway Conditional Uses:
1. All Uses: A conditional use must not cause any increase in the regional flood elevations or
cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
2. Fill, Storage Of Materials And Equipment:
a. Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain must be
protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method.
b. Permanent sand and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site
development plan.
c. Temporary placement of fill, other materials or equipment which would cause an increase to
the stage of the one percent (1%) chance or regional flood, may only be allowed if the City
Council has approved a plan that assures removal of the materials from the floodway based
upon the flood warning time available.
3. Accessory Structures: Accessory structures, as defined by these regulations, may be permitted,
provided that:
a. Structures are not intended for human habitation;
b. Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
c. Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a minimal obstruction to the flow of
flood waters;
d. Service utilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, within these structures must be
elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed.
e. Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP1
or FP2 floodproofing classifications in the International Building Code. All floodproofed
structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and
designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
f. As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4
floodproofing classifications in the International Building Code, provided the accessory
structure constitutes a minimal investment. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
(1) To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two (2)
"automatic" openings in the outside sidewalls of the structure with a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
(2) There must be openings on at least two (2) sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than one foot (1') above the lowest adjacent grade to the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 404/444
structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy
this requirement for automatic opening.
g. Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of
protected wetlands or public waters are subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statute chapter
103G.
h. A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not cause an increase to the one
percent (1%) chance or regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal conveyance
or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
i. Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and
adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff.
7-2-2018)
11.55: FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF):
A. Permitted Uses: Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures allowed in the underlying
zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in subsection B of this section. If no pre-existing,
underlying zoning district exists, then any residential or nonresidential structure, or use of a
structure of land, is a permitted use, provided it does not constitute a public nuisance.
B. Standards For Flood Fringe Permitted Uses:
1. All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, as
defined, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures must be no lower that one foot (1') below the regulatory flood protection elevation and
the fill must extend at the same elevation at least fifteen feet (15') beyond the outside limits of
the structure.
2. As an alternative to the fill, requirements of subsection B1 of this section, structures accessory
to the uses identified in subsection A of this section may be permitted to be internally/wet
floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the International Building Code,
provided that:
a. The accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed five hundred
seventy six (576) square feet in size, and is only used for parking and storage.
b. To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two (2)
"automatic" openings in the outside walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
c. There must be openings on at least two (2) sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings must be no higher than one foot (1') above the lowest adjacent grade to the
structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this
requirement for automatic openings.
3. The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel must not exceed one thousand
(1,000) cubic yards unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance
with subsection A of this section or if allowed as a conditional use under subsection C of this
section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 405/444
4. The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood
protection elevation.
5. All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or watertight to prevent infiltration of
floodwaters.
6. All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly protected by the use of
riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
7. All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than
two feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation or must have a warning/emergency
evacuation plan acceptable to the City Council.
8. Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at an elevation lower
than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, any facilities used by employees or the
general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth, in feet, multiplied
by the velocity, in feet per second, would exceed a product of 4 upon occurrence of the regional,
one percent (1%) chance, flood.
9. Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the standards of these regulations.
C. Conditional Uses: The following uses and activities may be allowed as conditional uses, if allowed
in the underlying zoning district(s) or any applicable overlay district, following the procedures in
section 11.04 of this chapter.
1. Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
2. The cumulative placement of more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of fill when the fill is
not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with subsection B1 of this section.
3. The use of methods to elevate structures above the regulatory flood protection elevation,
including stilts, pilings, parallel walls or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or
tuck under garages, shall meet the standards in subsection D6 of this section.
D. Standards For Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
1. The standards listed in subsections B4 through B9 of this section apply to all conditional uses.
2. Residential basements, as defined by these regulations, are not allowed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation.
3. All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements, to be placed below the regulatory
flood protection elevation must be structurally dry floodproofed, meeting the FP1 or FP2
floodproofing classification in the International Building Code, which requires making the
structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects
of buoyancy.
4. The placement of more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards to fill or other similar material on
a parcel, other than for the purpose of elevating a structure to the regulatory flood protection
elevation, must comply with an approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 406/444
a. The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at
a minimum of the regional, one percent (1%) chance, flood event.
b. The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other
qualified individual acceptable to the City Council.
c. The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the
floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
5. Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood protection elevation must comply
with an approved emergency plan providing for removal of such materials within the time
available after a flood warning.
6. Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's
lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The base or floor of an enclosed
area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure's basement or lowest floor if: a) the
enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; b) it is designed to internally
flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and c) it is used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject
to the following additional standards:
a. Design And Certification: The structure's design and as-built condition must be certified by a
registered professional engineer as being in compliance with the general design standards of
the International Building Code and specially, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing
and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory
flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating
within these components during times of flooding. Structure shall be subject to a
nonconversion agreement with upon the issuance of any permit.
b. Fully Enclosed Areas: Above grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck-under
garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
(1) The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a
floodproofing technique. There shall be a minimum of two (2) openings on at least two (2)
sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1')
above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The
automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any
form of human intervention; and
(2) That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the
FP3 or FP4 classifications in the International Building Code and shall be used solely for
building access, parking of vehicles or storage. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.56: GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT:
A. Permitted Uses:
1. The uses listed in subsection 11.54A, "Permitted Uses", of this chapter, are permitted uses.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 407/444
2. All other uses are subject to the floodway/flood fringe evaluation criteria specified in subsection
B of this section. Section 11.54 of this chapter applies if the proposed use is determined to be in
the Floodway District. Section 11.55 of this chapter applies if the proposed use is determined to
be in the Flood Fringe District.
B. Procedures For Floodway And Flood Fringe Determination Within General Floodplain District:
1. Upon receipt of an application for a permit or other approval within the General Floodplain
District, the Zoning Administrator must obtain, review and reasonably utilize any regional flood
elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source.
2. If regional flood elevation and floodway data are not readily available or the application involves
a project exceeding the lesser of five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, the applicant must furnish
additional information, as needed, to determine the regulatory flood protection elevation and
whether the proposed use would fall within the Floodway or Flood Fringe District. Information
must be consistent with accepted hydrological and hydraulic engineering standards and the
standards in subsection B3 of this section.
3. The determination of floodway and flood fringe must include the following components, as
applicable:
a. Estimate the peak discharge of the regional, one percent (1%) chance, flood.
b. Calculate the water surface profile of the regional flood based upon a hydraulic analysis of the
stream channel and overbank areas.
c. Compute the floodway necessary to convey or store the regional flood without increasing flood
stages more than one-half (0.5) foot. A stage increase of less than 0.5 foot is required if, as a
result of the stage increase, increased flood damages would result. An equal degree of
encroachment on both sides of the stream within the reach must be assumed in computing
floodway boundaries.
4. The Zoning Administrator will review the submitted information and assess the technical
evaluation and the recommended Floodway and/or Flood Fringe District boundary. The
assessment must include the cumulative effects of previous floodway encroachments. The
Zoning Administrator may seek technical assistance from a designated engineer or other expert
person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on this assessment,
the Zoning Administrator may approve or deny the application.
5. Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries have been determined, the Zoning
Administrator, must process the permit application consistent with the applicable provisions of
sections 11.54 and 11.55 of this chapter. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.57: SUBDIVISIONS:
A. No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable due to the likelihood of flooding or inadequate
drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational
vehicle parks or campgrounds are considered subdivisions under these regulations.
1. All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain a building site outside of the
Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 408/444
2. All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building
sites no lower than two feet (2') below the regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood
warning emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional,
one percent (1%) chance, flood has been approved by the City Council. The plan must be
prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and must demonstrate that
adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.
3. For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the
regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads, must be
clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
4. In the General Floodplain District, applicants must provide the information required in subsection
11.56B of this chapter to determine the regional flood elevation, the Floodway and Flood Fringe
District boundaries and the regulatory flood protection elevation for this subdivision site.
5. Subdivision proposals must be reviewed to assure that:
a. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood
prone area;
b. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
c. Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-
2-2018)
11.58: PUBLIC UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES:
A. Public Utilities: All public utilities and facilities, such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply
systems to be located in the floodplain must be floodproofed in accordance with the International
Building Code or elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
B. Public Transportation Facilities: Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the
floodplain must comply with sections 11.54 and 11.55 of this chapter. These transportation facilities
must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these
facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety, or where such facilities are essential
to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a
lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.
C. On Site Sewage Treatment And Water Supply Systems: Where public utilities are not provided: 1)
on-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules chapter 4725.4350, as
amended; and 2) new or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems
into flood waters, they must not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding,
and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules chapter 7080.2270, as amended. (Ord. 10,
7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.59: MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 409/444
A. Manufactured Homes: New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured
home parks are prohibited in any floodplain district. For existing manufactured home parks or lots
of record, the following requirements apply:
1. Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is prohibited in the Floodway District.
2. Placement or replacement of manufactured home units in the Flood Fringe District is subject to
the requirements of section 11.55 of this chapter and the following standards.
a. New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in compliance with section
11.54 of this chapter and must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable State of local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
b. New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks must meet
the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in section 11.58 of this chapter.
B. Recreational Vehicles: New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and expansions to existing
recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district. Placement of
recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds in the floodplain must
meet the requirements below.
1. Recreational vehicles are exempt from these provisions if they are placed in any of the following
areas and meet the criteria listed in subsection B2 of this section:
a. Individual lots or parcels of record.
b. Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
c. Existing condominium-type associations.
2. Criteria for exempt recreational vehicles:
a. The vehicle must have a current license required for highway use.
b. The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system,
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and
recreational vehicle parks.
c. No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the vehicle.
d. Accessory structures are not allowed. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.60: ADMINISTRATION:
A. Duties: The Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City Council must administer
and enforce these regulations.
B. Permit Application Requirements:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 410/444
1. Application For Permit: Permit applications must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on
forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit application must include the following,
as applicable:
a. A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions existing or proposed buildings, structures, and
significant natural features having an influence on the permit.
b. Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the stream channel.
c. Copies of any required Municipal, County, State or Federal permits or approvals.
d. Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator as necessary to properly
evaluate the permit application.
2. Certification: The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered professional
engineer, registered architect or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building
elevations were accomplished in compliance with these provisions. Floodproofing measures
must be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. Accessory
structures designed in accordance with subsection 11.55B2 of this chapter are exempt from
certification, provided sufficient documentation is provided and approved by the City Engineer.
3. Certificate Of Zoning Compliance For A New, Altered Or Nonconforming Use: No building, land
or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has
been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to
the requirements of this chapter.
4. Record Of First Floor Elevation: The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of the
elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new structures and alterations or
additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator must also maintain a
record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are
floodproofed.
5. Notifications For Watercourse Alterations: Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a
river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has
applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.245,
this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to the
Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA.
6. Notification To FEMA When Physical Changes Increase Or Decrease Base Flood Elevations: As
soon as is practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such supporting
information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional
Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data.
C. Variances:
1. Variance Applications: An application for a variance to these provisions will be processed and
reviewed in accordance with applicable State Statutes and these regulations.
2. Adherence To State Floodplain Management Standards: A variance must not allow a use that is
not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood
protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by
State law.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 411/444
3. Additional Variance Criteria: The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency
Management Agency must be satisfied:
a. Variances must not be issued by the City within any designated regulatory floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
b. Variances may only be issued by the City upon: 1) a showing of good and sufficient cause; 2)
a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and 3) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
c. Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
4. Flood Insurance Notice: The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance that:
1) the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and 2) such construction
below the base or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification must
be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
5. General Considerations: The City may consider the following factors in granting variances and
imposing conditions on variances and conditional uses in floodplains:
a. The potential danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused
by encroachments;
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of
others;
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and the ability of these systems to
minimize the potential for disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
d. The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
e. The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed use to the community;
f. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
g. The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to
flooding;
h. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated
in the foreseeable future;
i. The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and Floodplain
Management Program for the area;
j. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; and
k. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood
waters expected at the site.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 412/444
6. Submittal Of Hearing Notices To The Department Of Natural Resources (DNR): The Zoning
Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in
advance to provide at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by
electronic mail or United States mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
7. Submittal Of Final Decisions To The DNR: A copy of all decisions granting variances must be
forwarded to the DNR within ten (10) days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic
mail or United States mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
8. Recordkeeping: The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance, and must report such variances in an annual or biennial
report to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
D. Conditional Uses:
1. Administrative Review: An application for a conditional use permit under these provisions will be
processed and reviewed in accordance with these regulations.
2. Factors Used In Decision Making: In passing upon conditional use applications, the City Council
must consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter, and those factors
identified in subsection C5 of this section.
3. Conditions Attached To Conditional Use Permit: The City Council may attach such conditions to
the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of these
regulations. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
b. Limitations on period of use, occupancy and operations.
c. Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions.
d. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees
and other protective measures.
e. Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and these regulations.
The applicant must submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection
elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
4. Submittal Of Hearing Notices To The Department Of Natural Resources: The Zoning
Administrator must submit hearing notices for proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently
in advance to provide at least ten (10) days' notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by
electronic mail or United States mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
5. Submittal Of Final Decisions To The DNR: A copy of all decisions granting conditional uses must
be forwarded to the DNR within ten (10) days of such action. The notice may be sent by
electronic mail or United States mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist. (Ord. 10, 7th
Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.61: NONCONFORMITIES:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 413/444
A. Continuance Of Nonconformities: A use, structure or occupancy of a land which was lawful before
the passage or amendment of these regulations but which is not in conformity with these
provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
1. A nonconforming use, structure or occupancy must not be expanded, changed, enlarged or
altered in a way that increases its flood damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows
except as provided in subsection A2 of this section. Expansion or enlargement of uses,
structures or occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.
2. Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that
would result in increasing its flood damage potential must be protected to the regulatory flood
protection elevation in accordance with any floodproofing techniques, (i.e., FP1 through FP4
floodproofing classifications), allowable in the International Building Code, except as further
restricted in subsection A4 of this section.
3. If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is discontinued for more
than one year, any future use of the premises must conform to these regulations.
4. If any structure experiences a substantial improvement as defined in these regulations, then the
entire structure must meet the standards of section 11.54 or 11.55 of this chapter for new
structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District,
respectively. If the current proposal, including maintenance and repair during the previous three
hundred sixty five (365) days, plus the costs of any previous alterations and additions since the
first Flood Insurance Rate Map exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of any
nonconforming structure, the entire structure must meet the standards of section 11.54 or 11.55
of this chapter.
5. If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in these regulations, it may not be
reconstructed except in conformity with these provisions. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in section 11.54 or 11.55 of this chapter will apply
depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District,
respectively. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.62: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
A. Violation Constitutes A Misdemeanor: Violation of these provisions or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
grants of variances or conditional uses, constitute a misdemeanor and will be punishable as
defined by law.
B. Other Lawful Action: Nothing in these regulations restricts the City from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not comply
with the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses
will constitute an additional violation of these regulations and will be prosecuted accordingly.
C. Enforcement: Violations of these provisions will be investigated and resolved in accordance with
these provisions. In responding to a suspected violation, the Zoning Administrator and the City
Council may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it, including but not limited to,
prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the
guilty party. The City must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 414/444
violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.63: AMENDMENTS:
A. Floodplain Designation, Restrictions On Removal: The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning
Map must not be removed from the floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is
in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection
elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be
permitted by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) if the
Commissioner determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the
intended use.
B. Amendments Require DNR Approval: All amendments to these regulations must be submitted to
and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) prior to
adoption. The Commissioner must approve the amendment prior to the City Council approval.
C. Map Revisions Require Ordinance Amendments: The floodplain district regulations must be
amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to the
floodplain maps adopted in subsection 11.52B of this chapter. (Ord. 10, 7th Series, eff. 7-2-2018)
11.64: SEVERABILITY:
Every section, provision or part of this chapter is declared severable from every other section,
provision or part thereof to the extent that if any section, provision, or part of this chapter be held
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction it shall not invalidate any other section, provision or part
thereof. (Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
11.65 - 11.98: RESERVED:
11.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he performs
an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or
declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor, except as
otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. The City may enforce any provisions of this chapter by
mandamus, injunction or any other appropriate civil remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 96, 6th Series, eff. 9-5-2017)
Chapter 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (PLATTING)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 415/444
Chapter 12
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS (PLATTING)
12.01: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Purpose And Application: Each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit in the basic physical
structure of the future community, a unit to which the future community will of necessity be forced
to adhere. Piecemeal planning of such subdivisions, without correlation to the city plan, will bring a
disconnected patchwork of plats and poor circulation of traffic. In order that new subdivisions will
contribute toward an attractive, orderly, stable and wholesome community environment, adequate
municipal services and efficient movement of traffic, all subdivisions hereafter platted within the
jurisdiction of the city shall in all respects fully comply with the regulations hereinafter set forth in
this chapter. The application provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements adopted
for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Territorial Limits Of Regulations And Scope:
1. The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land contained herein shall apply
within the city and to land located within two (2) miles of its limits, when not within another
municipality, to the extent allowed under state law. In the event of overlapping jurisdiction within
such two (2) mile area, the extent of jurisdiction hereunder shall be determined and agreed upon
between the city and the other municipality or municipalities concerned.
2. Except in the case of a resubdivision, these regulations shall not apply to any lot or lots forming
a part of subdivision plats recorded in the office of the register of deeds of Morrison County prior
to the effective date hereof, nor is it intended by these regulations to repeal, abrogate, annul or
in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those
in conflict with these regulations or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed,
covenant or other private agreement which are equal to or more restrictive, or with restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the city is a party.
C. Definitions: For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given in this subsection:
ADMINISTRATOR: The person appointed as zoning administrator by the city council, as
provided by this chapter.
BIKEWAY: A bicycle lane, path or route, regardless of whether it is designed for the exclusive
use of bikes or is to be shared with other transportation modes.
BOULEVARD: The portion of the street right of way between the curb line and the property line.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The line within a lot, which establishes the minimum distance
between the property line and the nearest portion of an enclosed structure.
BUTT LOT: A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2) corner lots.
CARTWAY: An easement for ingress and egress dedicated to public use, usually petitioned by a
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 416/444
landowner who has no access to a public road, except over lands of another or has access of
less than thirty three feet (33') wide. Generally privately constructed and maintained, with
exceptions.
CITY: Statutory and home rule charter types of cities, per Minnesota statutes section 410. A
statutory city is governed by statute and any special laws enacted for that city; a home rule
charter city is governed by its charter, any special laws enacted for that city, and in some cases,
general law addressed for statutory cities if not prohibited. Cities are divided, for legislative
purposes, into classes as follows:
1. First Class: Over one hundred thousand (100,000) inhabitants;
2. Second Class: Twenty thousand one (20,001) to one hundred thousand (100,000)
inhabitants;
3. Third Class: Ten thousand one (10,001) to twenty thousand (20,000) inhabitants; and
4. Fourth Class: Not more than ten thousand (10,000) inhabitants.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The formal expression of a community's social and economic goals
portrayed graphically and/or in writing, showing the community's desirable future development,
the projected uses of private land, and the general location and extent of proposed public
facilities.
DEVELOPER'S AGREEMENT: A contract that the city may enter into with a landowner or
developer in the subdivision process that details how associated infrastructure and other
subdivision ordinance requirements will be accomplished.
DEVELOPMENT: The performance of any building or mining operations, the making of any
material change in the use of any structure or land, the parceling of land into one or more lots,
tracts or parcels, and the creation or termination of rights of access or riparian rights.
EASEMENT: A grant by an owner of land for the specific use of said land by the public generally,
or to a person or persons. Public easements created on the plat shall be limited to public utilities,
drainage and/or public way easements defined as follows:
Drainage Easement: An easement for purposes of controlling, preserving and providing for the
flow of water.
Public Way Easement: A thoroughfare or cul-de-sac, which provides ingress and egress to the
public.
Utility Easement: An easement conveyed, granted or dedicated to the public for utility
purposes.
FINAL PLAT: The final plat, drawing or chart prepared by a registered land surveyor on which
the subdivision plan of subdivision is presented to the city for approval and which, if approved,
will be submitted to the register of deeds or the registrar of titles.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 417/444
LOT: A parcel or portion of land in a subdivision or plat of land, separated from other parcels or
portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey map or by metes and bounds, for
the purpose of sale or lease or separate use thereof.
LOT LINE OR BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT: A process that allows for changes in property
lines through the attachment of land to a contiguous lot, tract or parcel, provided any residual
tract or any existing structure complies with the provisions of city code.
METES AND BOUNDS SUBDIVISION: A description of real property prepared by a land
surveyor registered in the state of Minnesota, which is not described by reference to a lot or
block shown on a map or a recorded plot, but is described by starting at a known point and
describing the bearing and distances of the lines forming the boundaries of the property.
MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The guides, principles and specifications for
the preparation of subdivision plans, indicating, among other things, the minimum and maximum
dimensions of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plan.
MINOR SUBDIVISION: A subdivision of land of small size and minor importance with well
defined conditions.
NONREGISTERED LAND: Land which has not been registered with the Morrison County
registrar of titles. "Nonregistered land" is commonly called "abstract land" because the evidence
of ownership is typically contained in a document called an "abstract of title" prepared by a
licensed abstract company.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any
other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to
commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
PARK: Public land and open spaces in the city dedicated or reserved for recreation purposes.
PEDESTRIANWAY: The right of way across or within a block for use by pedestrian traffic,
whether designated as a pedestrianway, crosswalk or however otherwise designated.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A type of development characterized by a unified site
design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent or
lease, and also usually involving clustering of these units or sites to provide areas of common
open space, density increases, and a mix of structure types and land uses. These developments
may be organized and operated as condominiums, timeshare condominiums, cooperatives, full
fee ownership, commercial enterprises, or any combination of these, or cluster subdivisions of
dwelling units, residential condominiums, townhouses, apartment buildings, campgrounds,
recreational vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels, and conversions of structures and land uses
to these uses. Does not include a duplex where specifically allowed in a zoning district on a
single parcel of land.
PLANNING COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The preliminary map, drawing or chart prepared in accordance with this
chapter indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning
commission and city council for their consideration.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between persons, which constitute a
restriction of the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of the property
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 418/444
owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of development, which
would tend to impair stability of values.
PUBLIC RECREATION SPACE: An area dedicated to the public for recreational purposes and
transferred by recorded deed to the city of Little Falls. "Public recreation space" shall not include
those areas dedicated for streets, rights of way, easement, wetland preservation, drainage
ponds and other nonrecreational purposes.
PUBLIC WAY: A highway, street, avenue, road, cul-de-sac, alley, trail, or other land donated for
public use which provides ingress and egress to the public.
REGISTERED LAND: Land which has been filed and registered with the Morrison County
registrar of titles. Land ownership is evidenced by a certificate of title, issued by the county
registrar of titles. "Registered land" is commonly called "Torrens land". The owner of registered
land is sometimes said to have "Torrens title".
REGISTERED SURVEYOR: A surveyor registered with the Minnesota state board of registration
for professional engineers and surveyors to practice professional surveying in the state of
Minnesota.
SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE: Any archaeological site, standing structure or other property
that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the
State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the
provisions of Minnesota statutes section 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is
presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after
review by the Minnesota state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota historical society.
All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
SKETCH PLAN: A plan drawn to scale used for planning and discussion purposes only.
STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Alley: A minor way for vehicular traffic, which is not owned and maintained by the city.
Collector Street: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares. It includes
the principal entrance streets of a residential development.
Cul-De-Sac: A minor street with only one outlet and having a turnaround.
Half Street: A public right of way having only half the required width specified in subsection
12.06C9 of this chapter.
Marginal Access Street: A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a thoroughfare and
which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
Minor Street: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting properties
and the local needs of a neighborhood.
Private Street: A way for vehicular traffic which is not owned and maintained by the city.
Street: A right of way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, land, land and place, or however otherwise
designated.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 419/444
Street Width: The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right of way of a street.
Thoroughfare: A street where heavy volumes of fast moving vehicles are provided for. The
streets have considerable continuity and are used primarily as a traffic artery for
intercommunication among large areas.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of
land hereunder for him/her or another.
SUBDIVISION: The separation of an area, parcel or tract of land under single ownership into two
(2) or more parcels, tracts, lots or long term leasehold interests where the creation of a
leasehold interest necessitates the creation of streets, roads or alleys for residential,
commercial, industrial or other use, or any combination thereof, except those separations:
1. Where all the resulting parcels, tracts, lots or interests will be twenty (20) acres or larger in
size and five hundred feet (500') in width for residential uses, and five (5) acres or larger in
size for commercial and industrial uses;
2. Creating cemetery lots;
3. Resulting from court orders or the adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a common
boundary.
The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
TOWN AND TOWNSHIP: Are used interchangeably in Minnesota law. Towns are based on the
congressional township, generally thirty six (36) square miles. Organized towns are the primary
local government unit for unincorporated areas. Urban towns are those towns that have been
granted some of the same powers as statutory cities.
WAIVER OF SUBDIVISION: A waiver granted to an applicant seeking to divide a platted lot into
one or more separately described lots or parcels, or consolidate two (2) or more such platted lots
or parts thereof into one or more lots or parcels in a subdivision plat on file and of record in the
office of the recorder or register of deeds or registrar of titles of Morrison County wherein the
subdivision or consolidation:
1. Involves platted properly; and
2. Involves lots all in the same subdivision; and
3. All lots meet the minimum requirements of the city code.
D. Rules:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 420/444
1. Unless approved as a final plat as provided herein, no subdivision shall be entitled to
recordation in the office of the register of deeds or have any validity; and the building/zoning
official shall not issue building permits for any structure on a lot in any proposed subdivision. The
city council shall not permit any public improvements to be installed unless the preliminary plat is
approved and shall not furnish services until approval of the final plat.
2. Any owner or agent of the owner of land who conveys a lot or parcel in violation of this chapter,
subject to modification under section 12.09 of this chapter, shall forfeit and pay to the city a
penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lot or parcel so conveyed. A
municipality may enjoin such conveyances or may recover such penalty by a civil action in any
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.02: PROCEDURE:
A. Preliminary Sketch And Review:
1. Requires preliminary consultation with city staff personnel regarding development and platting
proposal, to include the following items:
a. Availability of services;
b. Topographic features;
c. Street pattern and standards;
d. Proposed timing of development;
e. Lot location;
f. Park dedication requirements;
g. Trunk highway requirements;
h. Notice to other jurisdictions;
i. Stormwater requirements;
j. Proof of title;
k. Underlying plats; and
l. Developer's agreement.
2. Following such informal review and consultation, the subdivider may submit the preliminary plat
utilizing the considerations determined in the sketch plat review.
B. Preliminary Plat:
1. Before dividing any tract of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels, an owner or subdivider
shall, unless a variance is authorized, file with the administrator:
a. A completed plat application form.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 421/444
b. Six (6) full size copies (22 inches by 32 inches) of the preliminary plat, and one eleven inch by
seventeen inch (11" x 17") copy of the preliminary plat.
c. Abstract of title or Torrens certificate of title, or other proof of ownership as approved by the
city attorney, which has been updated within thirty (30) days of submission.
d. Fee to be determined by city council resolution.
e. If the subdivider requests that any existing special assessment, which has been levied against
the premises described in the subdivision be divided and allocated to the respective lots in the
subdivision plat, the city shall estimate the clerical cost of preparing the revised assessment
roll, filing the same with the county auditor, and making such division and allocation, and upon
approval by the city council of such estimated cost, the same shall be paid to the city in
addition to the fee mentioned in subsection B1d of this section, to cover the cost of preparing
and filing such revised assessment.
2. The preliminary plat shall be considered officially filed after the administrator has examined it for
proper form and stamped it. The administrator shall have fifteen (15) days to review the
preliminary plat and either accept or reject it. If no rejection or acceptance is received within the
fifteen (15) day time period, then the preliminary plat shall be deemed accepted.
3. After the preliminary plat is accepted, the administrator shall:
a. Set a date for a public hearing on the preliminary plat, subject to subsection B5 of this section.
Notice of the hearing setting forth the time, date and place of the hearing shall be published in
the official newspaper and shall be sent by mail to all property owners of record within three
hundred fifty feet (350') of the proposed subdivision boundaries at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing.
b. Submit the preliminary plat application to the planning commission for its examination and
report, and one copy to the public works director for his/her examination and report. Copies of
the report of the public works director shall be given to the planning commission prior to the
public hearing.
c. Submit one copy of the preliminary plat application, including updated abstract of title or
Torrens certificate, or other approved proof of title, to the city attorney, who shall have fifteen
(15) days in which to submit a report to the planning commission.
d. If the proposed preliminary plat includes lands abutting upon any existing or established trunk
highway, or proposed highway which has been designated by a centerline order filed in the
office of the county recorder, it shall first be presented by the city to the commissioner of
transportation for written comments and recommendations. Preliminary plats in the city
involving both a trunk highway and a highway under county jurisdiction, shall be submitted by
the city to the county highway engineer as provided in subsections B1 and B2 of this section,
and to the commissioner of transportation. Plats shall be submitted by the city to the
commissioner for review at least thirty (30) days prior to the city taking final action on the
preliminary plat. The commissioner of transportation shall submit the written comments and
recommendations to the city within thirty (30) days after receipt by the commissioner of
transportation of such plat. Final action on such a plat by the city shall not be taken until after
these required comments and recommendations have been received or until the thirty (30)
day period has elapsed.
(1) Any proposed preliminary plat or initial plat filing which includes land located in the city
bordering an existing or proposed county road, highway or county state aid highway, that is
designated on a map or county highway plan filed in the office of the county recorder or
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 422/444
registrar of titles, must be submitted by the city to the county engineer within five (5)
business days after receipt by the city of the preliminary plat or initial plat filing for written
comments and recommendations. The county engineer's review shall be limited to factors of
county significance in conformance with adopted county guidelines developed through
public hearing or comprehensive planning process with comment by the city. The guidelines
must provide for development and redevelopment scenarios, allow for variances, and reflect
consideration of city adopted guidelines.
(2) Within thirty (30) days after county receipt from the city of the preliminary plat or initial plat
filing, the county engineer shall provide to the city written comments stating whether the plat
meets county guidelines and describe any modifications necessary to bring the plat into
conformity with the county guidelines. The city may not approve a preliminary plat until it
has received the county engineer's written comments and recommendation, or until the
county engineer's comment period has expired, whichever occurs first. Within ten (10)
business days following the city's approval of a preliminary plat, the city shall submit to the
county board notice of its approval, along with a statement addressing the disposition of any
written comments or recommendations made by the county engineer. In the event the city
does not amend the plat to conform to the recommendations made by the county engineer,
representatives from the city shall meet to discuss the differences and determine whether
changes to the plat are appropriate prior to final approval. This requirement shall not extend
the time deadlines for preliminary or final approval as required under Minnesota statutes
sections 505.03 or 15.99 or 462.358, or any other law, nor shall this requirement prohibit
final approval as required by this section.
(3) A legible preliminary drawing or print of a proposed preliminary plat shall be acceptable for
purposes of review by the commissioner of transportation or the county highway engineer.
To such drawing or print, there shall be attached a written statement describing: a) the outlet
for and means of disposal of surface waters from the proposed platted area; b) the land use
designation or zoning category of the proposed platted area; c) the locations of ingress and
egress to the proposed platted area; and d) the preliminary site plan for the proposed
platted area, with dimensions to scale, authenticated by a registered engineer or land
surveyor, showing the existing or proposed state highway, county road or county highway,
and all existing and proposed rights of way, easements, general lot layouts and lot
dimensions. Failure to obtain the written comments and recommendations of the
commissioner of transportation or the county highway engineer shall in no manner affect the
title to the lands included in the plat or the platting of said lands. The city shall file with the
plat in the office of the county recorder or registrar of titles, a certificate or other evidence
showing submission of the preliminary plat to the commissioner or county highway engineer
in compliance with this subsection.
4. A developer's agreement shall be executed by both parties and any lien holders and/or
proposed lien holders, and submitted to the planning commission within fifteen (15) days from
the date the preliminary plat is officially accepted.
5. The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing and make its report to the city council
within sixty (60) days, except in cases where the applicant requests additional time to amend the
plat. At the hearing, all parties interested shall be given an opportunity to make presentations.
6. The city council shall act on the preliminary plat within one hundred twenty (120) days of the
date on which the preliminary plat was officially filed.
7. The preliminary plat must be approved if it meets the applicable standards addressed in this
chapter and applicable zoning standards, unless the city council adopts written findings based
on a record from the public proceedings why the application shall not be approved.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 423/444
8. If the city council fails to preliminarily approve or disapprove an application within the one
hundred twenty (120) day review period, the application shall be deemed preliminarily approved
and, upon demand, the city shall execute a certificate to that effect.
C. Final Plat:
1. The owner or subdivider shall file six (6) full size copies twenty two inch by thirty four inch
(22" x 34") and two (2) eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") copies of the final plat with the
administrator, not later than six (6) months after the date of approval of the preliminary plat by
the city council, otherwise the preliminary plat and the final plat will be considered void, unless
an extension is required in writing by the subdivider for good cause and is granted by the city
council. A border line shall be placed one-half inch (1/2") inside the outer edge of the plat on the
top and bottom thirty four inch (34") sides; and the right twenty two inch (22") side; and two inch
(2") the outer edge of the plat on the left twenty two inch (22") side. If the plat consists of more
than one sheet, the sheets shall be numbered consecutively. A plat shall be prepared on four (4)
mil transparent reproducible film, or the equivalent, and shall be prepared by a photographic
process.
2. The final plat will have incorporated all changes or modifications approved in the preliminary
plat, in all other respects it shall conform to the preliminary plat. It may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at
the time; provided, that such portion conforms with all the requirements of this chapter.
3. Other Requirements:
a. Prior to submitting the final plat to the city, the subdivider shall submit a copy of the final plat
to the public works director for approval.
b. The city may require an independent review of the final plat by a licensed professional
surveyor prior to final approval by the city council, based on the complexity of the plat.
Subdivisions that involve mixed uses, multi-zoned property, common interest communities
(CIC), shore land and/or Mississippi corridor regulations, phased in PUDs, or other land
divisions the city determines would need an independent plat check, may be subject to this
requirement. All fees of such review will be charged to the developer/subdivider.
4. The final plat shall be considered officially filed after the administrator has examined it and found
that it is in proper form.
5. After the final plat is placed on file, the administrator shall refer copies of the final plat to the
planning commission and copies to the public works director, who shall notify the utility
companies concerned of said platting. The procedure for processing the final plat shall be the
same as for the preliminary plat, except that no public hearing is required in processing the final
plat. The city council shall certify final approval within sixty (60) days of filing if the application
has complied with all conditions and requirements of applicable regulations and all conditions
and requirements upon which the preliminary approval was expressly conditioned, either through
performance or the execution of appropriate agreement assuring performance.
6. A plat shall contain a certification by the proper county official that there are no delinquent taxes
owed and that the current year's payable taxes have been paid in accordance with Minnesota
statutes section 272.12.
7. If the final plat is approved by the city council, the subdivider shall record it with the register of
deeds or registrar of titles within six (6) months after the date of approval; otherwise, the
approval of the final plat shall be considered void.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 424/444
8. If the city council fails to verify or decline final approval as so requested within the sixty (60) day
timeline, and if the applicant has complied with all conditions and requirements, the applicant
shall be deemed finally approved and, upon demand, the city shall execute a certificate to that
effect.
9. The subdivider shall furnish the following specified types of copies of the final plat to the persons
listed below:
a. Morrison County register of deeds: One original on hardshell twenty two inch by thirty four
inch (22" x 34");
b. City:
(1) One copy on hardshell twenty two inch by thirty four inch (22" x 34");
(2) One full size transparency;
(3) One eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reproducible on paper.
10. Signatories for plats:
a. Planning commission chairperson;
b. Council president;
c. City administrator;
d. City attorney; and
e. Surveyor.
11. Where applicable as to location, the subdivider shall comply with Minnesota statutes chapter
505, which concerns land proposed for platting that abuts a county, county state aid or state
trunk highway.
D. Absence Of Utilities: No plat shall be approved and no building permits shall be issued in areas
where public water and sanitary sewer are not available at or reasonably near the boundary of the
subdivision, unless a variance is authorized. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.03: NECESSARY DATA FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. Size And Scale: The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The size of the full size map
shall not be less than twenty two inches by thirty four inches (22" x 34"). There shall also be one
eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") copy. All subdivision maps shall be drawn at a scale not
smaller than a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), unless otherwise required by
the city council.
B. Information Required: The preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision shall contain or have
attached thereto the following information:
1. Identification And Description:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 425/444
a. Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation of
the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the county.
b. Legal description of property to be platted and a survey prepared by a surveyor registered in
the state.
c. Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, contract for deed vendors, mortgage holders
of record, surveyor and designer of the plan.
d. North point.
e. Date of preparation.
2. Existing Conditions:
a. Boundary lines of proposed subdivision, clearly indicated.
b. Existing zoning classification.
c. Total approximate acreage.
d. Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or other public ways,
showing type, width and condition of improvements, if any, railroad and utility right of way,
parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and
section and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100')
beyond the tract, unless otherwise required by the administrator.
e. Location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities
within the tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract. Such data as
grades, invert elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants shall also be
shown, unless otherwise required by the administrator.
f. Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided lands, within one hundred feet (100'),
identifying by name and ownership, unless otherwise required by the administrator.
g. Topographic data, out to three hundred feet (300') beyond the boundaries of the proposed
plat, including contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet (2'). Where the horizontal
contour interval is one hundred feet (100') or more, a one foot (1') vertical interval shall be
shown. Watercourses, marshes, wetlands, wooded areas, rock outcrops, power transmission
poles and lines, and other significant features shall also be shown, unless otherwise required
by the administrator.
3. Subdivision Design Features:
a. Layout of proposed streets, showing rights of way widths and proposed names of streets. The
name of any street heretofore used in the city or its environs shall not be used, unless the
proposed street is an extension of an already named street, in which event the name shall be
used.
b. Location and widths of proposed alleys, pedestrianways, utility easements, drainage
easements and public way easements.
c. Typical cross sections of proposed improvements upon streets and alleys, together with an
indication as to the method of disposing of the proposed stormwater runoff.
d. Approximate centerline gradients of proposed streets and alleys.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 426/444
e. Locations, size and approximate gradient of proposed sewer lines and water mains.
f. Layout, numbers and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks.
g. Minimum front and side street building setback lines, indicating dimensions.
h. Areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrianways, utility easements, drainage easements and
public way easements intended to be dedicated or preserved for public use, including the size
of such area or areas in acres.
4. Other Information:
a. Statement of the proposed use of lots, stating type of residential buildings with number of
proposed dwelling units; type of business or industry so as to reveal the effect of the
development on traffic, fire hazards or congestion of population.
b. Proposed protection covenants.
c. Source of water supply.
d. Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage and flood control.
e. If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed zoning plan for the areas, including
dimensions. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.04: QUALIFICATIONS GOVERNING APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A. The planning commission may return a conditional report to the city council. The city council may
require such changes or revisions as it deems necessary for the health, safety, general welfare
and convenience of the city.
B. The approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission and city council is tentative only,
involving merely the general acceptability of the layout as submitted.
C. Subsequent approval will be required on the engineering proposals pertaining to water supply,
storm drainage, sewerage and sewage disposal, sidewalks, gas and electric service, grading,
gradients and roadway widths and the surfacing of streets, by the public works department and
other public officials having jurisdiction, prior to the approval of the final plat by the city.
D. No plan will be approved for a subdivision which covers an area subject to periodic flooding or
which contains extremely poor drainage facilities, and which would make adequate drainage of the
streets and lots impossible, unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the
opinion of the public works director, make the area completely safe for occupancy, and provide
adequate street and lot drainage.
E. No plat will be accepted that cannot be adequately serviced with sanitary sewer and municipal
water, unless a variance is granted. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.05: NECESSARY DATA FOR FINAL PLAT:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 427/444
A. General: The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor who is registered in the state, and shall
conform to all state and county requirements and the requirements of subsections 12.03B1, B2a
and B3a, b, f, g and h of this chapter.
B. Plat Format: A plat shall be prepared on four (4) mil transparent reproducible film or the equivalent,
and shall be prepared by a photographic process. Plat sheet size shall be twenty two inches by
thirty four inches (22" x 34"). A borderline shall be placed one-half inch (1/2") inside the outer edge
of the plat on the top and bottom thirty four inch (34") sides; and the right twenty two inch (22")
side; and two inches (2") inside the outer edge of the plat on the left twenty two inch (22") side. If a
plat consists of more than one sheet, the sheets shall be number consecutively.
C. Plat Name, Legal Description, Dedication Statement: The plat name shall appear across the top
portion of the plat and in the dedication paragraph of the plat, and shall not duplicate or be similar
to the name of any plat that is in the office of the county recorder or registrar of titles. The plat
name shall be in capital letters in all locations that the name appears on the plat. The plat shall
contain a complete and accurate description of each tract of land being platted and a dedicated
statement describing what part of the land is dedicated, to whom, and for what purpose. In the
event of a discrepancy between the plat name stated in the dedication statement and the plat
name appearing in other portions of the plat, the name in the dedication statement shall control.
D. Ownership Interest, Acknowledgment: The names and signatures of all fee owners, contract for
deed vendees, and mortgage holders of record of the land being platted, shall appear on the plat,
together with a statement as to their interest. The marital status of individual owners shall appear
on the plat. Entities shall identify the specific type of entity and the jurisdiction in which the entity is
organized. Agents or officers for an entity shall state their position with the entity. A mortgage
holder may consent to the plat by a written acknowledge statement in lieu of the mortgage holder's
name and signature appearing on the plat. If a mortgage holder is included on the plat, the plat
shall be signed by an authorized representative. If a certificate of notarial act on a plat includes the
jurisdiction of the notarial act, the name of the notarial officer, the title of the notarial officer, and the
date the notary commission expires, printed in pen and ink, or typewritten, on the plat. A plat shall
be recorded regardless of whether a notary stamp was used or was illegible if used. All signatures
on the plat shall be written with black ink, not ballpoint.
E. Boundary, Lots, Blocks, Outlets: Plat boundaries shall be designated on the plat in accordance with
the underlying legal description and survey. All lots in each block shall be numbered consecutively
with Arabic numerals beginning with the numeral 1. All blocks shall be numbered consecutively
with Arabic numerals beginning with numeral 1. All outlots shall be labeled "OUTLOT" in capital
letters and lettered consecutively in capital letters beginning with the letter A. All lot, block and
outlot lines shall be drawn as a solid line. The name adjacent boundary line of any adjoining
platted lands shall be dotted on the plat.
F. Mathematical Data, Dimensions, Labels, Symbols: A plat shall show all survey and mathematical
information and data necessary to locate and retrace all boundary lines and monuments. Bearings,
azimuths and central angles shall be expressed in degrees, minutes, seconds and labeled with the
respective symbols. A north arrow and directional orientation note shall be shown. Distances shall
be expressed in feet and hundredths of a foot. All straight line segments of the plat shall be labeled
with the length of the line and bearing azimuth. All curved line segments of the plat shall be labeled
with the central angle, arc length and radius length. If any curb is nontangential, the dimensions
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 428/444
shall include a long chord bearing or azimuth, and shall be labeled nontangential. The
mathematical closure tolerance of the plat boundary, blocks, lots and outlots shall not exceed
2/100 of a foot. A graphics scale shall be shown along with the label "scale in feet". Dimension and
descriptive recitals in the legal description shown on the plat shall be depicted and labeled on the
graphic portion of the plat. A symbol shall indicate the position of all found and set plat
monuments, along with a description of each. Ditto marks and foot and inch symbols shall not be
used.
G. Public Ways: All public ways within the plat, whether existing at the time of platting or being
dedicated by the plat, shall be depicted on the plat, together with the name and sufficient
mathematical data to locate the position and width of the public way. The location of all existing
public ways adjacent to the plat boundary shall be depicted on the plat as dashed lines. The name
and width of the adjacent public ways shall be shown, if known.
H. Easements: All easements to be dedicated on the plat shall be depicted on the plat with purpose,
identification and sufficient mathematical data to locate the boundaries of the easements.
Easements created on the plat shall be limited to public utility and/or drainage easements as
defined in Minnesota statutes section 505.01, subdivision 3, paragraphs b, h and j. Easement
boundaries shall be shown as dashed lines. Temporary easements, building setback information
and building floor elevations shall not be shown on a plat.
I. Water Boundaries: Any water boundary abutting or lying within the plat boundaries shall be shown
and identified on the plat as a solid line delineating the then existing shore line. When any parcel
depicted on the plat includes water as a boundary, a dash survey line shall be shown and labeled
with sufficient mathematical data to compute a closure of said parcel. Distances shall be shown
between the survey line and the water boundary at all angle points, lot and boundary lines. Plat
monuments shall be set at all locations where the survey line intersects a plat boundary line or
block, lot or outlot line. The water elevation of any lake, stream or river depicted on the plat shall
be shown to the tenth of a foot along with the date the elevation was measured. All elevations shall
be referenced to a durable benchmark described on the plat, together with its general location
shown and benchmark elevation to the hundredth of a foot. If a mean sea level adjusted datum
benchmark is available within two (2) miles of the land being platted, all elevations shall be
referenced to the datum. The highest known water elevation shall be indicated on the plat if the
data is available from the Minnesota department of natural resources, the United States army
corps of engineers, or another appropriate governmental unit. All "wetlands", as defined in
Minnesota statutes section 505.01, subdivision 3, paragraph 1, shall be shown on the plat.
J. Certifications:
1. A plat shall contain a certification by the land surveyor who surveyed or directly supervised the
survey of the land being platted, and prepared the plat or directly supervised the plat
preparation. The certificate shall state that:
a. The plat is a correct representation of the boundary survey;
b. All mathematical data and labels are correctly designated on the plat;
c. All monuments depicted on the plat have been or will be correctly set within one year as
indicated on the plat;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 429/444
d. All water boundaries and wetlands as of the date of the surveyor's certification are shown and
labeled on the plat; and
e. All public ways are shown and labeled on the plat.
The survey's certification shall be properly acknowledged by the surveyor on the plat before a
notarial officer.
2. A plat shall contain a certification or approval executed by the local elected governmental unit or
an authorized official designated by the local elected governmental unit.
3. In any county that requires review and approval of plats by the county surveyor or another land
surveyor, the plat shall contain a certification of approval executed by the county surveyor or
land surveyor that this plat is in compliance with this section.
a. In such cases where the city requires an independent review of the final plat by a licensed
professional surveyor, the plat shall contain a certification of approval executed by the
assigned independent surveyor.
4. A plat shall contain a certification by the proper county official that there are no delinquent taxes
owed and that the current year's payable taxes have been paid in accordance with Minnesota
statutes section 272.12.
5. A plat shall contain a certification of recording by the county recorder or registrar of titles, or
both, if the plat contains both nonregistered and registered property.
K. Survey: The land surveyor that certifies the plat shall survey or directly supervise the survey of the
land depicted on the plat. Plat monuments shall be set at all angle and curve points on the outside
boundary lines of the plat prior to recording. Interior block, lot and witness monuments shall be set
within one year after recording the plat. A financial guarantee may be required for the placement of
monuments. If it is impracticable to set a plat monument, a witness plat monument shall be set.
The license number of the land surveyor that certifies the plat shall be affixed to all set plat
monuments.
L. County Surveyor Approval: All plats prepared for recording in accordance with this section are
subject to approval by the county surveyor in accordance with Minnesota statutes section 389.09,
subdivision 1, and/or as authorized by their respective county board of commissioners. (Ord. 10,
6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.06: CONSOLIDATED PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT REVIEW:
Preliminary and final plat review and approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision may be
consolidated, contingent upon the approval of city staff and contingent upon compliance with the
following criteria:
A. The proposed subdivision meets the definition of a "minor subdivision", pursuant to subsection
12.02C of this chapter.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 430/444
B. City utilities (i.e., storm sewer [drainage], sanitary sewer, water mains) are available and adequately
sized to service the proposed subdivision.
C. The intended plat use must match the general neighborhood use.
D. Access to the intended plat must be in place.
E. Future streets will not be obstructed and the proposed subdivision will not interfere with the proper
development of adjacent properties.
F. Wetlands must be delineated on the plat and must comply with all soil and water rules and
requirements and, additionally, must comply with all state law regarding use, development and
preservation of wetlands.
G. No variances are required or requested. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.07: MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Conformity With Comprehensive Plan: The proposed subdivision shall conform to the
comprehensive plan.
B. Street Plan: The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall
conform to the comprehensive plan and to these regulations, and shall be considered in their
relation to topographic conditions, to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and in
their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
1. Continuation Of Existing Streets: The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make
provisions for the appropriate continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas.
2. Future Projection Of Streets: Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, but may be subdivided,
the arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of
streets into adjoining areas by carrying the new streets to the boundaries of the new subdivision
at appropriate locations.
C. Streets:
1. Widths: All right of way widths and pavement widths (face to face of curb) shall conform to the
following minimum dimensions:
Classification Right Of Way Roadway
Major public ways 100 feet or as determined by county or state
(whichever is greater)
Local public ways 66 feet minimum 44 feet
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 431/444
Collector streets (east
side)
66 feet 40 feet
Collector streets (west
side)
60 feet 40 feet
Minor arterial (east
side)
66 feet 36 feet
Minor arterial (west
side)
60 feet 36 feet
Marginal access
streets
50 feet 36 feet
Cul-de-sac turnaround
50 feet 40 foot
radius
2. Deflections: When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than
ten degrees (10), they shall be connected by a curve with radius of not less than one hundred
feet (100').
3. Grades: All centerline gradients shall be at least five percent (5%) and shall not exceed the
following:
Classification Gradient (Percent)
Major thoroughfares, local thoroughfares, collector streets 4
Minor streets, marginal access streets, collector streets 6
4. Vertical Curves: Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves.
Minimum length, in fact, of these curves shall conform to the standards specified in table A,
sheet 5-291.231 of the Minnesota highway road design manual, April 1, 1969.
5. Street Jogs: Street jogs shall have a centerline offset by one hundred fifty feet (150') or more
when applied to minor streets or marginal access streets. In all other cases they shall be
avoided.
6. Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
7. Cul-De-Sacs: Maximum length cul-de-sac streets shall be five hundred feet (500'), measured
along the centerline from the intersection of origin to end of right of way.
8. Marginal Access Streets: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or planned major
public way or railroad right of way, the city council may require a street approximately parallel to
and on each side of such right of way for adequate protection of residential properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic. Such marginal access streets shall be located at a
distance from the majority public way or railroad right of way suitable for the appropriate use of
the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for
the requirements of approach grades and future grade separation.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 432/444
9. Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations;
and except where the city council finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other
half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever there is a half street adjacent to a tract
to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract.
10. Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited.
11. Private Streets: Private streets shall not be approved nor shall public improvements be
approved for any private streets.
12. Hardship To Owners Of Adjoining Property Avoided: The streets arrangements shall not be
such as to cause hardships to owners of adjoining property in platting their own land and
providing convenient access to it.
D. Alleys:
1. Locational Requirements: Either a public or private alley shall be provided in a block where
commercially zoned property abuts a major or local thoroughfare.
2. Widths: All alley rights of way approved easements and pavements width shall conform to the
following minimum standards:
Classification Right Of Way Or Easement Pavement
Industrial or commercial 24 feet 2 feet
Residential 20 feet 16 feet
3. Grades: All centerline gradients shall be at least five percent (5%) and shall not exceed eight
percent (8%).
E. Intersections:
1. Angle Of Intersection: The angle formed by the intersection of streets shall not be less than sixty
degrees (60), with ninety degree (90) intersections preferred.
2. Size Of Intersection: Intersections of more than four (4) corners shall be prohibited.
3. Corner Radii: Roadways of street intersections at curb shall be rounded by a radius of not less
than twenty feet (20'). Roadways of alley-street intersections shall be rounded by a radius of not
less than ten feet (10'). Corners at the entrances to the turnaround portion of cul-de-sacs shall
be rounded by a radius of not less than fifteen feet (15').
F. Curb And Gutter: Concrete curb and gutter shall be included as a part of the required street surface
improvement and shall thus be designed for installation along both sides of all roadways in
accordance with the standards of the city.
G. Sidewalks:
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 433/444
1. Location: Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all major public ways as
designated on a comprehensive plan upon which buildable lots front and may be required by the
city council upon recommendation of the planning commission along one or both sides of other
rights of way. The sidewalk shall not be located less than one foot (1') from the property line, nor
be adjacent to the curb, except as determined in commercial areas.
2. Widths: All sidewalk widths shall conform to the following minimum standards:
Classification Width
Single-family zone 5 feet
Multiple-family zone and public building sites 6 feet
Commercial zone 6 feet
Industrial zone 6 feet
3. Grades: Sidewalks shall slope one-fourth inch (1/4") per foot away from the property line, and
the profile grade shall conform to street grades.
H. Pedestrianways: In blocks over nine hundred feet (900') long, pedestrian crosswalks through the
blocks, and at least ten feet (10') wide, may be required by the city council in locations deemed
necessary to public health, convenience and necessity.
I. Water Supply: Extensions of public water supply system shall be designed so as to provided public
water service to each lot. The design of said extension shall be in accordance with the standards
of the city.
J. Sewage Disposal: Extensions of the public sanitary sewer system shall be designed so as to
provide sewer service to each lot. The design of said extensions shall be in accordance with the
standards of the city.
K. Drainage: A complete and adequate drainage system for the subdivision shall be designated, and
shall include a storm sewer system or a system of open ditches, culverts, pipes and catch basins,
or both systems. Such system or systems shall be designed in conformity will all applicable
standards of the city so as to meet with their approval.
L. Easements:
1. Provided For Utilities: Easements at least twenty feet (20') wide, centered on rear and other lot
lines, shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be dedicated to the public by
appropriate language in the owner's certificate. They shall have continuity of alignment from
block to block, and at deflection points easements for pole line anchors shall be provided where
necessary. Easements shall be provided along property lines from utility easements on rear lot
lines to rights of way so as to provide for a streetlight interval not to exceed five hundred feet
(500').
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 434/444
2. Provided For Drainage: Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any
watercourse or drainage channel, whether or not shown in the comprehensive plan, to a width
sufficient to provide property maintenance and protection and to provide for stormwater runoff
and installation and maintenance of storm sewers, and they shall be dedicated to the city by
appropriate language in the owner's certificate.
3. Provided For Public Ways: The parameters for public ways shall be address and set forth in the
developer's agreement and in accordance with the city engineering standards, and public way
easements shall be dedicated to the city by appropriate language in the owner's certificate.
M. Street Names: Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names, unless a
new street is a continuation of or in alignment with the existing or platted street, in which event it
shall bear the same name of the existing or platted street so in alignment.
N. Blocks:
1. Factors Governing Dimensions: Block length and width, or acreage within bounding streets,
shall be such as to accommodate the size of residential lots required in the area by the zoning
provisions and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of street traffic.
2. Length: Block length shall not exceed one thousand three hundred feet (1,300').
3. Arrangements: A block shall be so designated as to provide two (2) tiers of lots, unless it adjoins
a railroad, river or major public way where it may have a single tier of lots.
O. Lots:
1. Location: All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated street, or a street that
has received legal status as such.
2. Size: The lot dimensions in subdivisions designed for single-family detached dwellings use shall
not be less than the minimum dimensions required to secure the minimum lot area specified in
the zoning provisions of this code.
3. Butt Lots: Butt lots shall be platted at least five feet (5') wider than the average width of interior
lots in the blocks.
4. Side Lot Lines: Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to the street line.
5. Watercourses: Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream shall have an
additional depth or width, as required, to assure house sites that are not subject to flooding.
6. Natural Features: In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all natural
features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar conditions which, if
preserved, will add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.
7. Lot Remnants: All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger
tract must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
8. Lots Along Public Ways: Except in those cases where there are extenuating circumstances,
residential lots shall not front on major public ways. Residential lots contiguous to a railroad right
of way shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty feet (150') in depth. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-
2009)
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 435/444
12.08: PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
A. Reservation: Where a proposed park, playground, school site or other public site as shown on the
city parks plan or comprehensive plan is embraced in part or in whole by the boundary of a
proposed subdivision and such public sites are not dedicated to the city or board of education,
such site shall be reserved and no action taken towards approval of preliminary or final plat for a
period not to exceed ninety (90) days to allow the city or board of education the opportunity to
consider and take action toward acquisition of such site by purchase or other means.
B. Park Land Dedication: All plats, including plats associated with planned unit developments, shall be
subject to the park dedication requirements of this section. In all new subdivisions, there shall be
land dedicated for public recreation and/or open space, or other public recreation purpose, with
such land being in addition to property dedicated for streets, alleys, easements or other public
ways.
1. The city council may require the developer to dedicate, reserve or otherwise convey to the city a
reasonable portion of the total area of a proposed development or subdivision for public
recreational/open space purposes. The city council will reasonably determine whether the
development or subdivision will increase the demand for public recreational uses, such as parks,
playgrounds, trails and open space, and whether the public purposes set forth in the city park
plan or comprehensive plan will be met. At least seven percent (7%) of the area to be developed
or subdivided shall be set aside and dedicated by fee title or easement to the city for public
recreation and/or open space purposes. Gross area shall include all land in the proposed
subdivision, including, but not limited to, land designated as outlots, roads and rights of way,
drainage and utility easement, and designated wetlands. Lands to be dedicated to the city as
public recreation and/or open space shall meet at least one the of following criteria:
a. The land is adjacent to existing public land used for recreational and/or open space purposes,
or where future uses are planned that are consistent with the city recreation/open space
purposes and needs.
b. The land would extend an existing or proposed trail system.
c. The land is of sufficient size and appropriate nature to maintain a recreation purpose
appropriate for that area.
d. The soils should be suitable for construction of action recreation facilities, such as picnic
shelters, playground equipment, ballfields, etc.
e. Proposed parks should be located in an area that is readily accessible by the road system,
can support adequate park space, and can serve both the subdivision and other residents
using the city park system.
f. Provide an opportunity for habitat restoration to support a natural resource based park system.
In addition to the criteria listed above, land dedicated shall, as much as possible, extend and
protect sensitive areas, including, but not limited to, historically significant sites,
environmentally sensitive areas or unique natural resources or features.
2. The amount and location of lands to be dedicated shall be determined in the following manner:
a. Prior to the public hearing on the preliminary plat, the administrator will forward a copy of the
preliminary plat to the city park, recreation and tree board.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 436/444
b. The park, recreation and tree board will review the plat and forward a written recommendation
to the administrator.
c. The administrator, city staff and planning commission shall report and recommend the amount
and location of lands to be donated for public recreation purposes in accordance with the city
park plan and comprehensive plan, and the standards set forth in Minnesota statutes section
462.358.
d. The city council shall approve the amount and location of lands to be donated for public
recreation purposes in accordance with the city plans and the standards set forth in Minnesota
statutes section 462.358.
e. This determination shall be made at the time the city council meets to act on the preliminary
plat where the developer may be heard regarding the dedication requirement.
f. The amount of land to be dedicated in a residential development or subdivision shall be
determined by applying the following formula: number of units in subdivision multiplied by the
number of people per household multiplied by the per capita park land share equals the park
land dedication area.
g. The amount of land to be dedicated in a commercial, mixed use and industrial development or
subdivision shall depend upon the density of units per acres on the proposed development or
subdivision, and shall be determined by applying the following formula:
PROPOSED MAXIMUM UNITS PER ACRE
Market Value Percentage
0 _ 2 3 percent
2.1 - 3 4 percent
3.1 - 4 5 percent
4.1 - 5 6 percent
5.1+ 7 percent
In determining the amount of acreage to be dedicated for public recreation and/or open space use, the
city council may consider the amount of open space, park, recreational or common areas and facilities
which the developer will reserve for use by occupants of the proposed development or subdivision. No
areas may be dedicated for public recreation use until such areas have been approved as being
suitable and needed for the public health, safety, convenience and/or general welfare.
3. The city council, in its discretion upon recommendation of the planning commission, may accept
a cash fee in lieu of land dedication, or accept a combination of cash and land contributions. The
fee up to ten percent (10%) of the county assessor's market value of the proposed development
or subdivision as of the date of final plat approval, excluding the value of the proposed streets,
alleys, easements or other public ways. The market value of the land shall be determined by the
use of tax assessment records and formulas that apply thereto, with said fee deposited into the
city park improvement fund. Except as hereinafter provided, the cash equivalency payment shall
be due and payable on or before the release of the final plat by the city.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 437/444
4. When the development or subdivision is too small for practical dedication of land for public
recreation and/or open space purposes, or if no land of the subdivision is necessary to be
dedicated or is determined unsuitable for such purposes, the subdivider shall pay a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) per lot created or ten percent (10%) of the subdivision land value prior to
subdivision.
5. Lots created in any manner that are larger than five (5) acres or three hundred feet (300') in
width shall not be subject to paying a fee in lieu of public land dedication, but may be subject to
dedication of land for public use. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.09: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS ON SITE:
A. Improvement Listed And Described: Prior to the approval of a preliminary plat by the city council,
the subdivider shall have agreed, in the manner set forth in this section, to install or pay for the
installation, in conformity with construction plans approved by the public works director and in
conformity with all applicable standards and ordinances of the city, the following improvements on
the site:
1. Monuments: Monuments of a permanent character shall be placed in locations on the boundary
of the subdivision and within it as required.
2. Street And Alley Improvement:
a. Grading: The full width of the right of way of each street and alley dedicated in the plat shall
be graded.
b. Pavements: All streets and alleys shall have an adequate subbase and shall be improved with
an all-weather, permanent surface.
3. Curb And Gutter: Permanent curb and gutter shall be installed.
4. Underground Utilities: All utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, water, natural gas
and electricity shall be placed underground.
5. Sidewalks And Pedestrianways: Permanent sidewalks and pedestrianways shall be installed
when residential density becomes three (3) dwelling units per acre, or more, unless a variance is
authorized.
6. Water Supply: Water mains shall be provided to serve the subdivision by extension of the
existing city system. Service connections stubbed into the property line and all necessary fire
hydrants shall also be provided.
7. Sewage Disposal: Sanitary sewer and service connections stubbed into the property line shall
be provided to serve all the lots in the subdivision and shall be connected to the existing city
sewer system, except that where connection to the city sewer system is not available in a street
adjacent to or within the subdivision, the sewer system within the subdivision shall be installed
and capped for future use. A variance to this requirement may be granted if the grades for such
sewers to the existing sewer system cannot be provided.
8. Drainage: A system that will adequately take care of the water runoff within the subdivision shall
be provided. If the city council, upon the recommendation of the public works director,
determines that it is feasible for the subdivider to install storm sewers connected to the existing
storm sewer system of the city within or adjacent to the subdivision, or an extension of the city
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 438/444
system which will be extended to the boundary of the subdivision within eighteen (18) months of
the filing of the final plat, the city shall install a storm sewer system to provide drainage. If a
storm sewer system is installed and connections to the city system are not immediately
available, the storm sewers shall be capped and temporary provisions made for drainage by
other means. The cost of storm sewers shall be assessed against the benefitting properties
including those which may lie outside the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.
9. Street Trees: Street trees having a trunk diameter (measured 12 inches above the ground), of
not less than one and one-half inches (11/2") shall be planted along all streets where trees do
not exist, and not more than seventy five feet (75') and not less than forty feet (40') apart. There
shall be at least one tree per lot. This requirement shall be satisfied and it is preferable if an
equivalent number of trees of the same size or larger exist or are planted in a naturalistic
manner in the front yards of the adjoining lots. Only green ash, linden, sugar maple and long
lived hardwood shade trees, other than elm or box elder, shall be planted. These shall be
planted in at least one cubic yard of growing soil.
10. Boulevard Sodding: Boulevard strips shall be sodded.
11. Street Signs: Street signs shall be installed in all new subdivisions by the city.
B. Optional City Construction Permitted: In lieu of doing actual construction work on improvements
required to be made by the subdivider under this section, the subdivider may petition the city to do
the construction work required. Such petition shall include a request that the benefited property be
assessed for the cost of such improvements where appropriate. Such petition shall be presented to
the city by September 1 for construction during the next season. The option shall apply to streets,
alleys, curb and gutters, and sanitary sewer facilities. In no event shall such construction result in a
cost to be borne by taxpayers of the city generally, except in those instances where part of the
benefit of the construction is deemed by the city council to extend beyond the boundaries
contained in the proposed subdivision.
C. Water, Gas And Power Facility: Plans for water, gas and electric power facilities shall be submitted
to the planning commission. The planning commission shall indicate its approval of plans for these
facilities before the city council will issue a final plat approval. Financing arrangements for these
facilities shall be in accordance with policies of the planning commission.
D. Payment For Installation Improvements: The costs of the required improvements, which are listed
and described in subsection A of this section, are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense
of the subdivider and at no expense to the city, unless otherwise stated. In the case of an
improvement, the cost of which would be general policy of the city council be assessed only in part
to the improved property and the remaining cost paid out of the general tax levy, the city council
may make provision for payment of a portion of the cost by the subdivider and the remaining
portion of the cost by the city; and provided further, that if any improvement installed within the
subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, the city
council may make provisions for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement, representing the
benefit to such lands, to be assessed against the same and in such case, the subdivider will be
required only to pay for such portion of the whole cost of said improvements as will present the
benefit to the property within the subdivision. Any assessments incurred by the developer in the
course of developing any property may be paid off over a period of three (3) years, each yearly
payment being equal to one-third (1/3) of the total assessment.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 439/444
E. Required Agreement Providing For Property Installation Of Improvements: Prior to installation of
any required improvements and prior to approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall enter
into a developer's agreement, a contract, in writing, with the city requiring the subdivider to furnish
and construct said improvements at his/her sole cost and in accordance with plans and
specifications and usual contract conditions all approved by the city council, which shall include
provisions for supervision of details of construction by the public works director and grant to the
public works director authority to correlate the work to be done under said contract by any
subcontractors authorized to proceed thereunder and with any other work being done or
contracted by the city in the vicinity. The agreement shall require the subdivider to make an escrow
deposit or, in lieu thereof, to furnish the performance bond as specified in subsection F of this
section, the amount of the deposit and the penal amount of the bond to be equal to the public
works director's estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be furnished under the contract,
including the cost of inspection by the city. On request of the subdivider, the contract may provide
for completion of part or all of the improvements covered thereby prior to acceptance of the plat,
and, in such event, the amount of the deposit or bond shall be reduced in a sum equal to the
estimated cost of the improvements to be furnished after the acceptance of the plat only. The time
for completion of the work and the several parts thereof shall be determined by the city council,
upon recommendation of the public works director after consultation with the subdivider and shall
be reasonable in relation to the work to be done, the seasons of the year, and proper correlation
with construction activities in the subdivision. The provisions of this subsection shall be waived or
amended as deemed appropriate by the city council, upon advice of the public works director, on
those improvements which the city has agreed to install under the provisions of subsection B of
this section.
F. Financial Guarantee: The contract provided by subsection E of this section shall require the
subdivider to make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, furnish a performance bond as follows:
1. Escrow Deposit: An escrow deposit shall be made with the city administrator in a sum equal to
the total cost as estimated by the public works director, including cost of inspection by the city, of
all of the improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the contract
and which have not been completed prior to approval of the final plat. The city shall be entitled to
reimburse itself out of said deposit for any costs and expense incurred by the city for completion
of the work in case of default of the subdivider under this contract, and for any damages
sustained by the city on account of any breach thereof. Upon completion of the work and
termination of any liability to the city of the subdivider under this contract, the balance remaining
in said deposit shall be refunded to the subdivider.
2. Performance Bond: In lieu of making the escrow deposit above described, the subdivider may
furnish the city with a public contractor's performance bond in form prescribed by Minnesota
statutes sections 574.26 and 574.32, with corporate surety, in a penal sum equal to the total cost
as estimated by the public works director, including cost of inspection by the city, of all of the
improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider pursuant to the contract and which
have not been completed prior to approval of the final plat. The bond shall be subject to the
approval of the city attorney and filed with the city administrator.
G. Construction Plans: Construction plans for the required improvements, conforming in all respects
with the standards of the public works director and this code, shall be prepared at the subdivider's
expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the state, and said plans shall contain the
engineer's seal. Such plans, together with the quantities of construction items, shall be submitted
to the public works director for approval and for an estimate of the total cost of the required
improvements. Upon approval they shall become a part of the contract required in subsection E of
this section. The tracings of the plans approved by the public works director, plus two (2) prints,
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 440/444
shall be furnished to the city to be filed by the public works director as a record in the engineering
department.
H. Inspection: All required improvements on the site that are to be installed under the provisions of this
section shall be inspected during the course of construction by the public works director at the
subdivider's expense, and acceptance shall be subject to the public works director's certificate of
compliance with the contract.
I. Improvements Completed Prior To Approval Of Final Plat: Improvements within the subdivision
which have been completed prior to application for approval of the final plat or execution of the
contract for installation of the required improvements shall be accepted as equivalent
improvements in compliance with the requirements of subsection A of this section only if the public
works director shall certify that he/she is satisfied that the existing improvements conform to
applicable city standards. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.10: MODIFICATIONS, EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES:
A. Complete Neighborhood: The city council, upon receiving a report from the planning commission,
may grant a variance from these regulations in case of a subdivision large enough to constitute a
more or less self-contained neighborhood, provided the city council receives adequate safeguards
to assure development according to plan. Said plan shall not be in conflict with the major street
plan and shall, in the opinion of the city council, provide adequate public open space and be a
desirable community development.
B. Minor Subdivision: In the case of a subdivision of small size and of minor importance, situated in a
locality where conditions are well defined, the planning commission may exempt the subdivider
from complying with some of the requirements stipulated in this chapter pertaining to the
preparation of the preliminary plat and may allow for the consolidation of the preliminary and final
plat review, pursuant to the criteria set forth in section 12.06 of this chapter. The subdivider's
resulting parcels shall conform to all applicable requirements of this code.
C. Lot Division And Consolidation; Waiver Of Subdivision: Some of the subdivision requirements
stipulated in this chapter may be waived to allow a division of one or more lots platted into lots and
blocks and designated in a subdivision plat on file and of record in the office of the register of
deeds or registrar of titles of Morrison County, into one or more separately described parcels or
lots; or the consolidation of two (2) or more such platted lots or parts thereof into one or more lots
or parcels, pursuant to the criteria set forth under subsection 12.01C of this chapter, definition of
"waiver of subdivision". A waiver of subdivision may be allowed within any zoning district, with the
administrator's approval. The procedure shall be in compliance with the following:
1. The owner or owners of such platted lots or lots to be so divided or consolidated shall file in the
office of the administrator a certificate of survey prepared and signed by a state registered land
surveyor. Such survey shall show the dimensions of said lots as measured upon the recorded
plat, and also the proposed division or consolidation thereof. A written description of the
separately described lots or parcels, which will result from the proposed subdivision or
consolidation, shall be filed with such survey. The administrator shall review the proposal for
conformance with this section.
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 441/444
2. The separately described tract of land to be conveyed or designated for building permit
purposes by reason of such division or consolidation as described upon said proposed plat or
registered land survey shall not be less than the minimum dimensions required to secure the
minimum lot standards specified in the city code.
3. As a result of such division or consolidation as herein authorized, no remaining part of an
original subdivision lot shall become a separately described lot upon said proposed plat or
registered land survey, with a size less than the minimum dimensions required to secure the
minimum lot standards specified in this code.
4. Evidence of ownership or a legal interest in the property. That may include the deed of
ownership or a title opinion by a practicing attorney at law.
5. Written approval for public road access for each parcel from the appropriate road authority.
6. Upon submittal of all required documents, the administrator shall review the proposed
subdivision or consolidation for compliance with all applicable code provisions. If the waiver of
subdivision is in compliance, it shall be recorded in the office of the recorder or register of deeds
or the registrar of titles of Morrison County.
7. Upon the application of an owner or owners who shall have complied with this subsection and all
other applicable requirements of this chapter, the administrator, subject only to other applicable
provisions of this code, is authorized to issue the building permit requested for on any separately
described lot or parcel designated and set forth upon such proposed plat or survey.
D. Boundary Line Adjustment: A boundary or lot line adjustment is a procedure for changes in
property lines through the attachment of land to a contiguous lot, tract or parcel. It is intended to
modify or correct the location of a boundary or lot line to remedy adverse topographical features or
encroachments of structures. A boundary line adjustment may be allowed within any zoning
district, with the administrator approval, provided any residual tract or any existing structure does
not become noncompliant with the provisions of this code. The application for a boundary line
adjustment will not be considered complete until all fees and items are submitted.
1. The boundary line adjustment shall not:
a. Replat, amend, alter or vacate a plat;
b. Create any additional lot, tract, parcel or division;
c. Result in a lot, parcel, site or division which does not meet the minimum requirements of this
code for setbacks, lot standards and access; or
d. Increase the nonconforming aspect of an existing nonconforming lot.
2. Procedures: Information to be provided:
a. Boundary line adjustment application;
b. Original and two (2) copies of a certificate of survey by a state registered land surveyor for all
affected lots or tracts, showing the following:
(1) The proposed lines for affected lots, indicated by heavy solid lines;
(2) The existing lot lines for all affected lots proposed to be changed, indicated by heavy
broken lines;
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 442/444
(3) The location and dimension of all structures/improvements existing upon the affected lots
and the distances between structures/improvements and the proposed boundary lines;
(4) The area and dimensions of each lot following the proposed adjustment;
(5) The original legal description of the entire property, together with new separated legal
descriptions for each parcel;
(6) All parcel numbers of affected lots; and
(7) The location and dimension of any drain field, easements or rights of way existing within or
adjacent to any affected lots.
Upon submittal of all required documents, the administrator shall review the proposed
boundary line adjustment application for compliance with the requirements of this section
and all other applicable code provisions. If the adjustment is in compliance, it shall require
filing a certificate of transfer of subdivided property with the office of the recorder or register
of deeds, or the registrar of titles of Morrison County. The auditor's office will require the
following: evidence that the current year and delinquent taxes are paid in full; and a deed of
attachment be filed that states that the property as described is for the purpose of
attachment.
E. Variance: The city council may grant a variance upon receiving a report from the planning
commission in any particular case where the subdivider can show that by reason of exceptional
topography or other physical conditions, the strict compliance with these regulations could cause
an exceptional and undue hardship on the enjoyment of a substantial property right, provided such
relief may be granted without detriment to the public welfare and without impairing the intent and
purpose of these regulations.
F. Application For Variance Required: Application for any such variance shall be made in writing by the
subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed, stating fully all facts relied upon by the
petitioner, and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the
planning commission and the city council in the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for
such development shall include covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to
guarantee the full achievement of the plan. Any variance or modification thus granted shall be
recorded in resolution form and entered in the minutes of the city council setting forth the reasons
that justified the action. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.11: COPIES OF PLAT:
Copies of all of such plats or subdivisions, waivers of subdivision and boundary line adjustments, after
the same have been submitted and approved as provided in this chapter, shall be filed and kept by the
public works director among the records of the city. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.12: CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS:
No conveyance of land in which the land conveyed is described by metes and bounds or by reference
to a plat made after the effective date hereof which has not been approved as provided herein shall be
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 443/444
made or recorded; provided, however, the foregoing provision does not apply to a conveyance if the
land described:
A. Was a separate parcel of record April 1, 1945, or the date of adoption of subdivision regulations
under Minnesota laws 1945, chapter 287, whichever is the later, or of the adoption of subdivision
regulations pursuant to a home rule charter; or
B. Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to such time, and the
instrument showing the agreement to convey was recorded in the office of the Morrison County
recorder within one year thereafter, as provided by Minnesota statutes section 462.358; or
C. Was a separate parcel of record of not less than two and one-half (21/2) acres in area and one
hundred fifty feet (150') in width on January 1, 1966; or
D. Was a separate parcel of record of not less than five (5) acres in area and three hundred feet (300')
in width on July 1, 1980; or
E. Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than five (5) acres and having a width
of not less than three hundred feet (300'), and its conveyance does not result in the division of the
parcel into two (2) or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five (5) acres in area or
three hundred feet (300') in width; or
F. Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less than twenty (20) acres and having a
width of not less than five hundred feet (500'), and its conveyance does not result in the division of
the parcel into two (2) or more lots or parcels, any one of which is less than twenty (20) acres in
area or five hundred feet (500') in width. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.13: TRANSFER OF SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate subdivided real estate transfers and ensure that
there is uniform and strict compliance with all subdivision regulations of the city.
B. Certification Required: Pursuant to Minnesota statutes chapter 272 and amendments thereto, the
Morrison County auditor shall not transfer any conveyance of property that subdivides or modifies
the description of a property until presented with a certification bearing the signature of the city
administrator or his/her designee and the city seal, indicating that said conveyance is in
compliance with all subdivision regulations of the city. This provision shall not apply to previously
platted lots already on record with the office of the Morrison County recorder or register of deeds,
or the registrar of titles.
C. Procedure: Any instrument of conveyance, which seeks to subdivide property, shall be tendered to
the city administrator for certification. The city administrator shall order a review of the proposed
conveyance. Within twenty four (24) hours of receipt of the instrument, the city administrator or
his/her designee shall present a certification on a standardized certification form formulated by the
7/1/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=840 444/444
city administrator to the Morrison County auditor and Morrison County recorder indicating whether
the city subdivision regulations are applicable or nonapplicable.
1. If the city subdivision regulations do not apply, the certification shall reflect this and the official
recording of the transfer may occur.
2. If the subdivision regulations apply, then the certification must indicate this and it must also
indicate whether the subdivision regulations have or have not been satisfied. If the regulations
have been satisfied, then official recording of the transfer may occur. If the regulations have not
been satisfied, official recording shall not be allowed until a new certification is obtained which
indicates that the regulations have been met. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)
12.14 - 12.98: RESERVED:
12.99: VIOLATION A MISDEMEANOR:
Every person violates a section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter when he/she
performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, or fails to act when such failure is thereby
prohibited or declared unlawful and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor,
except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof. (Ord. 10, 6th Series, eff. 3-2-2009)