
Minnetonka Code of Ordinances


CITY OF MINNETONKA, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



   Local legislation current through Ord. 2019-01 effective April 17, 2019



Visit the City of Minnetonka, MN home page




Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




CITY OF MINNETONKA
HOME RULE CHARTER




Effective: April 17, 2017




Table of Contents




Chapter 1 - Names, Boundaries, Powers, and General Provisions



   Section 1.01. Name and Boundaries.





   Section 1.02. Powers.





   Section 1.03. Charter as Law.





   Section 1.04. Other Laws.





Chapter 2 - Form of Government





   Section 2.01. Form of Government.





   Section 2.02. Boards and Commissions.





   Section 2.03. Elective Officers.





   Section 2.04. Wards.





   Section 2.05. Incompatible Offices.





   Section 2.06. Council Vacancies.





   Section 2.07. Mayor.





   Section 2.08. Officers.





   Section 2.09. Salaries.   





   Section 2.10. Investigation of City Affairs.





   Section 2.11. Interferences with Administration.   





Chapter 3 - Procedure of Council





   Section 3.01. Council Meetings.





   Section 3.02. Staffing of Council Meetings.





   Section 3.03. Rules of Procedure and Quorum.





   Section 3.04. Voting Procedure.





   Section 3.05. Resolutions, Motions.





   Section 3.06. Adoption of Ordinances.





   Section 3.07. Emergency Ordinances.





   Section 3.08. Amendment and Repeal of Ordinances.





   Section 3.09. Codification of Ordinances.





Chapter 4 - Nominations and Elections





   Section 4.01. Regular City Elections.





   Section 4.02. Primary Elections.





   Section 4.03. Candidate Filing.





   Section 4.04. Special Elections.





   Section 4.05. Election Procedure.





   Section 4.06. Non-partisan Elections.





Chapter 5 - Initiative and Referendum





   Section 5.01. General Authority.





   Section 5.02. Initiation of Charter Amendments.





   Section 5.03. Further Regulations.





   Section 5.04. Commencement of Proceeding.





   Section 5.05. Petition.





   Section 5.06. Filing of Petition.





   Section 5.07. Evaluation and Certification of Petition.





   Section 5.08. Council Action on Initiative Petition.





   Section 5.09. Council Action on Referendum Petition.





   Section 5.10. Election.





   Section 5.11. Offenses.





   Section 5.12. Forms.





Chapter 6 - City Administration





   Section 6.01. City Manager.





   Section 6.02. City Manager's Powers and Duties.





   Section 6.03. Departments.





   Section 6.04. Subordinate Officers.





   Section 6.05. Purchasing.





   Section 6.06. Competitive Contracts.





   Section 6.07. Document Execution.





   Section 6.08. Compensation and Recognition.





Chapter 7 - Taxation and Finances





   Section 7.01. Council Control; Public Purpose Expenditures.





   Section 7.02. Fiscal Year.





   Section 7.03. Taxation.





   Section 7.04. Board of Equalization.





   Section 7.05. Budget Preparation.





   Section 7.06. Budget Adoption.





   Section 7.07. Budget Enforcement.





   Section 7.08. Budget Alterations.





   Section 7.09. Contingency Amount in Budget.





   Section 7.10. Disbursements.





   Section 7.11. Funds.





   Section 7.12. Accounts and Reports.





   Section 7.13. Debt.





   Section 7.14. Tax Anticipation Certificates.





   Section 7.15. Emergency Debt Certificates.





   Section 7.16. Equipment Certificates.





   Section 7.17. Purchases With Installment Payments.





   Section 7.18. Community Investment Fund.





Chapter 8 - Public Improvements and Special Assessments





   Section 8.01. Powers.





   Section 8.02. Current Services.





   Section 8.03. Fees and Civil Penalties.





   Section 8.04. Voluntary Assessments for Certain Property Purchases.





   Section 8.05. Construction of Public Improvements.





Chapter 9 - Property Acquisition





   Section 9.01. Acquisition of Property.





   Section 9.02. Acquisition of Property for Park and Open Space Purposes.





Chapter 10 - Franchises





   Section 10.01. Franchises Required.





   Section 10.02. Public Hearing.





   Section 10.03. Further Regulation; Franchise Value.





   Section 10.04. Term





   Section 10.05. Renewals.





Chapter 11 - Public Ownership and Operation of Utilities





   Section 11.01. Acquisition.





   Section 11.02. Rates and Finances.





   Section 11.03. Purchase in Bulk.





   Section 11.04. Lease of Plant.





   Section 11.05. Sale of Utility.





   Section 11.06. Notice of Public Hearings.





Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous and Transition Provisions





   Section 12.01. Official Publications.





   Section 12.02. Oath of Office.





   Section 12.03. Interest in Contracts.





   Section 12.04. Official Bonds.





   Section 12.05. Sale of Real Property.





   Section 12.06. Vacation of Streets, Use of Public Rights-of-Way.





   Section 12.07. Successor Rights and Obligations.





   Section 12.08. Relationship to State Law.





   Section 12.09. Existing Ordinances Continued.





   Section 12.10. Human Rights.





   Section 12.11. Implementing Ordinances.





   Section 12.12. Fines and Penalties.





   Section 12.13. Enforcement.





Appendix





   Appendix A-1   Committee Affidavit





   Appendix A-2   Circulator Affidavit





   Appendix A-3   Initiative Petition





   Appendix A-4   Referendum Petition





Charter History





   I. Adoption





   II. General Amendments





   II. Specific Amendments





Notice




Where the City Charter makes a general reference to State law, the City
Attorney's Office will provide copies of the applicable law upon request.



Chapter 1 - Names, Boundaries, Powers, and General Provisions



Section 1.01.  Name and Boundaries.



The City of Minnetonka, is a municipal corporation in Hennepin County,
Minnesota. It has the boundaries existing now or as may be changed in the
future.



Section 1.02.  Powers. 



The city has all powers that may be possible now or in the future for a
Minnesota municipal corporation to exercise. This section grants to the city
every power that the citizens could lawfully give to themselves as a
municipal corporation, including the power to preserve, protect and promote
the health, safety and general welfare of the city. The specific mention of
particular powers in this charter does not limit the general powers conferred
by this section.



Section 1.03.  Charter as Law.



This charter has the effect of law and need not be pleaded or proved in any
case.



Section 1.04.  Other Laws.



The city may exercise a power given to statutory cities unless that power is
specifically prohibited by this charter.



Chapter 2 - Form of Government



Section 2.01.  Form of Government.



The form of government established by this charter is the "council-manager
plan." The council exercises the legislative power of the city and determines
matters of policy. The city manager heads the city's administrative branch
and is responsible to the council for the administration of city business.



Section 2.02.  Boards and Commissions.



There are no separate, independent administrative boards or commissions,
except those required by law or established by the council. The council may
establish boards or commissions and other groups to advise the council
regarding municipal activities, to investigate subjects of interest to the
city, or to perform quasi-judicial functions. Members of such bodies will be
appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by the council.



Section 2.03.  Elective Officers.



Subd. 1. The council is composed of seven council members who are the mayor,
council member at-large seat A, council member at-large seat B, council
member ward 1, council member ward 2, council member ward 3, and council
member ward 4. A council member must be eligible to vote in the State of
Minnesota, be at least 21 years old, be a resident of the city, and have been
a resident of the city for at least 30 days before the election or
appointment to office. A person elected to represent a particular ward must
reside in that ward. The council is the judge of the qualifications and
eligibility of its own members. The council must provide by ordinance the
manner for taking evidence when qualifications or eligibility is contested.



Subd. 2. Each council member, including the mayor, serves for a term of four
years or until a successor is elected and qualifies. All terms start on the
first Monday of January following the date of the officer's election.



Subd. 3. The mayor and the two at-large council members are elected by all
city residents. Each ward council member is elected by the voters residing in
the ward that the council member represents.



Subd. 4. Municipal elections will be held in odd-numbered years. Elections
for the offices of mayor and council members-at-large will be held every four
years starting in 1997. Elections for the offices of ward council members
will be held every four years starting in 1999.

(Amended by Ord. 2019-01, effective April 17, 2019)



Section 2.04. Wards.



The city is divided into four wards corresponding generally to the four
geographic quadrants of the city:



(a)   Ward 1 - Southeast quadrant



(b)   Ward 2 - Northeast quadrant



(c)   Ward 3 - Northwest quadrant



(d)   Ward 4 - Southwest quadrant



The boundaries of the wards are established by ordinance. A ward is composed
of compact and contiguous territory. The population of the wards must be as
equal as practical; the equal number is determined by dividing the city
population by the number of wards. The difference between the ward with the
lowest population and the ward with the highest population can be no greater
than ten percent of the equal number. If a federal census shows that a ward
no longer meets this requirement, the council must change the ward boundaries
to achieve compliance within the time period required by state law. If a ward
boundary change places a ward council member's residence in a different ward,
the council member will continue in office until the next general municipal
election, at which time the office must be filled for the remainder of that
term.



Section 2.05.  Incompatible Offices.



Subd. 1. A council member may not hold another elected public office during
tenure as a council member. Taking the oath of office for an elected public
position constitutes an automatic resignation from any other elected public
office.



Subd. 2. A council member may not be the city manager or hold any other paid
city position, even if the council member has taken a leave of absence from
the paid city position. A former council member may not hold a paid,
appointed city position for one year after termination of the council
member's service. This does not prohibit a council member from being
appointed mayor if that position is vacant.



Subd. 3. A council member may serve on both the city council and the charter
commission, as long as no more than one council member serves on the charter
commission at one time.



Section 2.06.  Vacancies in the Council.



Subd. 1. Death or resignation. A vacancy in a council position automatically
occurs on the date an incumbent dies. A vacancy also automatically occurs
when an incumbent submits a written resignation to the mayor, city manager,
or city clerk, effective on the date specified. If the date is not specified,
the vacancy is created on the date of submittal.  If the date of submittal
is unknown, then the vacancy will occur on the date the official receives the
written resignation.



Subd. 2. Other vacancies. A vacancy in a council position also exists in the
following situations:



a.   failure of an elected person to qualify on or before the date of the
council's second regular meeting in the year after the election;



b.   termination of residency in the city;



c.   except as provided in section 2.04, termination of a ward council
member's residency in the ward from which elected;



d.   conviction of a felony either before or after qualification for
office; or



e.   loss of qualifications for the elective office.



Subd. 3. Procedure to declare vacancy.



a.   The council must on its own motion declare by resolution that a
vacancy exists when a vacancy occurs for a reason other than death or
resignation.

b.   If the council fails to act or is unaware of a vacancy, a resident
who is an eligible voter in the city may submit a written request with
supporting facts to the city clerk, asking the council to declare a vacancy.
A request submitted within 90 days after another request for the same council
position will not be considered under this section. Within 45 days after
receipt of the request, the council must investigate the claim and either
declare that a vacancy exists or that the request lacked adequate evidentiary
support.



Subd. 4. Procedure to fill the vacancy.



a.   A special election is required to fill a vacancy when:

   (1)   The vacancy has been declared, or has automatically occurred,
befoe the first day to file affidavits of candidacy for the next regular
municipal election; and

   (2)   more than two years remain in the unexpired term.

When this subdivision 4.a. applies, the city council must adopt a resolution
to set the date for the special election at the first regular or special
meeting of the city council occurring after the vacancy automatically occurrs
or at the same meeting at which the vacancy is declared. The special election
must be held in accordance with subdivision 5 of section. The person elected
will serve the unexpired term for that office. The city council, at its
option and at the same or a subsequent meeting, may make an interim
appointment of a person to fill the vacancy until a successor is elected at
the special election and qualifies for the office.

b.   If a special election is not required by subdivision 4.b. above, the
council may either appoint an eligible person to serve until expiration of
the position's term or fill the vacancy by special election. Upon notice of
an impending resignation, the council may begin the process of determining
how to fill the vacancy. No later than 60 days after a vacancy automatically
occurs or is declared to exist, the council must appoint an eligible person
to fill the vacancy or schedule a special election to be held in accordance
with subdivision 5 of this section.



If the council does neither, the mayor, or acting mayor if the vacancy is in
the mayor's position, has seven days to appoint an eligible person to fill
the vacancy.



If after 67 days no appointment is made nor an election scheduled, the clerk
must schedule a special election to be held in accordance with subdivision 5
of this section



Subd. 5. Special Election Requirements



a.   Except as provided in subdivison 5.b. below, special elections must
be held at the earliest date possible under state law. The following
provisions apply:

   (1) candidates must file for office no later than four weeks before the
election;

   (2) no primary will be held; and

   (3) the candidate receiving the highest number of votes is elected.

b.   If a special election occurs in the same year as a regular municipal
election, the council may at its option schedule the special election to
occur in conjunction with the regular municipal election rather than at the
earliest possible date under state law. If adequate time exists to conduct a
primary in compliance with state law for the special election, the provisions
of subdivision 5.a. above will not apply, and the special election will be
conducted in the same manner as regular municipal elections.



Subd. 6. [repealed]



Subd. 7. The term of a council member elected at a special election begins as
soon as the person has qualified for office and the city clerk has issued a
certificate of election to the successful candidate in accordance with state
law. The council member serves until the expiration of the position's term.



Subd. 8. [repealed]



Subd. 9.  When the mayor or a council member is unable to serve in the
office or attend council meetings for a 90-day period because of illness, or
because of absence from or refusal to attend council meetings for a 90-day
period, the city council, by resolution, may declare a temporary vacancy in
that office to exist. After a vacancy is declared, the council must appoint a
qualified individual to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term or until the original officeholder is again able to resume duties and
attend council meetings, whichever is earlier. When the original officeholder
is again able to resume duties and attend council meetings, the council must
by resolution remove the temporary officeholder and restore the original
officeholder.



(Amended by Ord. 2019-01, effective April 17, 2019)



Section 2.07.  Mayor.



The mayor is the presiding officer of the council. The mayor:



(a)   votes as a member of the council;



(b)   has the powers and duties conferred on the mayor by this charter,
city ordinances, and state laws;



(c)   is the official head of the city for ceremonial purposes, for
purpose of serving civil process, and for the purpose of martial law; and



(d)   may declare an emergency in accordance with state law.



The council must choose from its members an acting mayor, who holds office at
the pleasure of the council and serves as mayor in the mayor's absence or
disability. The council may also choose from its members an alternate acting
mayor, who holds office at the pleasure of the council and serves as mayor in
the absence or disability of both the mayor and the acting mayor.



Section 2.08.  Officers.



The city's officers are those officials to whom state law or this charter has
granted certain power to act on the city's behalf. The officers include the
council members, the city manager, the city clerk, the city treasurer, and
the city attorney. The council may by ordinance create other official
positions to exercise specified powers on the city's behalf.



Section 2.09.  Salaries.



The council members may by ordinance establish reasonable amounts for their
salaries. No change in salary takes effect until after the next regular
municipal election. The council members may be reimbursed for their
reasonable expenses incurred in connection with city business.



Section 2.10.  Investigation of City Affairs.



The council and officers authorized by the council may investigate the city's
affairs, subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of
books and papers. The council must provide for an audit of the city's
accounts at least once a year by the appropriate state department or a
certified public accountant. The council may conduct surveys or studies of
subjects of municipal concern.



Section 2.11.  Interferences with Administration.



Subd. 1. The council cannot interfere with the city manager in appointing
officers and employees in the administrative branch. The council cannot
require the city manager to hire, terminate, or discipline a particular
person. The council may by ordinance establish a merit system in all or part
of the city administration.



Subd. 2. Except for purposes of inquiry, the council must contact and control
the administrative branch solely through the city manager. The council
cannot, publicly or privately, give an order to the city manager's
subordinates. A single member or group of council members less than a
majority cannot give an order to the city manager.



Chapter 3 - Procedure of Council



Section 3.01.  Council Meetings.



The council must meet at the usual time and place for council meetings on the
first Monday after January 1 following a regular city election. At that time,
the newly elected council members will assume their duties. The council will
meet at the times each month established by ordinance or resolution. The
mayor or three other council members may call a special or emergency council
meeting after giving the notice required by law. Meetings of the council are
public, except as otherwise permitted by law. Any person may inspect the
minutes and records of the meetings at reasonable times.



Section 3.02.  Staffing of Council Meetings.



The city clerk is secretary of the council and keeps minutes of council
proceedings. Upon consultation with the city manager, the council may
designate another city employee (except the city manager or a council member)
to act as secretary and may request that certain city employees be present at
council meetings.



Section 3.03.  Rules of Procedure and Quorum.



The council determines its own rules and order of business. A majority of all
members constitutes a quorum for transacting business, but a smaller number
may adjourn. The council may by ordinance provide a means for a minority to
compel the attendance of absent members.



Section 3.04.  Voting Procedure.



Subd. 1. Each council member's vote on motions, resolutions, and ordinances
must be recorded, unless the vote is unanimous.



Subd. 2. Only the number of council members eligible to vote will be counted
when this charter provides a voting requirement, such as "a majority of all
council members." The total number of council members eligible to vote on a
matter does not include vacancies that exist under the provisions of section
2.06 and council members who cannot vote because of a legally recognized
conflict of interest on the matter.



Section 3.05.  Resolutions, Motions.



Subd. 1. Resolutions must be presented in writing.  An adopted resolution
must be signed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk. An adopted
resolution takes effect immediately or at a later date stated in it.



Subd. 2. The council may conduct business by motion when a resolution or
ordinance is not required.



Section 3.06.  Adoption of Ordinances.



Subd. 1. Unless this charter or state law provides otherwise, legislation
must be enacted by ordinance, and an ordinance must be approved by a majority
of all council members.



Subd. 2. An ordinance must be presented in writing. The enacting clause of an
ordinance is: "The City of Minnetonka ordains:". Except for an emergency
ordinance, an ordinance cannot be adopted at the meeting when it is
introduced, and at least seven days must elapse between introduction and
adoption.



Subd. 3. An ordinance passed by the council must be signed by the mayor or
acting mayor and attested to by the city clerk. The title and a summary of an
ordinance must be published at least once in the official means of
publication with notice that the full ordinance may be seen on the city's
website or at city hall or may be obtained by standard or electronic mail.



Subd. 4. An emergency ordinance and an ordinance that is not subject to
initiative and referendum under Section 5.01 are effective immediately upon
passage or at a later date stated in it. Other ordinances adopted by the
council are effective 30 days after publication of the summary in the
official means of publication or at a later date stated in them. An ordinance
adopted by the voters is effective immediately upon adoption, or at a later
time stated in it.



Section 3.07.  Emergency Ordinances.



An emergency ordinance is an ordinance necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, safety or welfare. It must be
adopted by the affirmative votes of at least five council members and contain
a preamble that defines and declares the emergency. The city may not
prosecute a violation of an emergency ordinance until 24 hours after the
ordinance was either (a) filed with the city clerk and posted in three
conspicuous places in the city or (b) published at least once in the official
means of publication, unless the person charged had actual notice of the
ordinance adoption before the alleged violation. An emergency ordinance is
automatically repealed on the 61st day after adoption, but the ordinance may
be re-enacted if the emergency still exists.



Section 3.08.  Amendment and Repeal of Ordinances.



An ordinance amending or repealing a prior ordinance or part of an ordinance
must state the subject and number of the ordinance or city code section to be
affected. It must set forth in full each section or subdivision to be amended
or repealed.



Section 3.09.  Codification of Ordinances.



Subd. 1. The city clerk must maintain a list by title of all ordinances
adopted by the city. Ordinances of general and permanent application must be
arranged in a code of city ordinances. The ordinance code must be printed and
maintained in a form that allows continuous revision. A code amendment must
be incorporated into to the code as soon as practicable after it is
effective. After each section a note must be placed indicating the
legislative source of the section and any amendments. The city clerk must
have copies of the code available for public distribution free or at a
reasonable charge.



Subd. 2. The council must review the code of ordinances at least every ten
years to ensure that its provisions are current and appropriate. The code may
be re-codified when appropriate. An ordinance provision not previously
published will be effective if it is included in the re-codification and if a
notice is published in the official means of publication for two successive
weeks stating that copies of the code are available at the city clerk's
office.



Subd. 3. Ordinances granting franchises, disposing of public property,
enacting zoning designations of land, and other ordinances that are not of a
general and permanent nature need not be included in the ordinance code. At
the council's discretion, a table of all or some of these ordinances may be
included, or their text may be included as appendices.



Chapter 4 - Nominations and Elections



Section 4.01.  Regular City Elections.



A regular city election must be held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November of odd-numbered years at places designated by the city
council. The city clerk must give notice of the election in the manner
provided by law; however, failure to give notice does not invalidate the
election.



Section 4.02.  Primary Elections.



If one or two candidates file for a particular office, they are declared the
nominees, and no primary will be held. If three or more candidates file for a
particular office, a primary election must be held to determine the nominees
for that office. The primary for that office must be held according to the
schedule for a primary before a state general election, except that it will
be in the year of the city general election. In a primary, the two candidates
receiving the most votes for each office are the sole nominees for that
office at the regular city election.



Section 4.03.  Candidate Filing.



An eligible person may file as a candidate for election by filing their
affidavits of candidacy for a municipal general election with the city clerk
according to the schedule for a state general election, except that it will
be in the year of the city general election. Each position on the council is
a separate office. Each person wishing to be a candidate for a council office
must designate which office is sought. A person may not be a candidate for
more than one council office at an election.



Section 4.04.  Special Elections.



The council may order a special election by resolution. A notice of a special
election must be published in the official means of publication at least
three weeks before the election. The procedure at the election must conform
as closely as possible with that prescribed for other city elections.



Section 4.05.  Election Procedure.



State law will govern all city elections, except as otherwise provided in
this charter or city ordinance.



Section 4.06.  Non-partisan Elections.



Elections for council positions must be held on a nonpartisan basis, with no
party designation on the ballots.



Chapter 5 - Initiative and Referendum



Section 5.01.  General Authority.



The people of the City of Minnetonka reserve to themselves the powers of
initiative and referendum. Initiative is the process for voters to propose
and adopt an ordinance. Referendum is the process to require an ordinance
passed by the council to be referred to the voters for approval or
disapproval. These powers must be exercised in compliance with this charter
and may be exercised only by city residents who are eligible voters under
state law. Initiative and referendum cannot be used with an ordinance that
appropriates money, authorizes the levy of taxes, involves land use or
zoning, or involves the same subject matter as a valid and sufficient
initiative or referendum petition certified to the city council within the
preceding six months.



Section 5.02.  Initiation of Charter Amendments.



Nothing in this charter affects the right of city residents who are eligible
voters to propose amendments to this charter, which is governed by the
Minnesota constitution and statutes.



Section 5.03.  Further Regulations.



The council may further regulate initiative and referendum by ordinance.



Section 5.04.  Commencement of Proceeding.



Five or more Minnetonka city residents who are eligible voters may form a
committee to undertake an initiative or referendum proceeding. The committee
must file an affidavit and its proposed petition with the city clerk before
circulating a petition for signatures. The affidavit must be substantially in
the form attached as Exhibit A-1, must state that a committee has been
formed, must contain the names and addresses of the committee members, and
must be signed by each member of the committee, whose signatures must be
verified by a notary public. For an initiative petition, the affidavit must
also attach a copy of the new ordinance that the committee is proposing. For
a referendum petition, the affidavit must also cite the adopted ordinance
that the committee seeks to reconsider. No petition may be circulated until
the city clerk has approved its form. The city clerk must rule on the
petition's form within five business days after its submittal.



Section 5.05.  Petition.



Subd. 1. General provisions. An initiative or referendum petition must relate
to only one subject which is clearly expressed in the petition. A petition
must be signed only by registered voters of the city, with their residence
address and date of signature. The signatures may be on more than one page.
The circulator of a signature page must be a resident of the city of
Minnetonka who is an eligible voter and must execute an affidavit for each
page, in the form attached as Appendix A-2, verifying that each signature on
the page is genuine.



Subd. 2. Initiative petition. An initiative petition consists of the
signature pages substantially in the form provided in Appendix A-3, each with
the attached text of the proposed ordinance. The number of valid signatures
for an initiative petition must equal at least 10 percent of the number of
persons voting in the city at the last state general election.



Subd. 3. Referendum petition. A referendum petition consists of the signature
pages substantially in the form provided in Appendix A-4, each with the
attached text of the adopted ordinance to be reconsidered. The number of
valid signatures for a referendum petition must equal at least 20 percent of
the number of persons voting in the city at the last state general election.



Section 5.06.  Filing of Petition.



All signature pages must be filed in the city clerks' office as one petition.
A valid referendum petition, including the signature pages, must be submitted
no later than 90 days after the city council adopted the ordinance that is
the subject of the petition.



Section 5.07.  Evaluation and Certification of Petition.



Within 15 working days after the petition is filed, the city clerk must
evaluate the petition for compliance with this chapter. The validity of the
signatures must be judged as of the day the petition was filed. If the city
clerk finds the petition to be sufficient, the clerk must certify the
petition to the council at its next regular meeting, stating the number of
petitioners and the percentage of voters that they constitute. If the city
clerk finds the petition insufficient, the clerk must immediately notify at
least the first three listed members of the sponsoring committee, with the
reasons for the finding. The committee has 30 days in which to correct the
petition. If the clerk finds at the end of the 30 days that the petition is
still insufficient, the clerk must notify at least the first three listed
members of the committee that the petition will not be certified to the city
council. A final finding of insufficiency does not prevent the filing of a
new petition for the same purpose nor prevent the council from referring the
ordinance to the voters at a regular or a special election, at its option.



Section 5.08.  Council Action on Initiative Petition.



Subd. 1. After receiving a certified initiative petition, the council may
refer the proposed ordinance to an appropriate committee. The committee or
council must hold a public hearing on the ordinance. After the public
hearing, but no later than 65 days after the city clerk submitted the
ordinance to the council, the council must take final action on the
ordinance.  If the council passes the proposed ordinance with amendments and
the committee of petitioners has not filed a statement with the city clerk
within 10 days after passage as specified below, the ordinance need not be
submitted to the voters.



Subd. 2. The ordinance proposed in the petition must be submitted to the
voters if:



(a)   the council passes the ordinance with amendments and within 10 days
afterwards at least 3/5 of the members of the petitioners' committee file a
statement with the city clerk expressing dissatisfaction with the council
action; or



(b)   the council fails to pass the ordinance with or without amendments.



Subd. 3. The ordinance must be considered at the next regular municipal or
statewide election, unless there is less than 60 days between that election
and the date that the city council establishes the form of the ballot
question under section 5.10. If there is less than 60 days, the ordinance
will be considered at the following regular municipal or statewide election.
There will be no special election for an initiated ordinance.



Section 5.09.  Council Action on Referendum Petition.



After receiving a certified referendum petition, the council must reconsider
the ordinance at its next regular meeting and either repeal it or reaffirm
the ordinance as passed. In the latter case the council must submit the
ordinance at an election to be held no less than 60 days, but no more than
120 days, after the council establishes the form of the ballot question under
section 5.10. The election must be held at a municipal or statewide election
if one is scheduled in that time period. If one is not scheduled, then the
council must order a special election.. An ordinance does not become
effective if a sufficient referendum petition is filed with the city clerk
before the ordinance's effective date. The ordinance remains suspended
pending an election.



Section 5.10.  Election.



Subd. 1. The city council must hold a public hearing before establishing the
form of the ballot question and must give at least five-days written notice
of the hearing to at least the first three listed members of  the petition
committee. The city council must establish the ballot question within 21 days
after the occurrence of either event in section 5.08, Subd. 2 (a) or (b) for
an initiative proceeding or after the council reaffirms the ordinance under
section 5.09 for a referendum proceeding. The ballot question must state the
substance of the ordinance in an unbiased manner and give the voters the
opportunity to vote either "yes" or "no" on the adoption.



Subd. 2. If a majority of the people voting on an initiated or referred
ordinance are in favor, it becomes a city ordinance, effective immediately
after the vote has been certified or on the date specified in the ordinance,
whichever is later. If less than a majority of the people voting on an
initiated or referred ordinance are in favor, it will not become effective.



Subd. 3. More than one proposed ordinance may be considered at an election,
but the voters must be allowed to vote on each separately. If two initiated
ordinances are approved at one election and are inconsistent, the one
approved by the higher percentage prevails on the inconsistency.



Section 5.11.  Offenses.



It is unlawful for a person to:



(a)   sign a name other than one's own to an initiative or referendum
petition;



(b)   circulate an initiative or referendum petition not in its entirety;



(c)   circulate an initiative or referendum petition when unqualified to
do so; or



(d)   pay or offer to pay a person, or receive payment or agree to receive
payment, on a basis related to the number of signatures obtained for
circulating an initiative or referendum petition. This paragraph does not
prohibit the payment of salary and expenses for circulation of the petition
on a basis not related to the number of signatures obtained.



A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with
state law.



Section 5.12.  Forms.



Subd. 1. Each affidavit filed by a committee under Section 5.05 must be
substantially in the form attached as Appendix A-1.



Subd. 2. Each affidavit attached to a signature page must be substantially in
the form attached as Appendix A-2.



Subd. 3. Each signature page for an initiative petition must be substantially
in the form attached as Appendix A-3.



Subd. 4. Each signature page for a referendum petition must be substantially
in the form attached as Appendix A-4.



Chapter 6 - City Administration



Section 6.01.  City Manager.



Subd. 1. The city manager is the chief administrative officer of the city.
The city council appoints the city manager, based on training, experience,
and administrative qualifications. The city manager must be a United States
citizen. The council must appoint an acting city manager when the office of
city manager is vacant or when the city manager is suspended, unable to
perform the manager's duties, or otherwise absent for unplanned reasons. The
city manager must designate a qualified person as acting city manager during
a planned absence.



Subd. 2. The city manager is an employee at will, is appointed for an
indefinite term, and may be removed by the council at any time with or
without cause. The city manager may demand written charges and a public
hearing before removal is effective. The city manager must submit the written
demand within 15 days after council action. The public hearing must be held
before the council within 30 days after the city manager's demand. The
council must provide written charges to the city manager at least 10 days
before the hearing. The council may suspend the city manager from office and
appoint an acting city manager before removal takes effect. The city manager
will be paid the city manager's regular salary during suspension pending
removal or after removal and pending the public hearing.



Subd. 3. After the hearing, the council may either reinstate the city manager
or make the removal final. If removed, the city manager has no right to
appeal and no further right to receive the city manager's salary.



Section 6.02.  City Manager's Powers and Duties.



The city manager is responsible for administration of the city's business,
subject to the provisions of this charter and any council regulations. The
city manager has the power and duty to:



a.   ensure that this charter, city ordinances and resolutions are
enforced and implemented;



b.   appoint, suspend, and remove city employees on the basis of merit and
fitness. The appointment and removal of the city attorney and the removal of
department directors is subject to council approval;



c.   adopt and enforce appropriate policies governing employment practices
and employee conduct, including a code of ethics;



d.   manage departments and divisions of the city administration;



e.   attend council meetings with the right to participate in discussions
but not vote. The council may exclude the city manager from a meeting at
which the city manager's removal is considered, to the extent permitted by
law;



f.   recommend to the council measures deemed necessary for the public
welfare and the efficient administration of the city's business;



g.   keep the council fully informed about the city's financial condition
and needs, and prepare and submit the annual budget to the council;



h.   prepare an administrative code or policy manual incorporating the
details of administrative procedure; and



i.   perform other duties prescribed by law, this charter, or the council.



Section 6.03.  Departments.



With council approval, the city manager may create departments, divisions and
other units to administer the city's business and may alter their powers and
organization.



Section 6.04.  Subordinate Officers.



The city clerk and the city treasurer are subordinate to the city manager.
The clerk is responsible for keeping city records. The treasurer is
responsible for managing public funds. They also have other powers and duties
imposed by state law, this charter, and city ordinance.



Section 6.05.  Purchasing.



Subd. 1. The city manager is the city's chief purchasing agent.  The city
manager may make purchases or contracts when the amount does not exceed the
amount at which competitive bids are required by law, unless the city council
adopts an ordinance establishing a limit that is less than the competitive
bidding threshold, but no less than $100,000. In addition, the city manager
may make purchases or contracts exceeding the limit established under this
subdivision if (a) the item is identified in the approved city budget, (b)
the amount is no greater than the budgeted amount, (c) the item is purchased
through a cooperative purchasing agreement with another governmental agency,
and (d) the council is notified of the purchase within a reasonable time.



Subd. 2. The city manager may also make emergency purchases when the
immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the city
that may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of the public or the
protection of property.  The city manager must inform the council before
making the emergency purchase, must prepare a full written report of the
circumstances as soon as possible after the emergency purchase, and must
publicly inform the council at the first council meeting after the emergency
purchase. The written report must be available for public inspection.



Subd. 3. Other purchases or contracts may be made only by the council after
receiving the city manager's recommendation.



Section 6.06.  Competitive Contracts.



City contracts must be made in compliance with state law. When sealed bids
are required, the city manager must advertise for bids in the official means
of publication at least one week before the bids are due. The council may
adopt an emergency ordinance waiving this publication requirement. The
specifications for sealed bids must be drafted to prevent fraud and
favoritism but may include reasonable requirements related to legitimate
public concerns. The council may exercise reasonable discretion to award the
contract in the best interests of the city, considering such factors as
price, quality, experience, suitability, availability, compatibility,
efficiency, and overall best value. The council may by ordinance adopt
additional regulations for making city contracts.



Section 6.07.  Document Execution.



Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the mayor and city manager sign
city documents that require approval of the city council, and the city
manager signs city documents that involve matters that are within the city
manager's power. The city manager may delegate the city manager's authority
in writing.



Section 6.08.  Compensation and Recognition.



The city council may approve a comprehensive compensation program for city
employees, including the city manager. The compensation program may include
non-monetary benefits, such as city employee and community volunteer
recognition programs and city employee preventative health and wellness
programs.



Chapter 7 - Taxation and Finances



Section 7.01.  Council Control; Public Purpose Expenditures.



Subd. 1. The council has full authority over the city's financial affairs and
must use sound discretion in exercising this authority. The council must
provide for the collection of revenues and other assets, the auditing and
settlement of accounts, and the safekeeping and disbursement of public funds.



Subd. 2. The city must spend public funds only for public purposes, and the
council may adopt a policy establishing guidelines regarding which
expenditures qualify as having a public purpose consistent with Minnesota law.



Section 7.02.  Fiscal Year.



The city's fiscal year is the calendar year.



Section 7.03.  Taxation.



The council may provide by ordinance for a system of local taxation, to the
extent permitted by state law.



Section 7.04.  Board of Equalization.



Subd. 1. The council is the board of equalization. The council must appoint
two or more non-voting advisors to assist the board in reviewing property
valuations. The advisors must be city residents who are experienced in real
estate matters. Each will serve a one-year term. The council may provide
compensation for the advisors.



Subd. 2. The board's function is to equalize assessments of property for
taxation. The board's actions must be approved by a majority of all its
members. As soon as the board reassesses any property, the city assessor must
notify the property owner of the amount and the reason for the change.



Section 7.05.  Budget Preparation.



The city manager must prepare an annual budget and submit it to the council.
The budget must include a plan for all city funds except those containing
proceeds of bond issues. The budget must show estimated revenues and
expenditures for each fund using generally accepted accounting principles.
Expenditures in the general fund must be shown for each city department or
division. The budget must include comparisons to the actual revenues and
expenditures of the prior two fiscal years. The city manager should submit
explanatory comments with the budget when appropriate.



Section 7.06.  Budget Adoption.



The council must consider the budget in compliance with state law and must
provide a reasonable opportunity for interested citizens to be heard. The
adopted budget must show in detail the city's financial plan for the next
fiscal year. It must show the amounts and sources of revenues and the amounts
and purposes of expenditures. The total expenditures cannot exceed the total
estimated revenues and allocated surplus. The budget must be adopted in
compliance with state law. A majority of the council must adopt the budget by
resolution and must by resolution levy taxes needed to fund budgeted
expenditures. The city clerk will file the tax levy resolution with the
county auditor within the required time period.



Section 7.07.  Budget Enforcement.



Subd. 1. The city manager must enforce the budget. The city manager may
transfer uncommitted funds in the general fund within a department or
division. The city manager may not approve an expenditure unless there are
sufficient funds to pay for it. This is determined by deducting the total
actual and expected expenditures from the actual and expected revenues plus
allocated surplus.



Subd. 2. The city manager may authorize certain employees to make purchases
and to approve claims for payment. An obligation incurred by a city employee
that does not comply with this charter or that exceeds the employee's
authority is the employee's personal obligation, unless ratified by the city
manager or council.



Section 7.08.  Budget Alterations.



The council may not increase the total expenditures in the adopted budget
beyond the amount that actual receipts plus transfers exceed estimated
revenues. The council may reduce an appropriation in the budget by a
resolution adopted by a majority of all members. The council may transfer
uncommitted budget appropriations to other purposes by approval of at least
five members. Council action is not required for transfers made by the city
manager under Section 7.07. The council must adopt by approval of at least
five members a revised budget for the current year when adopting the next
year's budget. The revised budget should incorporate any changes in estimated
revenues and expenditures based on actual revenues and expenditures to that
date. A capital expenditure that exceeds the amount designated in the city
council's adopted capital improvement plan is a budget alteration that
requires five votes.



Section 7.09.  Contingency Amount in Budget.



The council may include a contingency amount in the budget that does not
exceed 10 percent of the total. The council may transfer funds from the
contingency amount to another line item only by approval of at least five
members. The amount transferred may be used only for the purpose designated.



Section 7.10.  Disbursements.



Disbursements of city funds exceeding $100 must be made by an electronic
method or check bearing the actual or facsimile signature of the mayor, city
manager and city treasurer. The city manager must institute safeguards to
ensure that checks and electronic payments are made only by authorized
individuals, for properly authorized public purposes, and in compliance with
this charter. The safeguards must also ensure that disbursements under $100
are approved by personnel authorized by the city manager. For payments other
than employee wages, an accompanying check register or journal entry must
specify the purpose for the disbursement and the fund from which it is
drawn.  All claims for payment must be supported by appropriate
documentation such as an itemized bill, payroll, or time-sheet approved by an
authorized city employee or officer. The council may by ordinance further
regulate the safekeeping and disbursement of city funds.



Section 7.11.  Funds.



The council and city manager must account for the city's finances through a
classification of funds, including a general fund for operating expenses and
other required funds. The council may by ordinance or resolution make
inter-fund loans, except from trust or agency funds or where prohibited by
this charter or law. The council may by ordinance or resolution make
permanent transfers among all funds, except when prohibited by this charter
or law.



Section 7.12.  Accounts and Reports.



The city manager is the city's chief accounting officer. The council may
prescribe and enforce proper accounting methods, forms, periodic reports and
other mechanisms consistent with state law, this charter and city ordinances.
On or before the last day of each June, the city manager must submit to the
council a comprehensive annual financial report of the city's entire
financial operation for the past fiscal year.



Section 7.13.  Debt.



Obligations may not be issued to pay current expenses except as provided in
this charter. The council may issue obligations for any other lawful
municipal purpose. When required by state law, obligations will be issued
only when approved by the majority of registered city voters voting on the
question at an election.



Section 7.14.  Tax Anticipation Certificates.



At any time after January 1, the council may issue certificates of
indebtedness in anticipation of taxes currently levied for a fund but not yet
collected. The total amount of certificates plus interest may not exceed 90
percent of the current taxes that are uncollected at the time of issuance. If
the average percent of city taxes actually collected in the preceding five
years is lower than 90 percent, then this lower percent must be substituted
for the percent in the previous sentence. The certificates must (a) be issued
on conditions determined by the council, (b) bear interest at no more than
the lawful rate, and (c) be payable no later than April 1 of the year
following issuance. The proceeds of the tax levied for the affected fund and
the city's full faith and credit must be irrevocably pledged for redemption
of the certificates in the order of their issuance.



Section 7.15.  Emergency Debt Certificates.



The council may by ordinance issue emergency debt certificates if revenues
become insufficient for ordinary city expenses or if a public emergency
requires extraordinary expenses. These certificates must (a) be on the
conditions that the council determines, (b) not exceed a term of two years,
and (c) bear interest at no more than lawful the rate. The council must levy
a tax sufficient to pay all principal and interest on these certificates. The
ordinance authorizing emergency debt certificates must state the nature of
the emergency and be approved by at least five council members.



Section 7.16.  Equipment Certificates.



The council may issue equipment certificates to purchase fire or police
equipment or street construction or maintenance equipment. These certificates
must be (a) issued on the conditions that the council determines, (b) within
existing debt limits, and (c) payable in not more than five years. The
council must levy a tax for the payment of these certificates in the same
manner as for the payment of bonds.



Section 7.17.  Purchases with Installment Payments.



The council may purchase equipment for street, water, sewer, police, or fire
purposes with conditional sales contracts, if the installment payments do not
extend beyond the estimated useful life of the equipment. The council may
purchase real property through a contract for deed payable over a period not
exceeding five years. The seller's only remedy must be recovery of the
property in case of nonpayment.



Section 7.18.  Community Investment Fund.



Subd. 1. The council must create and maintain a separate fund designated as
the community investment fund. Into this fund are deposited the following:



(a)   surplus money in special assessment accounts that is not needed to
pay the public improvement bonds and that is not transferred to another
improvement fund,



(b)   collections of special assessments received after an improvement
project has been fully funded,



(c)   investment earnings generated by the fund, and



(d)   any other money appropriated by the council or donated to the city
for the fund's purposes.



Subd. 2. The council must by ordinance provide a procedure for expenditures
from the fund. The ordinance must provide that the amount of principal
expended may not exceed the fund's actual investment earnings from the two
calendar years before the expenditure. The ordinance must also provide that
the fund's principal may be expended only if (a) the expenditure is a loan
that must be repaid, or (b) no further expenditures are made from the fund
until the principal has been restored to its previous amount plus 10 percent
of the earnings that would have been generated on the principal at the
previous amount. The council may alter or remove these restrictions on using
principal only by at least six affirmative votes.



Subd. 3. When the city sells an asset that was purchased with money from the
community investment fund, the city's proceeds from the sale must be returned
to the community investment fund, unless money from other city funds was used
to construct, purchase, enlarge, or renovate the asset, in which case the
proceeds must be distributed on an equitable basis.



Chapter 8 - Public Improvements and Special Assessments



Section 8.01.  Powers.



The city may make any type of public improvement not prohibited by law and
may levy special assessments to pay all or part of the costs that are of
local character. Special assessments must be levied according to state law.



Section 8.02.  Current Services.



The council may provide by ordinance that the cost of city services to
streets, sidewalks or other public or private property may be assessed
against the property served and collected in the same manner as special
assessments.



Section 8.03.  Fees and Civil Penalties.



The council may provide by ordinance that fees, civil penalties, and late
payment penalties imposed by the city may be assessed against (a) property
that was the subject matter, or related to the subject matter, of the fees
and penalties, or (b) property that was the location of an activity, proposed
use, city service, or other circumstance that resulted in the fees and
penalties. The ordinance must require the city to attempt to obtain voluntary
payment of the fees and penalties before imposing the assessments. The
ordinance must require the city to give notice and an opportunity to be heard
to the property owner listed on the official tax records before imposing the
assessments. The assessments will be collected like special assessments.



Section 8.04.  Voluntary Assessments for Certain Property Purchases.



After receiving a petition to do so, the council may purchase property in the
city for open space or other public purposes and may recover all or a portion
of the acquisition costs through special assessments against property owned
by the petitioners. The special assessment procedure required by state law
need not be followed in this situation.



Section 8.05.  Construction of Public Improvements.



Construction, maintenance and repair of public improvements may be done with
workers under the city's control or by contract. Contractors must provide to
the city the bonds that are required by state law.



Chapter 9 - Property Acquisition



Section 9.01.  Acquisition of Property.



The city may acquire any kind of property inside or outside of its boundaries
that the city may need for a public purpose. Acquisition may be by purchase,
gift, eminent domain, or other lawful means. The city must follow state law
in acquiring property by eminent domain.



Section 9.02.  Acquisition of Property for Park and Open Space Purposes.



Acquisition of property for park and open space purposes is an authorized
public purpose. "Park purposes" include playground, trail, parkway, open
space, and any other recreational purpose. "Open space" includes land and
water areas retained for use as active or passive recreation areas or for
resource protection.



Chapter 10 - Franchises



Section 10.01.  Franchises Required.



A person or legal entity must obtain a city franchise before installing or
maintaining a fixture in, on, over, or under a city street or public way for
a public utility or other purpose, except when otherwise permitted by law. A
franchise must be granted by an ordinance that is not an emergency ordinance.
The ordinance will contain the franchise conditions. The person or legal
entity obtaining the franchise must pay for publication of the franchise
ordinance and must deposit sufficient funds for that purpose with the city
clerk before ordinance adoption.



Section 10.02.  Public Hearing.



The council must hold a public hearing before a franchise ordinance is
adopted or amended. Notice of the hearing must be published in the official
means of publication at least 10 days before the hearing.



Section 10.03.  Further Regulation; Franchise Value.



The council may by ordinance reasonably regulate and control the exercise of
a franchise, to the extent permitted by law. The value of the franchise may
not be included in the valuation of the grantee's property for any purpose,
including municipal acquisition of the grantee's property by purchase or
eminent domain.



Section 10.04.  Term.



The council may not grant an exclusive or perpetual franchise. If a franchise
is proposed for a term exceeding 20 years, the issue must be submitted to the
voters for approval or disapproval.



Section 10.05.  Renewals.



An extension, renewal or modification of a franchise is subject to the same
limitations and procedures as a new franchise.



Chapter 11 - Public Ownership and Operation of Utilities



Section 11.01.  Acquisition.



The city may own and operate a gas, water, heat, power, light, telephone, or
other public utility for supplying its own needs, those of private consumers,
or both. The city may construct the facilities reasonably needed for the
utility and may acquire existing utility properties. Acquisition of existing
facilities must be by an ordinance that is not an emergency ordinance. The
operation of city-owned public utilities will be under the city manager's
supervision.



Section 11.02.  Rates and Finances.



The council may set just and reasonable fees for municipal utilities and
services. The council should try to make each municipal utility and service
financially self-sustaining. The council must hold a public hearing complying
with section 11.06 before setting utility fees. The council may adopt
regulations governing utility services and establish penalties for violations.



Section 11.03.  Purchase in Bulk.



Instead of the local production of gas, electricity, water and other
utilities, the council may purchase these in bulk and resell them to local
consumers. The council must hold a public hearing complying with section
11.06 before setting the fees.



Section 11.04.  Lease of Plant.



If the public interest will be served, the council may contract with a
private party to operate a city-owned utility for a term not exceeding 10
years. The contract must be contained in an ordinance approved by five
council members. The ordinance may not be an emergency ordinance.



Section 11.05.  Sale of Utility.



A public utility owned by the city may not be sold or otherwise disposed of
unless the full terms of the sale or other disposition are contained in an
ordinance that is submitted to the electorate and approved by a majority of
the voters voting on the issue.



Section 11.06.  Notice of Public Hearings.



Notice of public hearings required by this chapter must be published in the
official means of publication at least 10 days before the hearing. Additional
notice may be given as determined by the council.



Chapter 12 - Miscellaneous and Transition Provisions



Section 12.01.  Official Publications.



The council must annually designate an official means of publication in
accordance with state law. The official means of publication will be used to
publish ordinances and other matters required by law to be published.



Section 12.02.  Oath of Office.



City officers must take an oath of office in substantially the following form
before taking office: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) to support the
constitutions of the United States and of the State of Minnesota and to
discharge faithfully the duties of (title of position) of the City of
Minnetonka to the best of my judgment and ability."



Section 12.03.  Interest in Contracts; Code of Ethics.



Subd. 1.  A city officer or employee who is authorized to take part in any
manner in a city contract may not voluntarily have a personal financial
interest in the contract, or personally benefit financially from it, except
as permitted by law.



Subd. 2. The council must adopt a code of ethics ordinance governing the
official conduct of all elected and appointed officials. The council may take
whatever reasonable action it deems appropriate after finding that this
ethical code has been violated. The council may also disqualify an official
from voting on a particular matter if the council finds that the official has
a conflict of interest.



Section 12.04.  Official Bonds.



Before assuming their official duties, the city manager, the city clerk, the
city treasurer, and other officers and employees required by ordinance must
each give the city a corporate surety bond securing the proper performance of
official duties and the safekeeping of public funds. The city will pay the
premiums on the bond.



The bond (a) must be in the amount approved by the council, (b) may be either
an individual or blanket surety bond, (c) must be approved as to form by the
city attorney, and (d) must be filed with the city clerk. State laws
governing official bonds must also be satisfied.



Section 12.05.  Sale of Real Property.



Real property of the city may only be disposed of by ordinance. The sale
proceeds must first be used to retire any outstanding indebtedness incurred
by the city in the acquisition or improvement of that property. If there is
no outstanding debt, the council may designate by resolution another public
use for the proceeds.



Section 12.06.  Vacation of Streets, Use of Public Rights-of-Way.



Subd. 1. The council may by resolution vacate all or part of streets, alleys,
public easements, public ways and public grounds.  A vacation may be
approved only if the council determines that it is in the public interest.
The resolution must be adopted by a majority of all council members eligible
to vote.



Subd. 2. The council must hold a public hearing before approving a vacation.
Notice of the hearing must be published in the official means of publication
at least two weeks in advance.  Notice must also be mailed at least 10 days
in advance of the hearing to the owner of each abutting property, and to each
landowner in the plat if the property to be vacated was dedicated as part of
a plat.



Subd. 3. The council may further regulate vacation proceedings by ordinance.
A copy of the vacation resolution will be filed with the appropriate county
officials.



Subd. 4. The council may by ordinance establish a procedure for managing
public rights-of-way that are under the city's jurisdiction. The ordinance
may include a process to permit the private use of a right-of-way that is not
being physically used or occupied by the public, upon such terms and
conditions as the council may provide.



Section 12.07.  Successor Rights and Obligations.



The city succeeds to the property, rights, privileges, and legal obligations
of the Village of Minnetonka.



Section 12.08.  Relationship to State Law.



State laws that are applicable to the City of Minnetonka will supercede any
inconsistent charter provisions. Except as provided by section 1.04, state
laws that are applicable to the City of Minnetonka are supplementary to this
charter.



Section 12.09.  Existing Ordinances Continued.



Ordinances and regulations in force when this charter took effect and
consistent with this charter are continued in full force until amended or
repealed.



Section 12.10.  Human Rights.



City officers and employees will use all city powers to protect citizens from
discriminatory practices in the city based on race, color, creed, religion,
ancestry, national origin or gender.



Section 12.11.  Implementing Ordinances.



The council must adopt regulations by ordinance to implement this charter and
make its provisions effective.



Section 12.12.  Fines and Penalties.



The council may provide by ordinance that a violation of a city ordinance is
either a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with
state law. In addition, the council may establish by ordinance a procedure
for imposing a civil penalty not exceeding $2,000 for each ordinance
violation. This procedure must provide an opportunity for a hearing before a
neutral party, which may be the council.



Section 12.13.  Enforcement.



A resident of the city of Minnetonka may bring an action in district court to
enforce a provision in this charter.



Appendix




Appendix A-1
Committee Affidavit




State of Minnesota   )
                             )  ss
County of ________   )




We certify that the undersigned are all residents of the city of Minnetonka
who are eligible voters and have formed a committee for the purpose of
circulating a petition to:





[Chose one:]




      initiate an ordinance regarding
_____________________________________ a copy of which is attached.





      refer to the people Ordinance No. ____________, adopted on
____________, by the Minnetonka city council regarding
_________________________________________________________________________





Attached is a copy of the proposed petition. The names and addresses of the
committee members are (a minimum of five is required):




   Name               Address

1.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
2.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
3.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
4.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
5.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
6.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
7.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
8.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
9.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
10.   ______________________________________________________________________
__




Signatures of committee members (each of which must be notarized):




____________________________   Signed and sworn to before me on
______________ by _____________




____________________________   Signed and sworn to before me on
______________ by _____________




____________________________   Signed and sworn to before me on
______________ by _____________




____________________________   Signed and sworn to before me on
______________ by _____________




____________________________   Signed and sworn to before me on
______________ by _____________





Appendix A-2
Circulator Affidavit




State of Minnesota   )
                             )  ss
County of ________   )




I, ____________________________________,certify that



   a.   I am an eligible voter in the City of Minnetonka;



   b.   I reside in the City of Minnetonka at
_____________________________________;



   c.   I circulated the attached petition which consists of _____
pages;



   d.   Each signature contained on the attached petition was executed
in my presence;



   e.   To the best of my knowledge and belief, each person who signed
the attached petition is a registered voter of the City of Minnetonka; and



   f.   To the best of my knowledge and belief, each petitioner's
signature contained on the attached petition is the genuine signature of the
person whose name it purports to be.




__________________________________________



Signed and sworn to before me on _______________________ by
_______________________.




___________________________________________
Notary Public




Appendix A-3
Initiative Petition




This petition proposes an ordinance to
_____________________________________________________, a copy of which is
attached.  The undersigned petition the city council for its adoption or for
its submission to the voters for their approval or disapproval.





Sponsoring Committee




This ordinance is sponsored by the following committee of City of Minnetonka
residents who are eligible voters (a minimum of five):



   Name               Address



1.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
2.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
3.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
4.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
5.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
6.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
7.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
8.   _______________________________________________________________________
_





Instructions to Petition Signers




You are being asked to sign a petition. You must be a resident of, and a
registered voter in, the City of Minnetonka. All signers must include their
entire residence address and the date of signing. Every person signing this
petition must do so in the presence of the person circulating the petition.



   Date         Name            Address



1.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
2.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
3.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
4.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
5.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
6.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
7.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
8.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
9.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
10.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
11.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
12.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
13.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
14.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
15.   ______________________________________________________________________
__




Appendix A-4
Referendum Petition




This petition proposes the repeal an ordinance regarding
__________________________________________, a copy of which is attached. The
undersigned believe the ordinance is detrimental to the welfare of the city
and petition the city council to repeal the ordinance or to submit it to the
voters for their approval or disapproval.





Sponsoring Committee




The proposed repeal is sponsored by the following committee of City of
Minnetonka residents who are eligible voters:



   Name               Address



1.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
2.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
3.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
4.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
5.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
6.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
7.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
8.   _______________________________________________________________________
_





Instructions to Petition Signers




You are being asked to sign a petition. You must be a resident of, and a
registered voter in, the City of Minnetonka. All signers must include their
entire residence address and the date of signing. Every person signing this
petition must do so in the presence of the person circulating the petition.




   Date         Name            Address



1.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
2.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
3.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
4.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
5.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
6.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
7.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
8.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
9.   _______________________________________________________________________
_
10.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
11.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
12.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
13.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
14.   ______________________________________________________________________
__
15.   ______________________________________________________________________
__




Charter History




I.   Adoption



The charter for the City of Minnetonka was adopted by an election held
November 4, 1969.



II.   General Amendments



By Ordinance No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989, the charter was revised to
simplify language, eliminate gender-based references, and make style uniform
throughout the charter. Because of the extensive and non-substantive nature
of these general revisions, references to each section affected have not been
included.



By Ordinance No. 2001-20, adopted August 27, 2001, non-substantive changes
were made to the charter to make it more readable and understandable. This
included the re-organization of some chapters into a different structure.
Some sections and subsections of the charter refer to different subject
matter after this ordinance was adopted.



III.   Specific Amendments




Section 1.02




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 1.04





   Added by Ord. No. 94-700, adopted November 14, 1994.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 2.02





   Amended by Ord. No. 2001-10, adopted March 19, 2001.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2001-21, adopted August 27, 2001.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2003-09, adopted April 14, 2003.




Section 2.03





   Amended by election held February 17, 1970.





   Amended by Ord. No. 82-258, adopted May 24, 1982





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by election held November 5, 1991





   Amended by Ord. No. 93-649, adopted July 26, 1993





   Amended by Ord. No. 2001-22, adopted August 27, 2001.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2003-09, adopted April 14, 2003.




Section 2.04





   Amended by Ord. No. 96-742, adopted April 8, 1996.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2013-01, adopted January 28, 2013.




Section 2.05





   Amended by election held February 17, 1970.





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 94-686, adopted June 27, 1994.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-13, adopted April 12, 2004.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2005-15, adopted May 23, 2005.




Section 2.06





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2009-03, adopted February 23, 2009.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted March 8, 2010.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2012-06, adopted April 30, 2012.
   Amended by Ord. No. 2017-01, adopted January 9, 2017.




Section 2.07





   Added by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 2.08





   Renumbered by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 2.09





   Renumbered by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2007-10, adopted March 5, 2007.




Section 2.10




   Renumbered and amended by Ord. No. 89- 568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 3.01




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 3.02




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 3.01




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 3.04




   Amended by Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted March 8, 2010.




Section 3.05




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 3.06





   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2013-01, adopted January 28, 2013.




Section 3.07





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-013, adopted April 12, 2004.




Section 3.08





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 3.09





   Amended by Ord. No. 96-742, adopted April 8, 1996.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2001-23, adopted August 27, 2001.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-013, adopted April 12, 2004.




Section 3.11




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 4.02





   Amended by election held February 17, 1970.





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 94-700, adopted November 14, 1994.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2010-16, adopted October 4, 2010




   Amended by Ord. No. 2013-01, adopted January 28, 2013.




Section 4.03





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 93-647, adopted July 26, 1993.





   Amended by Ord. No. 94-700, adopted November 14, 1994.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2010-16, adopted October 4, 2010




   Amended by Ord. No. 2013-01, adopted January 28, 2013.




Section 4.06




   Added by Ord. No. 98-1, adopted February 23, 1998.




Section 5.01





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.02




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.03




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.04




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.05




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.06





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.07





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.08




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.09




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.10




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.11




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 5.12




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-16, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 6.01





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 6.02





   Amended by Ord. No. 93-650, adopted July 26, 1993.





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2009-03, adopted February 23, 2009.




Section 6.03




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 6.04





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 6.05





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.





   Amended by Ord. No. 93-651, adopted July 26, 1993.





   Amended by Ord. No. 99-9, adopted February 22, 1999.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-013, adopted April 12, 2004.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2010-16, adopted October 4, 2010.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2013-01, adopted January 28, 2013.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2014-12, adopted April 21, 2014.




Section 6.06





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.





   Amended by Ord. No. 99-9, adopted February 22, 1999.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2003-09, adopted April 14, 2003.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-013, adopted April 12, 2004.




Section 6.07





   Added by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.


   Amended by Ord. No. 2012-06, adopted April 30, 2012.




Section 6.08




   Added by Ord. No. 2007-10, adopted March 5, 2007.




Section 7.01





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2007-10, adopted March 5, 2007.




Section 7.03




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.04





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.05




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.06





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 93-652, adopted July 26, 1993.




Section 7.07





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 98-1, adopted February 23, 1998.




Section 7.08





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.





   Amended by Ord. No. 93-653, adopted July 26, 1993.





   Amended by Ord. No. 98-11, adopted June 8, 1998.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 7.09





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted March 8, 2010.




Section 7.10





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 99-9, adopted February 22, 1999.




Section 7.11




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.12





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 7.13




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.14




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.15




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.16




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.17




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 7.18





   Added by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted March 8, 2010.




Section 8.02




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 8.03




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 8.04




   Added by Ord. No. 2000-6, adopted April 24, 2000.




Section 8.05




   Renumbered from 8.04 by Ord. No. 2000-6, adopted April 24, 2000.




Section 9.01




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 9.02




   Added by Ord. 2009-03, adopted February 23, 2009.




Section 9.03




   Deleted by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 9.04




   Deleted by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 10.02




   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-013, adopted April 12, 2004.




Section 11.01




   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 11.02




   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.




Section 11.05




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 11.06




   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-013, adopted April 12, 2004.




Section 12.01




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 12.03





   Amended by Ord. No. 74-70, adopted May 20, 1974.





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 90-590, adopted November 5, 1990.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2009-03, adopted February 23, 2009.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2012-06, adopted April 30, 2012.




Section 12.05




   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.




Section 12.06





   Amended by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.





   Amended by Ord. No. 93-654, adopted July 26, 1993.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted May 20, 2002.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2004-013, adopted April 12, 2004.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2006-08, adopted April 10, 2006.





   Amended by Ord. No. 2009-03, adopted February 23, 2009.




   Amended by Ord. No. 2015-01, adopted January 5, 2015




Section 12.08





   Renumbered by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Former Section 12.08 deleted by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2,
1989.




Section 12.09




   Renumbered by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 12.10




   Renumbered by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




Section 12.11





   Renumbered by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2, 1989.




   Former Section 12.11 deleted by Ord. No. 89-568, adopted October 2,
1989.




Section 12.12




   Added by Ord. No. 93-648, adopted July 26, 1993.




Section 12.13




   Added by Ord. No. 2006-08, adopted April 10, 2006.



CHAPTER 1:  CITY COUNCIL, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



   100.   CITY COUNCIL.



   105.   ELECTION WARDS.



   110.   CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE.



   115.   CODE OF ETHICS.



   120.   [REPEALED].



   125.   PARK BOARD.



   130.   SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD.



   135.   [REPEALED].



   140.   [REPEALED]



SECTION 100.  CITY COUNCIL.



100.005.  Salaries of Mayor and Council Members.



In accordance with section 2.08 of the city charter and Minn. Stat. §415.11,
the salaries of the mayor and council members are as follows:



   mayor            $15,000 annually



   council members      $11,000 annually



(Amended by Ord. 2007-11, adopted March 26, 2007; amended by Ord. #2002-29,
adopted December 16, 2002;

EDITOR'S NOTE: Ord. 2014-01, adopted February 10, 2014 amends this section,
effective January 1, 2016)



100.010.  Workers' Compensation Coverage.



The mayor and council members are city employees for purposes of workers'
compensation coverage while acting within the scope of their official duties.



100.015.  Council Policies.



The city council may, by resolution, adopt and amend policies for the
implementation, interpretation, and administration of this code and other
matters of municipal concern.  These policies will not have the force of law
and will only be guidelines for council and staff.  The city clerk must
assemble the policies in an appropriate volume and keep a copy available for
public inspection.



100.020.  Rules of Procedure.



The city council may adopt rules of procedure to govern its meetings.  These
rules may be attached as an appendix to this code.



100.025.  Delegation of Authority.



Upon a request for evidence that conditions attached to a city council
approval have been satisfied, city staff will investigate and determine if
compliance has been achieved.  If it has, the mayor and city manager are
authorized to execute instruments certifying compliance, releasing property
from those conditions, or both, without specific approval of the council.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



100.030.  Contested Qualifications.



The council may hold a hearing after receiving a written complaint
questioning the qualifications or eligibility of a council member, or on the
council's own motion. A hearing must be held only if the city council
determines (1) upon advice of the city attorney, designee or other attorney
appointed by the council, that the allegations raise a legitimate question
about the qualifications or eligibility of a council member, and (2) that the
complaint has been lodged in good faith and not for impermissible purposes
such as harassment. The council must use the contested case procedures under
Minn. Stat. §§ 14.57 through 14.62 for the hearing, except that no
administrative law judge is required. The council may remove a member from
office if the council determines that the person is not qualified or eligible
to serve as a council member.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-10, adopted April 14, 2003)



SECTION 105.  ELECTION WARDS.



105.005.  Purpose.



In compliance with city charter section 2.03(b), the city council establishes
four compact, contiguous wards equal in population, as described below.



105.010.  Wards.



1.   Ward No. 1 consists of all that part of the City of Minnetonka lying
easterly and southerly of the following described boundary:



Point of beginning commencing at the intersection of County Road 62 with
County Road 4; thence northerly along County Road 4 to its intersection with
County Road 3; thence northeasterly along County Road 3 to its intersection
with Woodhill Road; thence northerly on Woodhill Road to its intersection
with Highway 7; thence westerly along Highway 7 to its intersection with
Williston Road; thence northerly to Lake Street Extension; thence easterly to
its intersection with Interstate Highway 494; thence northerly on Interstate
Highway 494 to its intersection with County Road 5; thence easterly on County
Road 5 to the municipal boundary located at the southeast corner of city's
Public Works facility on County Road 5; then following the city boundary in a
clockwise manner to the southeast corner of the city; thence westerly along
the southern boundary of the City of Minnetonka and there terminating at
point of beginning.



2.   Ward No. 2 consists of all that part of the City of Minnetonka lying
easterly and northerly of the following described boundary:



Point of beginning commencing at the intersection of Interstate Highway 494
and County Road 5 traveling eastbound to municipal boundary located at the
southeast corner of the city's Public Works facility on County Road 5; thence
following the City of Minnetonka's boundary in a counterclockwise manner
generally northerly and easterly to the northeast corner of the city; thence
westerly along Ridgemount Avenue to Park Lane South; thence southerly on Park
Lane South and the extension of Park Lane South to Interstate Highway 394;
thence west on Interstate Highway 394 to its intersection with Interstate
Highway 494; thence southerly to County Road 5 and there terminating at the
point of beginning.



3.   Ward No. 3 consists of all that part of the City of Minnetonka lying
westerly and northerly of the following described boundary:



Point of beginning commencing at the intersection of Interstate Highway 494
and Lake Street Extension; thence northerly to Interstate Highway 394; thence
easterly to the southerly extension of Park Lane South; thence northerly to
the northern city boundary; thence westerly along the northern boundary line
of the City of Minnetonka to the northwest corner of the city; thence
southerly along the western boundary of the City of Minnetonka to the
legislative boundary between state legislative districts 48 and 44; then
easterly to the intersection of County Road 101; thence southerly to Highway
7; thence easterly to Williston Road; thence northerly to Lake Street
Extension; thence easterly to Interstate Highway 494 and there terminating at
the point of beginning.



4.   Ward No.4 consists of all that part of the City of Minnetonka lying
southerly and westerly of the following described boundary:



Point of beginning commencing at the intersection of Highway 7 and Woodhill
Road traveling southbound on Woodhill Road to County Road 3; thence westerly
on County Road 3 to County Road 4; thence southerly on County Road 4 to the
southern border of the City of Minnetonka; thence westerly along the southern
border of the City of Minnetonka to the southwest corner of the city's
boundary; thence northerly along the western boundary of the City of
Minnetonka to the legislative boundary between state legislative districts 48
and 44; thence easterly along the legislative boundary to the intersection of
County Road 101; thence southerly on County Road 101 to Highway 7; thence
easterly on Highway 7 to Woodhill Road and there terminating at the point of
beginning.



(Section repealed and replaced by Ord. 2012-03, adopted March 26, 2012;
amended by Ord. #2002-09, approved April 22, 2002)



SECTION 110.  CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE.



110.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words below are defined
for the purpose of this section as follows:



1.   “Ballot question” means a proposition placed on the ballot to be
voted on by city voters but not other voters of the state.



2.   “Candidate” means an individual who seeks nomination or election
to a city office.



3.   “Committee” means an association or persons acting together to
influence the nomination, election, or defeat of a candidate or to promote or
defeat a ballot question. Promoting or defeating a ballot question includes
efforts to support or prevent a proposition from qualifying for placement on
the ballot.



4.   “Contribution” means anything of monetary value that is given or
loaned to a candidate or committee for a political purpose.
“Contribution” does not include a service provided without compensation
by an individual.



5.   “Disbursement” means money, property, or any other thing of value
that is directly or indirectly given, promised, paid, or loaned.



6.   “Political purpose” means with the intent to influence, or the
effect of influencing, directly or indirectly, voting at an election.



110.010.  Financial Reports.



1.   Reporting Requirement. A committee or candidate who receives
contributions or makes disbursements of more than $50.00 in a calendar year
must submit financial reports to the city clerk on forms provided by the
clerk.



2.   Timing of Reports.



   a.   An initial report must be filed within 14 days after the
candidate or committee receives contributions or makes disbursements of more
than $50.00.



   b.   The committee or candidate must file a report by January 31 of
each year following the year when the initial report was filed.



   c.   In addition, in a year when the candidate's name or a ballot
question appears on the ballot, the candidate or committee must file a report
as follows:



      (1)   ten calendar days before the primary or special primary;



      (2)   ten calendar days before the general election or special
election; and



      (3)   thirty calendar days after a general or special election.



   d.   A candidate or committee must file a final campaign financial
report when all debts have been settled and all assets in excess of $100.00
in the aggregate are eliminated. The final report may be filed for the period
from the last previous report to the date of the final report.



3.   Contents of Reports. The report to be filed must include:



   a.   the name of the candidate or ballot question;



   b.   the name and address of the person responsible for filing the
report;



   c.   the total amount of receipts and expenditures for the period
from the last previous report to five days before the current report is due;



   d.   the purpose of each expenditure; and



   e.   the name of any individual or committee that during the year
has made one or more contributions that in the aggregate are more than $50.00.



110.015.  Certification of Filing.



1.   Each candidate and treasurer of a committee must certify to the city
clerk that all reports required by this section have been submitted or that
the candidate or committee has not received contributions or made
disbursements of more than $50.00 in the calendar year.



2.   The certification of filing must be submitted to the city clerk no
later than seven days after the general or special election on a form
designated by the city clerk.



3.   A certificate of election will not be issued by the city clerk until
the certification of filing has been submitted.



110.020.  Failure to File Report.



1.   Penalty.  A candidate or treasurer of a committee who intentionally
fails to file a report required by this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
An intentional violation is established



by evidence that no report was filed within ten days after a candidate or
committee received a notice from the city clerk of the failure to file. The
clerk's notice must be sent by certified mail to the last known address of
the candidate or committee. A refusal to accept or failure to claim certified
mail is not a defense that notice was not received.



2.   Forfeiture.



   a.   Except as provided in paragraph (b) below, if a candidate is
convicted of violating a provision of this section or if an offense was
committed by another individual with the knowledge, consent, or connivance of
the candidate, the court must enter a supplemental judgement declaring that
the candidate has forfeited the nomination or office.  The court must
transmit a copy of the supplemental judgement to the city clerk.  The
nomination or office then becomes vacant, and the vacancy must be filled as
provided by law.



   b.   In a trial for a violation of this section, the candidate's
nomination or election may not be voided if the court finds that:



      (1)   an offense was trivial; or



      (2)   an action or omission of a candidate arose from
accidental miscalculation or other reasonable cause, but not from a lack of
good faith, and that it would be unjust for the candidate to forfeit the
nomination or election.



      Neither of these findings is a defense to a conviction under this
section.



3.   Disqualification. A candidate whose election to office has been set
aside for a violation of this section may not be appointed, during the period
fixed by law as the term of the office, to fill a vacancy that may occur in
the office. A candidate or other individual who is convicted of a violation
of this section may not be appointed, during the period fixed by law as the
term of the office with respect to which the election was held and the
offense was committed, to fill a vacancy in the office. An appointment to an
office made contrary to this section is void.



110.025.  Disclosure of Real Estate Holdings.



When a candidate files for any elective office in the city, the candidate
must also file with the clerk a disclosure that contains the street address
of all real estate within the city that the candidate owns or in which the
candidate has a financial interest greater than 5 percent. If the property
has no street address, the candidate must provide a description of its size
and location with enough specificity for a reasonable person to understand
where it is located.



SECTION 115.  CODE OF ETHICS.



115.005.  Purpose.



The city council of the city of Minnetonka confirms its determination that
ethical standards among its members, as well as the members of the various
commissions of the city of Minnetonka, are essential to the public affairs of
the city.  The standards of conduct set forth below are intended to serve as
a guideline for the members of the city council and the commissioners in
carrying out their duties.  By eliminating conflicts of interest and
providing a guide for conduct in city matters, the city council hopes to
promote the faith and confidence of the citizens of Minnetonka in their
government, and to encourage its citizens to serve on its council and
commissions.



115.010.  Standards of Conduct.



1.   A council member or member of any board or commission, must not use
the official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for the
person or others.



2.   Except as permitted by law, a council member or member of a board or
commission must disclose a potential conflict of interest for the public
record and refrain from participating in the discussion and vote, when a
matter comes before that person that:



   a.   affects the person's financial interests or those of a business
with which the person is associated, unless the effect on the individual
member is no greater than on other members of the same business, profession
or occupation or if the effect on the business with which the individual
member is associated is indirect, remote, and insubstantial; or



   b.   affects the financial interests of an organization in which the
person participates as a member of the governing body, unless the person
serves in that capacity as the city's representative.



3.   A council member or member of a board or commission must not act as
an agent or attorney for another before the city council or a board or
commission  in a matter where a conflict of interest exists or may exist.



4.   A council member or member of any board or commission must not
knowingly accept or solicit, directly or indirectly, a gift or loan for
himself, herself, or another if this is prohibited by state law.



5.   A council member or member of any board or commission may accept
compensation or expense reimbursement for the performance of the person's
public duties only from the sources listed below.  A council member or
member of any board or commission must not solicit or accept, and a person
must not offer or pay to a public official or employee, compensation or
expense reimbursement for the performance of the person's public duties from
any source other than:



   a.   compensation and expenses paid by the city;



   b.   compensation and expenses from other employment, if the person
happens to conduct public business while being paid for the other employment
and if the other employment does not interfere with, influence, or compromise
the person's public position; and



   c.   compensation and expenses paid by another governmental agency
or municipal association to a council member or member of a board or
commission who serves as a city representative for that agency, but only if
the city does not also pay the person for the same activity.



6.   A council member or member of any board or commission must not use
public money, time, personnel, facilities, or equipment for private gain or
political campaign activities except when:



   a.   the use is required or authorized by law; or



   b.   the use is no greater than that allowed for members of the
general public.



   This paragraph does not prohibit correspondence at any time to
individual residents in response to the resident's specific inquiries, or
general surveys of residents that are conducted before the time of filing for
candidacy for elective office.



7.   A council member or member of a board or commission must not disclose
to the public, or use for the private gain of self or others, information
that was gained by reason of the official's public position and that is not
public data.  Further, a council member or member of a board or commission
must not disclose information received, discussed, or decided in conference
with the council's or board's attorney that is protected by the
attorney/client privilege, unless a majority of the council or board has
authorized that disclosure.



8.   A council member or member of any board or commission must not enter
into a contract with the city of Minnetonka, unless authorized by law.  A
council member or member of a board or commission who has a proprietary
interest of 10 percent or more in an agency doing business with the city must
make known that interest in writing to the city council and the city clerk.



9.   A council member or member of any board or commission must not
intentionally violate a provision of the city charter or the city ordinances.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-08, adopted June 24, 2013; amended by Ord. #2006-06,
adopted April 10, 2006)



115.015.  Disclosures.



Within 30 days after taking the oath of office or being appointed to a
position, each council member and member of a city board or commission must
file a report with the city clerk, on a form prepared by the clerk, which
contains the information specified below for the preceding year. 
Subsequently, each person must file a supplemental report on the first day of
February of each year in office and within 30 days after any change in
information provided under paragraph 5.  The information must be for the
individual, the individual's spouse, and all minor children (collectively
referred to below as “person”):



1.   a business entity in which the person is an officer, director,
member, or employee, and the position held;



2.   a business entity in which the person has an ownership interest,
either legal or equitable, greater than 5 percent;



3.   sources of income, compensation, fees, or commissions that are
received from employment, for services rendered, or from pensions, except the
employment of minor children;



4.   non-profit organizations in which the person serves on the governing
body, and the position held, except if serving in that capacity as the city's
representative; and



5.   real property within the city owned by the person or in which the
person has a beneficial interest and that has an assessed valuation in excess
of $10,000.  The person's homestead need not be included.



The term “business entity” includes any business, proprietorship, firm,
partnership, person in representative or fiduciary capacity, association,
venture, trust or corporation.



115.020.  Hearing.



The council may hold a hearing after receiving a written complaint
questioning adherence to these principles or alleging a conflict of interest
or failure to file a required disclosure statement, or on the council's own
volition.  At the hearing, the person accused must have the opportunity to
be heard.  A hearing will be held only if the city council determines (1)
upon advice of the city attorney, designee or other attorney appointed by the
council, that the allegations rise to the level of a violation of these
principles or to the level of a legally-recognized conflict of interest, and
(2) that the complaint has been lodged in good faith and not for
impermissible purposes such as delay.  If after the hearing, the council
finds that a conflict of interest, failure to file a required disclosure, or
violation of these principles does exist, the council may take whatever
action it deems appropriate, including referring the matter for criminal
prosecution, imposing a civil penalty not exceeding $2000 per violation,
directing an official not to participate in a decision, or removing an
appointed member of an advisory board or commission from office.  A council
member or member of a board or commission must not participate in a decision
if the council prohibits the participation.



SECTION 120.  [REPEALED].



(Repealed by Ord. #2002-06, adopted April 22, 2002)



SECTION 125.  PARK BOARD.



125.005.  Park Board.



There is hereby continued, as heretofore created, a park board for the city
of Minnetonka, which board shall be known and designated as the park,
recreation, and leisure time activities board and shall consist of 7 voting
members who shall be appointed as follows:



1.   three members, one to be appointed from each school district serving
Minnetonka, those being the Hopkins, Minnetonka and Wayzata school districts;
and



2.   four members, or such other number as may be required to fill the
entire membership of the board to be appointed from the city of Minnetonka at
large, taking into account insofar as possible geographic representation from
all areas of the city with particular attention to the ward boundaries of the
city.



125.010.  Eligibility.



Members must have been a resident of the city of Minnetonka for a period of
not less than one year prior to the date of their appointment.



125.015.  Appointment Procedure and Term.



All members shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city
council.  The terms of the at-large members shall commence February 1, 1983
for two-year terms expiring on January 31st of each successive odd year. 
The three school district members' terms will commence on February 1, 1984,
and be for two-year periods expiring on January 31st of each successive even
year.  All unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term only.  Any member may be removed by the mayor, with the
approval of the city council, for misconduct or neglect of duties.  The
mayor with the approval of the city council shall make such interim
appointments as necessary to maintain membership at 7 persons, prior to
commencement of the staggered terms described above.



125.020.  Duties.



1.   The park board will consult with the city council and the staff and
be advisory to the city council in matters relating to park lands, park
facilities, programs, and finances.  This shall include short- and
long-range planning related to capital improvement projects, the acquisition,
development, and use of park lands, park facilities, recreational and leisure
time facilities, and matters of policy relating to park lands, park
facilities and recreational programs.



2.   The park board may, from time to time, meet with various groups on
matters relating to park and recreation activities.



3.   When convened as the park board, the board shall make its foremost
concern the park lands and park facilities of the city of Minnetonka, through
the recommendations to the city council of policies pertaining thereto.



4.   The park board shall annually, at its first meeting in February,
select one of its members to be its chairperson.



5.   As designated by the park board, six of the members of the park board
shall also represent the city of Minnetonka on a joint recreation board
heretofore established between the cities of Hopkins and Minnetonka.  In
this capacity, the members shall direct their primary attention to the
recreation programs and activities developed and offered through the joint
board, and make recommendations to the city council through the joint board
concerning policies pertaining to the recreation programs and activities.



125.025.  Meetings.



The park board shall meet as necessary, but not less than once every three
months, at a time and place designated by the chairperson of the park board,
or at a time and place mutually agreeable to the majority of the board.



125.030.  Compensation.



The city council may, from time to time, fix compensation for the members of
the park board and provide for the payment of expenses incurred in connection
with carrying out the duties and functions of the board.



SECTION 130.  SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD.



130.005.  Senior Citizen Advisory Board.



The senior citizen advisory board for the city of Minnetonka will consist of
fifteen members to be appointed by the mayor with approval of the council.



130.010.  Appointment and Term.



Terms will be for two years expiring on January 31st. Seven members will be
appointed in even-number years, and eight members will be appointed in
odd-numbered years. The terms of members appointed prior to the effective
date of this section will be extended from a term expiring on May 31st to a
term expiring on January 31st.



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-12, effective Oct. 13, 2018)



130.015.  Duties.



The senior citizen advisory board will:



1.   advise the city council about the needs and status of senior citizens
in the city;



2.   recommend to the city council ways in which the needs of senior
citizens may be met;



3.   determine and assess existing resources in the city that may be
utilized by senior citizens to meet their needs;



4.   evaluate proposed programs, grants and other governmental activities
that may impact on senior citizens in the city;



5.   recommend policies, goals and objectives for the operation of the
Minnetonka senior center to the city council; and



6.   work cooperatively with the city staff and the senior coordinator in
the operation of the senior center and implementation of its goals and
objectives.



130.020.  Officers.



The senior citizens advisory board may adopt by-laws providing for the
election of officers and appointment of committees.



130.025.  Rules.



The senior citizens advisory board must adopt rules governing its
organization and procedures.



130.030.  Meetings.



The senior citizens advisory board will meet at least once each month at a
time and place designated by the chairperson of the senior citizens advisory
board or at a time and place mutually agreeable to a majority of the board.



130.035.  Relationships.



The senior citizens advisory board reports directly to the city council.



SECTION 135.  [REPEALED].



(Repealed by Ord. #2008-38, adopted December 22, 2008)



SECTION 140.  [REPEALED].



(Repealed by Ord. #2013-03, March 4, 2013)



CHAPTER 2:  ADMINISTRATION; FINANCE



Section



   200.   DEPUTY CITY CLERK.



   205.   PERSONNEL.



   210.   REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY APPROVALS.



   215.   CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   220.   PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS AND STORM SEWER CHARGES.



   225.   IMPROVEMENT BOND REDEMPTION FUND.



   230.   COMMUNITY INVESTMENT FUND.



SECTION 200.  DEPUTY CITY CLERK.



200.005.  Position Created.



By authority of section 6.04 of the city charter, the council establishes the
office of deputy city clerk.



200.010.  Appointment and Duties.



The city clerk may appoint one or more deputy city clerks, and the deputy
city clerks are authorized to perform all of the duties of the city clerk in
the absence of the city clerk.



SECTION 205.  PERSONNEL.



205.005.  Appointments.



1.   Procedure.  The city manager is responsible for hiring city
employees, except as otherwise provided by state law, city charter or
ordinance.  Each appointment must be based on merit and qualifications for
the position as determined by the city manager.



2.   Relationship to Other City Personnel.  A person must not be
appointed as a city employee who is the child, child-in-law, step-child,
parent, parent-in-law, sibling, sibling-in-law, grandparent, grandchild,
aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew of an elected official, a city employee, or an
appointed city official if the employment relates to the subject matter of
the appointed official's responsibilities.  A spouse of an elected city
official, a city employee, or appointed city official must not be appointed
as a city employee if the other spouse has the authority to appoint,
supervise, evaluate, or discipline the position, or if one holds or will hold
a position that is classified as confidential.



205.010.  Holidays.



The following will be the official holidays for the city, and official
business must not be conducted on them:  New Years Day, January 1; Martin
Luther King's Birthday, the third Monday in January; President's Day, the
third Monday in February; Memorial Day, the last Monday in May; Independence
Day, July 4; Labor Day, the first Monday in September; Veterans Day, November
11; Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November; the Friday after
Thanksgiving Day; and Christmas Day, December 25.  The holidays that fall on
a Saturday will be observed the preceding Friday.  Those that fall on a
Sunday will be observed the following Monday.



205.015.  Discipline.



Except as otherwise provided by state law, city charter or ordinance, the
city manager or designee will make all decisions regarding discipline of city
employees, including suspension and termination.



205.020.  Administration.



1.   Administrative Policies.  The city manager may establish
administrative policies to administer the city's employment practices.  All
city employees must comply with these policies. Except when the city manager
determines that it is unnecessary, all policies and changes to the policies
will be distributed to the city council for comment before adoption.



2.   Employee Benefits. The city manager may provide monetary and
non-monetary benefits, programs, and activities to the city's workforce to
help attract and retain employees.  These benefits, programs, and activities
should foster high employee productivity and morale and reduce expenses
resulting from low productivity and frequent employee turnover. These
programs and activities may include such things as insurance options,
incentive and recognition awards, social activities, professional association
memberships, and training opportunities.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-28, adopted December 16, 2002)



205.025.  Indemnification.



To the extent required by state law, the city or its insurance carrier will
defend and indemnify its officers and employees against a claim resulting
from the performance of their official duties.  Any judgment for costs and
disbursements in favor of the officer or employee will be assigned to the
city, and all monies collected will be paid to the city.  This
indemnification does not apply in cases of intentional tort, malfeasance in
office, or wilful or wanton negligence.  In those cases, the city council
may indemnify the officer or employee if it finds this to be in the public
interest. Indemnification under this paragraph is subject to the liability
limits imposed by Minn. Stat. § 466.04 and any other relevant statutes.



205.030.  Prohibitions.



A person must not intentionally make a false statement or provide false
information relating to the person’s application for employment, or current
employment, with the city.  A person seeking employment or promotion in the
municipal service must not directly or indirectly give any money, service or
other valuable consideration to a person who has the ability to influence or
make the employment or promotion decision.



205.035.  Background Investigations.



1.   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's
computerized criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes
of employment background checks for the positions described in paragraph 2
below.



2.   Authority to Conduct. The Minnetonka police department is required,
as the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history background
investigation on the applicants for the following positions within the city,
unless the city's appointing authority concludes that a background
investigation is not needed: finalists for regular and part-time city
positions of employment and for other city positions of employment or
independent contractor status that have:



   a.   direct access to, or management of, public funds;



   b.   substantial contact with juveniles in a setting where adults
are not present;



   c.   the task of entering private property on a regular basis; or



   d.   supervisory responsibilities.



In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to
screen employment applicants, the police department is authorized to access
data maintained in the Minnesota bureau of criminal apprehension's
computerized criminal history information system in accordance with BCA
policy.  Any data that is accessed and acquired must be maintained at the
police department under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement
official or his or her designee.  A summary of the results of the
computerized criminal history data may be released by the police department
to the appointing authority  and other city staff involved in the hiring
process.



3.   Procedures. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant
must authorize the police department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
state law, including Minn. Stat. Chap. 13, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. The written consent must fully comply
with the provisions of state law, including Minn. Stat. Chap. 13, regarding
the collection, maintenance and use of the information.  Except for the
positions set forth in Minn. Stat. §364.09, the city will not reject an
applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction
unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and
the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail
sentence.  If the city rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the
city must notify the applicant in writing of the following:



   a.   the grounds and reasons for the rejection;



   b.   the applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in
Minn. Stat. § 364.06;



   c.   the earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment; and



   d.   that all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-14, adopted October 8, 2012; amended by Ord. 2009-11;
adopted September 14, 2009)



SECTION 210.  REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY APPROVALS.



210.005.



A license, permit, or other city approval or authorization of any kind may be
granted only to an applicant who:



1.   has complied with all relevant statutory, charter and ordinance
requirements;



2.   has paid all fees, charges, taxes, special assessments and other
debts or obligations that are due from the applicant and payable to the city
regarding any matter; and



3.   is in compliance with all ordinance requirements and attached
conditions regarding other city approvals that have been granted to the
applicant for any matter.



210.010.



The requirements of section 210.005(2) and (3) may be waived in the following
circumstances:



1.   the applicant has provided sufficient safeguards to assure payment of
debts or compliance with city requirements within a reasonable time after the
city approval; or



2.   enforcement of the requirements would result in a significant
hardship to the applicant through no fault of his/her own or would result in
an otherwise unfair situation.



SECTION 215.  CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



215.005.  Administration and Enforcement.



The city manager is responsible for administering and enforcing this code. 
In addition, certain individuals designated within the code have the
authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified.  All licensed
police officers employed by the city have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this code.



215.010.  Delegation of Authority.



All individuals designated within this code as having the authority and
responsibility to administer and enforce the code or portions of it, may
delegate that authority to qualified individuals under their direction and
control. General enforcement power of police officers may not be delegated
except in emergency situations and other situations authorized by this code.



215.015.  Authority to Issue Citations.



1.   All individuals given enforcement power under this code and their
designees have the authority to issue a citation in lieu of arrest or
continued detention.  The following individuals and their designees have the
authority to enforce the provisions specified below:




code provisions   authorized individuals





zoning code (sec. 300)   planning director





building code (sec. 500-520)   building official, community development
director





housing code (sec. 525)   community development director,
   environmental health specialist





public health regulations, including food   community development director,
establishments (sec. 630) refuse and garbage   environmental health
specialist
(sec. 835) and public nuisances (sec. 845)





obstructions at intersections   city engineer
(sec. 845.010(1))





outside parking and storage (sec. 845.020)   community service officers
and abandoned or inoperable motor
vehicles (sec. 845.025)





animal control regulations (sec. 925)   community service officers





tree disease (sec. 840) and   city forester
noxious weeds (sec. 845.005(7))





permits, licenses, and business regulations   community development
director
(sec. 600-645, 700)





fire regulations (sec. 910)   fire chief





street numbers (sec. 1110)   building official, fire marshal





driveway regulations (sec. 1105)   city engineer




2.   The chief of police may authorize city employees and volunteers who
are not licensed police officers to direct traffic, to enforce state laws and
city ordinances designated by the chief, and to issue a citation in lieu of
arrest or continued detention for that enforcement.  These personnel may
exercise this authority only if they are under the direction and control of a
licensed city police officer.



215.020.    Reasonable Accommodation.



1.   The city has a legitimate interest in imposing regulations to protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare. However, these regulations
may not be applied in a manner that denies reasonable accommodation as
required by the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. It is the policy
of the city to provide reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities
seeking fair and equal access to housing, in compliance with federal law.
Reasonable accommodation means granting a modification or waiver of city
regulations or policies to an individual with a disability, or to a developer
of housing for an individual with a disability, when necessary to eliminate
barriers to housing opportunities as required by the Act. The process for
making and acting upon requests for reasonable accommodation is set forth
below.



2.   A person may request the modification or waiver of city regulations
or policies by submitting a request in writing to the community development
director. No fee is required for this application. "Person" includes an
individual with a disability, his or her representative, or a developer or
provider of housing for an individual with a disability. The application must
include a detailed explanation of why the modification or waiver  is
reasonably necessary to make the specific housing available to the person,
including verification of the disability, as well as other information
required by the director. If the request also requires another city review or
approval, then the applicant must file the request concurrently with that
application.



3.   The community development director, in consultation with the city
attorney, has the authority to consider and act on requests for reasonable
accommodation, except that requests associated with another city review or
approval will be considered and decided concurrently with that application. A
decision must be in writing and may include the imposition of conditions. In
making a decision, the following factors must be considered:



   a.   whether there is a qualifying disability;



   b.   whether the request is needed to allow a disabled person equal
opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling, or to live in a particular
neighborhood, as a person without disabilities;



   c.   whether the request is reasonable, considering such things as
the potential impact on surrounding uses, the extent to which the
accommodation meets the stated need, and other alternatives that may meet
that need;



   d.   whether the request would constitute a fundamental alteration
of the city's regulations, policies, or procedures;



   e.   whether the request would impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the city; and



   f.   any other factor that may have a bearing on the request.



4.   The director's written decision, including notice of the right to
appeal, must be mailed to the applicant and to the owners of all properties
that are immediately adjacent to the property that is the subject of the
request. An aggrieved party may appeal the director's decision to the city
council by submitting a written request to the city clerk within 10 days
after the decision was mailed to that party. The director's decision is the
final decision of the city, unless properly appealed. Only the aggrieved
applicant and immediately adjacent property owners who received notice of the
written determination have a right to appeal.



5.   An approved request is granted only to an individual and does not run
with the land unless the director determines that (a) the accommodation is
physically integrated into the residential structure and cannot easily be
removed or altered or (b) the accommodation is to be used by another
individual with a disability.



6.   The director may require that the applicant record a covenant
agreeing to comply with conditions established in the determination, before
the issuance of any permits related to an approved reasonable accommodation.



(Added by Ord. #2013-07, adopted June 3, 2013)



SECTION 220.  PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS AND STORM SEWER CHARGES.



220.005.  Partial Prepayment.



1.   Special assessments.  Within 30 days after the city council adopts
the resolution approving the assessment roll, the owner of property that is
assessed may pay a portion of the total assessment, if payments are made in
increments of not less than $100.00 and the remaining unpaid balance is not
less than $100.00.  The unpaid balance will be spread over the period of
time established by the council for the payment of the special assessments.



2.   Storm sewer charges. Storm sewer charges may be partially prepaid at
any time without restriction or penalty.



220.010.  Deferment.



1.   The council may defer payment of special assessments and storm sewer
charges for a period not exceeding 15 years in the following instances:



   a.   when the property affected is the homestead of the owner, and
the owner is retired as a result of age;



   b.   when the property affected is the homestead of the owner, and
the owner is retired as a result of permanent and total disability, which is
defined as any of the following:



      (1)   the total and permanent loss of the sight of both eyes;



      (2)   the loss of both arms at the shoulder;



      (3)   the loss of both legs so close to the hips that no
effective artificial members can be used;



      (4)   complete and permanent paralysis;



      (5)   total and permanent loss of mental faculties; or



      (6)   other injury that totally incapacitates the owner from
working at an occupation that produces an income.



2.   A person who receives a deferment under subdivision 1 above may not
have an annual household income that exceeds 50 percent of the average median
income, as determined annually by the United States department of housing and
urban development for the fair market rental area that includes Minneapolis
and St. Paul, Minnesota.



3.   Deferments will be granted upon the owner’s certification of the
required qualifications on the city-provided form.  The certification may be
made at any time following the adoption of the assessment or storm sewer
charge and must be renewed annually by the owner during the term of the
deferment, no later than September 30 of each year.



4.   Deferred assessments and charges will accrue simple interest during
the deferment period at the rate established for the payment of assessments
when the assessment or storm sewer charge was adopted.



5.   A one-time five-year hardship extension beyond the initial 15 years
will be granted upon compliance with all of the following:



   a.   the owner must continue to comply with the requirements of
paragraphs 1 and 2 above;



   b.   the owner’s minimum age must be 80.  If an eligible person
becomes deceased and the decedent’s spouse does not meet the age
requirement, this requirement will be waived in order to avoid a hardship for
the surviving spouse;



   c.   the owner must provide copies of his/her/their federal income
tax forms for three years immediately preceding the hardship request;



   d.   the owner must furnish a statement of all current assets and
the nature of their liquidity, showing that other financial resources are not
available for payment of the special assessments;



   e.   the bond account established for each special assessment levy
in question must be sufficient to discharge all city obligations incurred
from the sale of the bonds;



   f.   the years allowed for spreading the unpaid amounts at the end
of the five-year extension may not be fewer than 10 if the property cannot be
further divided, or fewer than five if the property is further divisible;



   g.   the special assessment balance at the end of a five-year
extension may not be greater than 50 percent of the market value of the
property as estimated to the end of the five- year extension.  Further, the
special assessment balance at the end of a five-year extension may not result
in annual installments of more than $10,000 based on the remaining years
allowed for re-spreading the unpaid amount; and



   h.   the hardship extension must be renewed on an annual basis, no
later than September 30 of each year, but may not be renewable for more than
a total of five years.



6.   Upon failure to receive renewal certification, or upon the expiration
of the 15-year deferment, the clerk must either:



   a.   promptly certify to the county auditor the amount of the
deferred assessment and accrued interest, to be extended on the proper tax
rolls and to be collected over the time remaining of the 30-year period after
the original assessment; or



   b.   promptly certify to the city treasurer the amount of the
deferred storm sewer charges to be placed on the utility bills for the
affected property and to be collected over the time period allowed for the
payment of the charges when originally adopted.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-17, effective December 23, 2017)



SECTION 225.  IMPROVEMENT BOND REDEMPTION FUND.



225.005.  Fund Created.



The treasurer will maintain a separate debt redemption fund, designated as
the improvement bond redemption fund, as long as there are any outstanding
improvement bonds payable from the fund.



225.010.  Purpose of Fund.



The fund will be administered as a sinking fund in accordance with state law
and will be used solely for the payment of principal and interest on general
obligation improvement bonds issued to finance improvements under Minn. Stat.
chapter 429.  The fund may be used for the collection of special assessments
and ad valorem taxes to pay the cost of the improvements, or for the purpose
of refunding temporary improvement bonds.



225.015.  Separate Improvement Funds.



A separate improvement fund must be created under Minn. Stat. § 429.091 for
each improvement or consolidated group of improvements to be financed by
improvement bonds. The name and number of the improvement or improvements
will be inserted in the name of each fund.  The proceeds of each bond sale
must be paid into a separate fund, together with collections of special
assessments and taxes levied for paying the costs of the improvement(s) and
any other money appropriated by the council. These funds will be held in each
account and used to defray improvement expenses, including principal and
interest on the bonds, until construction is completed and the cost of the
improvement is fully paid.  The council may then discontinue the fund and
transfer any remaining amounts to another improvement fund or to another fund
permitted by law.  Money not transferred must be paid into the improvement
bond redemption fund created in section 230.005.  Subsequent collections of
special assessments and taxes levied for the payment of the improvement costs
must be paid into the improvement bond redemption fund.



225.020.  Receipts of Fund.



The proceeds of bonds that are sold to refund temporary improvement bonds
must be paid into the fund from which the bonds being refunded are payable,
and used only for the payment of those bonds.  Subsequent collections of
special assessments and taxes levied for the improvements financed by the
bonds being refunded must be paid into the improvement bond redemption fund.



225.025.  Resolution Authorizing Bonds.



Before delivery of any improvement bonds that are payable from the
improvement bond redemption fund, the council must adopt a resolution
determining the following, if applicable:



1.   the cost of the improvements to be financed;



2.   the principal amount of temporary improvement bonds to be redeemed;



3.   the minimum principal amount of special assessments to be levied for
each improvement to be financed;



4.   the remaining principal amount of special assessments levied or to be
levied for each improvement financed by temporary improvement bonds to be
redeemed;



5.   the number of annual installments of special assessments;



6.   the years in which annual installments are due and payable;



7.   the rate of interest to be charged upon deferred installments; and



8.   the minimum amount of a general ad valorem tax upon all taxable
property within the city for each year of the bonds.



225.030.  State Law Requirements.



All matters involving improvement bonds, including issuance and payment, must
be in compliance with state law.



SECTION 230.  COMMUNITY INVESTMENT FUND.



230.005.  Fund Created.



There will be a separate city fund designated as the community investment
fund. This fund will be maintained in the official city records and
administered by the treasurer in accordance with the provisions of this
section. All surplus moneys in each separate improvement fund in the
improvement bond redemption fund that remain after the costs of each
improvement have been fully funded, and that are not transferred to another
separate improvement fund, will be transferred to the community investment
fund. In addition, the following will be deposited in this fund:



1.   collections of special assessments and taxes levied for the payment
of the costs of an improvement that are received after the improvement costs
have been fully funded;



2.   investment earnings generated by the moneys in the community
investment fund; and



3.   other moneys appropriated by the council or donated for the purposes
of the fund.



The principal of the fund consists of all transfers from the improvement bond
redemption fund, subsequent collections of special assessments and taxes, and
other moneys appropriated or donated to the fund. In addition, the principal
will be increased annually by an amount equal to ten percent of the
investment earnings generated by the fund in the previous year. The remaining
investment earnings will not accrue to the principal and will forever be
treated as investment earnings available for expenditure in accordance with
this section.



230.010.  Purpose of Fund.



This fund will be used solely to pay the capital costs of projects of general
benefit to the city of Minnetonka.



230.015.  Expenditure Limitations.



1.   Expenditures from the fund will be made solely from accumulated
investment earnings until 1993. In 1993 and beyond, expenditures will be made
only from accumulated investment earnings whenever possible.



2.   Expenditures may be made from principal, but may not exceed an amount
greater than the equivalent of the fund's investment earnings for the prior
two consecutive years. If expenditures from principal are made, either they
must be structured as a loan to repay the principal, or no further
expenditures of any kind may be made from the fund until investment earnings
have reestablished the principal at an amount equal to that existing before
the expenditures plus ten percent of the investment earnings that would have
been earned per year if the principal had not been reduced.



230.020.  Funding Preference.



Expenditures from the fund for competing projects must be granted in the
following order of preference:



1.   first priority: projects that can be funded within the amount of the
available investment earnings;



2.   second priority: projects that are using expenditures from principal
funds and that have the capacity to repay the principal amount borrowed; and



3.   third priority: projects that are using expenditures from principal
funds, have no other reasonable funding source, are non-revenue producing,
require significant funding, and will provide otherwise unattainable
community benefit.



230.025.  Funding Procedure.



Expenditures from the fund may be made only after compliance with the
following procedure.



1.   The project to be funded must have been included for at least two
years in the city's formally-adopted capital improvement program.



2.   The city council must hold a public hearing on whether the proposed
project should be funded. Notice specifying the date, time and place of the
hearing, the project to be funded, and the amount of funding must be
published at least ten days before the hearing in the city's official
newspaper. In addition, efforts must be made to give notice to the community
through other reasonable means, such as newspaper articles, cable television
and any city newsletter. The public hearing must be held on two separate days
at least 30 days apart. The date and time of the second meeting must be
announced at the first.



3.   The city council must make the following findings in an adopted
resolution:



   a.   the project has sufficient community-wide benefit as determined
by a review of its intended purpose or users, the degree to which it
addresses a community-wide need or problem, and its consistency with other
city goals, programs or policies;



   b.   the project to be funded could not occur but for the use of the
community investment fund or a tax increase;



   c.   the community investment fund is not replacing funding from
another previously programmed or available source;



   d.   the project has been included in at least two consecutive
formally-approved capital improvement programs;



   e.   if principal is used, the project has the ability to reasonably
repay the funds, and use of the principal does not exceed the equivalent of
the last two years' investment earnings from the community investment fund;
and



   f.   an estimate of the ongoing annual operating and maintenance
costs has been made and the source(s) for paying such costs identified.



4.   If any of the findings in paragraph 3 cannot be made and the project
meets the expenditure limitations imposed in section 230.015, expenditures
may be made from the fund only after the affirmative vote of at least five
council members.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-12, adopted May 20, 2002)



230.030.  Administrative Expenditures.



The limitations imposed in the sections above do not apply to reasonable
expenses necessary for the administration of the community investment fund.



230.035.  Amendments.



Amendments may be made to section 230.015(1) only upon the affirmative vote
of at least six members of the council. Other amendments to section 230 may
be made only upon the affirmative vote of at least five members of the
council.



CHAPTER 3:  ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



   300.        ZONING REGULATIONS.




   300.01.  TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION.





   300.02.     DEFINITIONS.





   300.03.     ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.





   300.04.     PLANNING COMMISSION.





   300.05.     INTERIM USE PERMITS.





   300.06.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.





   300.07.     VARIANCES.





   300.08.     CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.





   300.09.     ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.





   300.10.     R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.





   300.11.     R-2 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.





   300.12.     R-3 LOW OR MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.





   300.13.     R-4 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.





   300.14.     R-5 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.





   300.15.     GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.





   300.16.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR





                          RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.





   300.17.     B-1 OFFICE BUSINESS DISTRICT.





   300.18.     B-2 LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICT.





   300.19.     B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.





   300.20.     I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.





   300.21.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS AND





                          INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.





   300.22.     PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.





   300.23.     WETLANDS PROTECTION.





   300.24.     FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.





   300.25.     SHORELAND DISTRICT.





   300.26.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR WETLANDS,





                          FLOODPLAIN AND SHORELAND DISTRICTS





   300.27.     SITE AND BUILDING PLAN REVIEW.





   300.28.     PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.





   300.29.     NON-CONFORMING USES.





   300.30.     [REPEALED].





   300.31.     PLANNED I-394 DISTRICT.





   300.32.     I-394 REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICTS.





   300.33.     ANTI-BLIGHT REGULATIONS.





   300.34.     [REPEALED]





   300.35.  OPUS OVERLAY DISTRICT.





   300.36.     SOUTHWEST LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT OVERLAY DISTRICT.





   300.37.     R-1A, RESIDENTIAL ALTERNATIVE, DISTRICT.





   310.03.  TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES REGULATIONS





   325.       SIGN REGULATIONS.





   325.01    PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.





   325.02    DEFINITIONS.





   325.03    CITATION; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.





   325.04    PERMITS, PROCEDURE AND VARIANCES.





   325.05    GENERAL REGULATIONS.





   325.06    DISTRICT REGULATIONS




SECTION 300.  ZONING REGULATIONS.



SECTION 300.01.  TITLE, PURPOSE, SCOPE AND INTERPRETATION.



1.  Title.



Sections 300.01 through 300.33, inclusive, of the code of city ordinances
shall be known and may be referred to as the “Minnetonka zoning ordinance
of 1986”.  When referred to herein it shall be known as “this
ordinance”.



2.  Purpose.



This ordinance is enacted to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the city of Minnetonka through the following:



a)   encouraging the planned and orderly development of residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational and public uses of land;



b)   providing adequate light, air and convenience of access to property;



c)   limiting congestion in the public right-of-way;



d)   preventing overcrowding of land and undue concentration of population
and structures;



e)   providing for the compatible integration of different land uses and
the most appropriate use of land;



f)   encouraging development in accordance with the city's comprehensive
plan;



g)   conserving the natural beauty and environmental assets of the city
including areas of steep slopes, mature trees, and wetlands;



h)   protecting water resources and water quality in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and the city's water resources management plan;



i)   facilitating the provision of water, utilities and sewage disposal to
property;



j)   protecting the population from fire, and other matters affecting
public safety;



k)   maintaining to a reasonable extent property values and the tax base
of the city; and



l)   providing for the administration of this ordinance and amendments to
it, defining the powers and duties imposed by this ordinance and prescribing
penalties for violation of its provisions.



3.  Scope.



a)   From and after the effective date of this ordinance, the use of all
land and all buildings erected, altered, enlarged or relocated and every use
accessory thereto shall be in conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance.  Any existing use or building, lot or development which was
legally established but is not in conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance shall be regarded as non-conforming and may continue in existence
only for such period of time and under such conditions as is provided for in
section 300.29 of this ordinance.



b)   Some of the residential zoning designations established by this
ordinance may differ from the stated land use designations in the
comprehensive plan. These differences are consistent with the comprehensive
plan, which recognizes that the existing zoning designations may remain in
the near term, while waiting for planned, orderly, and staged development or
redevelopment that complies with the comprehensive plan. Until that future
development occurs, those properties will remain subject to the provisions of
the current residential zoning district and these additional restrictions:
(1) each property must be subdivided, developed or redeveloped only in
compliance with the comprehensive plan land use designation, and (2) no
conditional use permit that changes the principal use may be granted for a
property. This does not prohibit improvements to an existing principal
structure, including expansion and replacement, nor prohibit the
construction, improvement, expansion, or replacement of permitted accessory
uses. The city will initiate an amendment to the zoning district when the
property is ready for subdivision, development or redevelopment, or when
there is a specific development application that is consistent with the
comprehensive plan.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-04, adopted March 26, 2012)



4.  Interpretation and Application.



a)   The provisions of this ordinance shall be minimum requirements. 
Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this ordinance differ from
those required by any statute or other ordinance of the city, the regulations
which are more restrictive or which impose the higher standard shall prevail
except provisions of the subdivision ordinance as codified in the 1982 code
of ordinances shall not supercede provisions of this ordinance.



b)   Words or terms defined in this ordinance shall have the meanings
assigned to them unless such meaning is clearly contrary to the intent of
this ordinance.  The singular number shall include the plural.  The present
tense shall include the past and future tenses.  The word “shall” is
mandatory and “may” is permissive.



5.  Official Zoning Map.



a)   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by
this ordinance shall be known and may be referred to as the “Minnetonka
official zoning map”.  The map and all notations, references and data
shown on it are incorporated by reference into this ordinance and shall be as
much a part of this ordinance as if it were fully described herein.



b)   The official wetlands, floodplain and shoreland maps referenced in
sections 300.23, 300.24 and 300.25 of this ordinance are a part of the
official zoning map established by this subdivision.



c)   All property within the city shall have the zoning designation shown
on the official zoning map.  If there is any discrepancy or inconsistency
between the official zoning map and any other map, ordinance or source which
purports to indicate the zoning of property, the official zoning map shall
take precedence.



d)   Except for the wetland, floodplain and shoreland overlay districts,
zoning district boundary lines shown on the official zoning map are intended
to follow lot lines, the center lines of streets or alleys, the center lines
of street or alleys projected, railroad right-of-way lines, the center of
watercourses or the corporate limits of the city, unless otherwise indicated.
In the case of the wetlands, floodplain and shoreland  overlay districts,
the boundary lines of the districts must be determined as specified in
sections 300.23, 300.24, and 300.25 of this ordinance, respectively. 



e)   It shall be the responsibility of the city planner to maintain the
Minnetonka official zoning map and to make changes on the map promptly
whenever appropriate.



6.  Severability.



Every section or subdivision of this ordinance is declared separable from
every other section or subdivision.  If any section or subdivision is held
to be invalid by competent authority, no other section or subdivision shall
be invalidated by such action or decision.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-10, adopted March 24, 2008



SECTION 300.02.  DEFINITIONS.



For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:



1.   “Abandon” - the cessation of a specific use of a property for a
period of 12 or more months.



2.   “Abut” - to make direct contact with or immediately border.



3.   “Access aisle or aisle” - the traveled way by which vehicles
enter and depart parking spaces.



4.   “Accessory apartment” - a smaller secondary dwelling unit,
located within a principal dwelling unit, that includes provisions for
sleeping, cooking, and sanitation independent of the principal dwelling unit.
This definition includes secondary dwelling units that have exterior
entrances separate from the principal dwelling unit and secondary dwelling
units that are accessed only through the principal dwelling unit.



5.   “Alteration, structural” - any change or rearrangement in the
supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, girders or rooflines, or any enlargement of a building or structure
whether horizontal or vertical.



6.   “Alteration, use” - any change to the use or occupancy of a
building or parcel from one type of land use to another.  Changes in use or
occupancy include office to retail, warehouse to assembly, retail to
restaurant or similar changes which result in a different intensity of use.



7.   “Apartment” - a dwelling unit, generally rented, located within a
larger bulding.



8.   “Basement” - an area of a building, having its floor or base
below ground level on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation
below ground level.



9.   “Basement floor elevation (minimum)” - the lowest floor of a
building.



10.   “Berm” - a landscaped mound of earth used for aesthetic or
buffer purposes. (Figure 1)



Figure 1







11.   “Bluff ”- a steep slope as defined in this ordinance.



12.   “Bluff impact zone” - land within a bluff and land within 20
feet from the top of a bluff.



13.   “Boarding or lodging house” - a dwelling unit or part of a
dwelling unit in which meals, sleeping accommodations, or meals and sleeping
accommodations are provided for compensation to no more than five persons who
do not function as a single housekeeping unit.



14.   “Buffer” - the use of land, topography, open space or
landscaping to separate a use of property from another adjacent or nearby use.



15.   “Buildable area” - a contiguous portion of a lot  that is
suitable for the location of the primary  structure and that excludes all
existing and  proposed easements, setback areas for principal  structures,
wetlands, floodplains, the neck  portion of any neck or flag lot, steep
slopes that  are unbuildable under this ordinance, and other  unbuildable
areas.  Certain easements may be  included in the buildable area at the
discretion of  the city if their inclusion is consistent with the  intent
of this code.  (Figure 2)



Figure 2







16.   “Building” - any structure having a roof supported by columns,
walls or other means of support for the shelter or enclosure of persons or
property.



17.   “Building height” - the vertical distance between the ground
elevation abutting a building and the midpoint elevation of the highest gable
of a pitched or hipped roof, the deck line of a mansard roof, or the highest
point of a flat roof or a parapet wall. The ground elevation used to measure
building height will be selected from one of the following, whichever results
in the greater height:



   a)   When the change in grade within the footprint of the building
is equal to or less than 10 feet, the highest ground elevation abutting the
building will be used.



   b)   When the change in grade within the footprint of the building
is greater than 10 feet, an elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest ground
elevation abutting the building will be used.



Figure 3







18.   “City” - the city of Minnetonka, a municipal corporation, along
with its duly authorized boards, commissions or representatives.



19.   "City Planner" - for purposes of this ordinance, the person holding
said position or a designated representative.



20.   “Common area, residential” - land, structures, or both, that are
owned and maintained by a homeowners' association or similar organization and
used for the mutual benefit of residents or tenants of the association or
organization.



21.   “Common space, commercial” - enclosed areas located within a
commercial structure that are utilized for the mutual benefit of building
tenants.



22.   “Community based residential care facility” - any facility
similar to but not included within the definition of licensed residential
care facility. These may include public or private facilities which provide
one or more persons with up to 24 hour care, training, education,
rehabilitation, treatment or other support services.



23.   “Comprehensive plan” - the comprehensive municipal plan, as
defined in Minnesota Statutes section 462.352, in effect at the time of the
final action on an application, except as otherwise required by Minnesota
Statutes section 462.357.



24.   “Conditional use permit” - a permit to allow a conditional use
duly authorized by the appropriate authority as described in sections 300.16
or 300.21 of this ordinance.  A conditional use permit may be subject to
periodic review upon determination by the city.



25.   “Conservation easement” - a recordable document that prohibits
construction, grading, vegetation removal, or other alteration of property
except in accordance with city-approved environmental management practices,
but which does not grant the public the right to use the property.



26.   “Crawl space” - an enclosure designed to internally flood, which
is completely above grade on at least one side and usable solely for building
access or storage.



27.   “Cul-de-sac” - a street with a single means of ingress and
egress and having a turnaround at its end for safe and convenient reversal of
traffic. (Figure 4)



Figure 4







28.   "Cul-de-sac bulb" - a turnaround at the end of a cul-de-sac.



29.   “Deck” - an unenclosed platform structure composed of boards
made of synthetic or natural materials. A deck is considered attached if any
part of it is within ten feet of the principal structure; a deck is
considered detached if no part of it is within ten feet of the principal
structure. A detached deck is considered an accessory structure in the
wetland, floodplain, and shoreland districts.



30.   “Density” - the number of dwelling units per acre of land,
excluding areas zoned as wetland, floodplain, or below the ordinary high
water level of a public water, as regulated by the comprehensive plan.



31.   “Distribution line” - an overhead or underground facility
consisting of utility poles, lines, underground conduit, and related devices
used to carry electricity from a substation to the ultimate user, with a
nominal voltage equal to or less than 35 kilovolts, or to carry
communications.



32.   “Dock” - a platform that provides access to a water resource.



33.   “Dwelling” - a building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively for residential occupancy.



34.   “Dwelling, attached” - a dwelling attached to one or more
dwellings by common walls or floors.



35.   “Dwelling, detached” - a dwelling that is not attached to any
other dwelling.



36.   "Dwelling, single-family" - a building designed or intended for
occupancy by one family.



37.   “Dwelling, two-family” - a building designed with two separate
dwelling units intended for occupancy by two families. A principal dwelling
unit that contains an accessory apartment is not considered a two-family
dwelling.



38.   “Dwelling, multiple-family” - a building designed with three or
more dwelling units intended for occupancy by three or more families.



39.   “Dwelling unit” - one or more rooms with facilities for
sleeping, cooking, and sanitation designed or intended for residential
occupancy.



40.   “Educational institution or facility” - a public or private
school that has a course of instruction meeting the compulsory education
requirements of the Minnesota board of education.



41.   “Excavation” - the removal, relocation or recovery by any means
of soil, rock, minerals, debris or organic substances other than vegetation
from a parcel of land.



42.   “Expansion” - any increase in dimension, size, area, volume, or
height, any increase in the area of use, any placement of a structure or part
thereof where none existed before, any addition of a site feature such as a
deck, patio, fence, driveway, parking area, or swimming pool, any improvement
that would allow the land to be more intensely developed, any move of
operation to a new location on the property, or any increase in intensity of
use based on a review of the original nature, function or purpose of a
non-conforming use, the hours of operation, traffic, parking, noise, exterior
storage, signs, exterior lighting, types of operations, types of goods or
services offered, odors, area of operation, number of employees, and other
factors deemed relevant by the city. Expansion is synonymous with
"enlargement" and "intensification."



43.   “Family” - any number of individuals living together on the
premises as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group
occupying a boarding or lodging house, licensed residential care facility,
licensed day care facility or community based residential facility.



44.   “FEMA” - the United States federal emergency management agency
or its successor.



45.   “Filling” - sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any
composition placed on a parcel of land.



46.   “Flood” -  a temporary increase in the flow or stage of a
stream or in the stage of a wetland, pond, watercourse, or lake that results
in the inundation of normally dry areas.



47.   “Flood elevation” - the water level achieved by a 100-year flood
as defined by the city water resources management plan, the federal emergency
management agency, or other studies accepted by the city, whichever is more
restrictive.  A 100-year flood is synonymous with the terms one-percent
chance flood, base flood, and regional flood.



48.   “Flood obstruction” - a dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee,
dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation (except for creation of
compensatory flood storage), channel modification, culvert, building, wire,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in,  along, across, or
projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may
impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in
itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.



49.   “Flood proofing” - a combination of structural provisions,
changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding,
primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.



50.   “Flood way” - the bed of a wetland, pond, or lake, or the
channel of a watercourse, and those portions of the adjoining floodplain that
are reasonably required to carry, store or discharge the 100-year flood event.



51.   “Floodplain” - the area adjoining a wetland, pond, lake or water
course including the floodway, subject to periodic inundation by a 100-year
flood as designated on the official city floodplain district map.



52.   “Floor area” - for single-family and two-family dwellings, the
sum of the following as measured from exterior walls: the fully exposed gross
horizontal area of a building, including attached garage space and enclosed
porch areas, and one-half the gross horizontal area of any partially exposed
level such as a walkout or lookout level. For multiple family dwellings and
non-residential buildings, the sum of the following as measured from exterior
walls: the fully exposed gross horizontal area of a building and one-half of
the gross horizontal area of any partially exposed level such as a walkout or
lookout level, excluding interior parking spaces and vehicular circulation
areas. For all buildings, if a floor has a height in excess of 15 feet an
additional floor will be assumed for every full 15 feet of interior building
height. (Figure 5)



Figure 5







53.   “Floor area ratio (FAR)” -  the floor area of a building as
defined by this ordinance, divided by area of the lot on which the building
is located. Area zoned as wetland, floodplain, or below the ordinary high
water level of a public water is excluded from the lot area for purposes of
the floor area ratio calculation unless it can be demonstrated that there
will be minimal hydrologic, aesthetic and ecological impacts to the relevant
area as determined by the city.  (Figure 6)



Figure 6







54.   “Garage” - a detached or attached accessory structure designed
or used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by
residents of a principal structure on the same lot.



55.   “Grade” - the elevation of the ground.



56.   “Grading” - excavating, filling or other land-disturbing
activity.



57.   “Heliport” - any area on the ground or on a structure approved
by the city for the landing and takeoff of helicopters.



58.   “Home occupation” - an occupation that is clearly secondary to
the principal residential use and does not change the nature of the
principal  residential use.



59.   “Housekeeping unit” - all persons residing within a dwelling
unit whose relationship includes a substantial amount of social interaction,
including the sharing of housekeeping responsibilities or expenses and the
taking of meals together.



60.   “Impervious surface” - a material providing a hardsurface that
prevents normal infiltration of water into the ground.



61.   “Intensity of development” - a measure of the magnitude and
impact of a land use on the environment and neighboring land uses. 
Variables include, but are not limited to, the levels of traffic that are
generated, degree of lot coverage, volume of noise or odor emitted and
similar factors.



62.   “Intensive vegetative clearing” - the complete removal of trees
and shrubs, or grasses and forbs, in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block
except the removal of invasive species as approved by the city.



63.   “Level of service” - the level at which an intersection operates
based upon criteria established by the institute of traffic engineers, as
amended periodically.



64.   “Licensed day care facility” - any facility required to be
licensed by a governmental agency, public or private, which for gain or
otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with care, training,
supervision, habilitation, rehabilitation or developmental guidance on a
regular basis, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, in a place other
than the person's own home.  Licensed day care facilities include, but are
not limited to, family day care homes, group family day care homes, day care
centers, day nurseries, nursery schools, developmental achievement centers,
day treatment programs, adult day care centers and day services.



65.   “Licensed residential care facility” - any facility required to
be licensed by a governmental agency, public or private, which for gain or
otherwise regularly provides one or more persons with a 24 hour per day
substitute for care, food, lodging, training, education, supervision,
habilitation, rehabilitation and treatment they need, but which for any
reason cannot be furnished in the person's own home.  Residential facilities
include, but are not limited to, state institutions under the control of the
commissioner of human services, foster homes, residential treatment centers,
maternity shelters, group homes, residential programs, supportive living
residences for functionally impaired adults or schools for handicapped
children.



66.   “Loading space” - that portion of a property designed to serve
the purpose of loading or unloading all types of vehicles.



67.   “Lot” -  a measured parcel of contiguous land having fixed
boundaries and recorded with the appropriate government authority or office.
(Figure 7)



Figure 7







68.   “Lot area” - the total area bounded by lot lines excluding
dedicated public road rights-of-way and any area located below the ordinary
high water level of a lake or creek. (Figure 8)



69.   “Lot-behind-a-lot”



   a)   a lot with substandard or no frontage on a public road
right-of-way, where access to public road right-of-way is over the
substandard lot frontage or by a private easement, commonly called a "flag"
or "neck" lot (Figure 9), or



   b)   a lot with standard frontage on a public street, where the only
buildable area is directly behind an existing or potential house pad that
fronts on a public street.



70.   “Lot, corner” - a lot abutting, and located at the intersection
of, two or more public road rights-of-way. (Figure 9)



71.   “Lot coverage” - - that portion of a lot, excluding any area
located below the ordinary high water level of a lake or creek, that is
covered by buildings, driveways, parking areas and any other impervious
surface.  (Figure 8)



Figure 8








Figure 9










72.   “Lot depth” - the average horizontal distance  between the
front and rear lot lines. (Figure 8)



73.   “Lot, double frontage” - a lot abutting two, non-intersecting
public road rights-of-way. (Figure 9)



74.   "Lot, riparian" - a lot abutting a public water, excluding wetlands.



75.   “Lot line” - a line that defines the legal boundary of a lot.
(Figure 9)



76.   “Lot line, front” - a lot line abutting a public road
right-of-way. In the case of a lot-behind-lot, the front lot line will be
determined by the city planner based upon characteristics of the lot and the
surrounding neighborhood. (Figure 9)



77.   “Lot line, rear” - the lot line opposite and most distant from
the front lot line.  In the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line will be
determined by the city planner based upon characteristics of the surrounding
neighborhood. (Figure 9)



78.   “Lot line, side” - any lot line other than a front or rear lot
line.  (Figure 9)



79.   “Lot of record” -  a  lot whose legal description was
established in the Hennepin county property records by plat, subdivision or
as otherwise permitted by law prior to February 12, 1966, and which contains
identical lot lines as were present on February 12, 1966.



80.   “Lot width at right-of-way” - the horizontal distance between
side lot lines as measured at the public road right-of-way. (Figure  10)



Figure 10







81.   “Lot width at setback” -  the horizontal distance between side
lot lines as measured at the required front yard setback established by this
ordinance. (Figure 10)



82.   “Lowest floor” - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of
a building, including a basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor.



83.   “Manufactured or mobile home” - a structure, transportable in
one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis, is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation, and may be used as a dwelling
unit when attached to the required utilities. The term does not include a
recreational vehicle.



84.   “Marina” - a facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing
and securing of pleasure boats and which may include eating, sleeping and
retail facilities for owners, crews, and guests.



85.   "Master development plan" - description or illustration of
development usually comprised of a series of plans that generally show:
location of trees and water resources, streets, utilities, stormwater
improvements, buildings, and parking areas; proposed site grading, tree
removal, and landscaping; and building elevations and signs.



86.   Medical clinic” - a freestanding structure or, in the case of
multiple tenant buildings, a total occupied space of 2,000 square feet or
greater used for patient examination and treatment by physicians, dentists,
optometrists, psychologists or other health care professionals and where
patients are not lodged overnight.



87.   "Microbrewery" - a facility that manufactures and distributes malt
liquor or wine in total quantity not to exceed 250,000 barrels per year,
which may include space dedicated as a taproom to distribute on-sale and
off-sale alcohol.



88.   “Mixed use development” - the development of a parcel of land
with two or more different uses such as residential, commercial, or
manufacturing or with residential uses of different densities as permitted by
this ordinance.



89.   "Non-PUD development" - a development that is not a PUD and which
complies with all applicable subdivision and zoning regulations.



90.   “Occupancy” - the purpose for which a building or part thereof
is used or intended to be used.



91.   “Ordinary high water level or OHWL” - the boundary of public
waters at an elevation delineating the highest water level as defined by the
department of natural resources which has been maintained for a sufficient
period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape; commonly that point
where the vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominately
terrestrial. For tributary creeks, the ordinary high water level is the
elevation of the top of the bank of the channel as approved by the city's
engineer.



92.   "Original zoning classification" - the zoning classification a
property had immediately prior to being rezoned.



93.   "Outdoor entertainment" - any type of entertainment or recreation
activity that does not occur within an enclosed building.



94.   “Parking deck or ramp” - a structure built for the temporary
storage of motor vehicles.



95.   “Parking lot” - an off-street, ground level area, without a
roof, surfaced and improved for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.



96.   “Parking space” - an area within a parking deck, ramp or lot
intended for the storage of an individual motor vehicle and that complies
with the standards outlined in section 300.28 of this ordinance. This term is
identical to the term parking stall.



97.   “Patio” - a horizontal structure without a roof, composed of any
material other than boards, such as concrete, flagstones, bricks or pavers. A
patio is considered attached if any part of it is within ten feet of the
principal structure; a patio is considered detached if no part of it is
within ten feet of the principal structure. A detached patio is considered an
accessory structure in the wetlands, floodplain, and shoreland districts.



98.   “Performance standards” - specified criteria and limitations
provided in section 300.28 which are intended to protect the public health,
safety or welfare.



99.   “Person(s)” - an individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
company, association, society, joint stock association or body politic
including any trustee, receiver, assignee or other representative thereof.



100.   "Planned unit development (PUD)" - a zoning classification and
development type in which the city grants flexibility from certain
subdivision and zoning regulations to achieve a public benefit that would not
otherwise be achieved through a non-PUD development.



101.   “Porch” - a structure that is designed for residential
occupancy that includes a floor and roof, and may include walls, but is not
designed for winter use. A porch may be attached to, or detached from, a
principal structure. A detached porch (for example, a gazebo) is classified
as an accessory structure. A porch is considered attached if any part of it
is within ten feet of the principal structure; a porch is considered detached
if no part of it is within ten feet of the principal structure.



102.    “Premises” - a lot together with all buildings and structures
located on it.



103.    “Public building” - a building owned and occupied by a
municipal, school district, regional, state or other governmental unit.



104.   “Public water” - any water defined in Minnesota statutes,
section 103G.005, or as amended. These waters include lakes, wetlands, and
watercourses.



105.   “Recreational vehicle” - a vehicle that is built on a single
chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towed by a light
duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.



106.   “Restaurant” - an establishment in which food and drink is
offered or prepared and served for public consumption. Restaurants may
include incidental take-out service.



107.   “Restaurant, fast food” - a restaurant whose business is the
sale of rapidly prepared or pre-prepared food or drink directly to customers
without table service and which may include drive-up order and delivery
systems. This definition does not include establishments within community or
neighborhood shopping centers that do not have a customer dining area and
offer food only as take-out or by delivery.



108.   “Restoration” - a reestablishment of previously existing
conditions or uses or reconstruction of previously existing building features.



109.   "Retaining wall" - a wall that separates and retains two areas of
earth that have different elevations.



110.   “Right-of-way” - a strip of land  intended to be used for
streets, highways, crosswalks, sidewalks, trails, railroads or utility
purposes. (Figure 11)



111.   "Riparian" - of, on, or relating to the banks of a natural water
body excluding wetlands.



Figure 11







112.   “Roof” - the exterior surface forming the upper covering of a
building.



113.   “Setback” - the minimum horizontal distance that must be
maintained between a property line, delineated wetland edge, floodplain
elevation, ordinary high water level, or top of bluff and a building or
structure. A setback is measured perpendicularly from the lot line,
delineated wetland edge, floodplain elevation, ordinary high water level, or
top of bluff to the closest point of the building or structure, excluding
building or structure eaves.



114.   “Setback line” - a line located at the required setback from a
property line, delineated wetland edge, floodplain elevation, ordinary high
water level, or top of bluff.



115.   "Shopping center" - a group of retail and other commercial
establishments that is planned, developed, owned, or managed as a single
property.



116.   “Shopping center, community” - a general merchandise and
convenience-oriented shopping center, generally including a large tenant such
as a discount store or supermarket, providing goods and services to residents
of the larger community. Examples of community shopping centers in the city
include Ridgehaven Mall and the Seven-Hi commercial area.



117.   “Shopping center, neighborhood” - a convenience-oriented
shopping center primarily providing goods and services to residents of the
adjacent area. Generally, the smallest type of shopping center. Examples of
neighborhood shopping centers in the city include retail buildings in the
Glen Lake and Cedar Lake Road areas.



118.   “Shopping center, regional” - a shopping center providing a
wide range of goods and services to residents of the metropolitan region.
Ridgedale Mall is the only regional shopping center in the city.



119.   "Shore impact zone" - land located between the ordinary high water
level of a public water including a tributary creek, and a line parallel to
it at a setback of 25 feet for general development lakes and tributary
creeks, and 37.5 feet for recreational development lakes.



120.   “Shorelands” - land located within the shoreland district as
defined in section 300.25.



121.   "Sign" - any writing, pictorial presentation, number, illustration
or decoration, flag, banner or other device that is used to announce, direct
attention to, identify, advertise, or otherwise make anything known.  The
term "sign" does not include the terms "building" or "landscaping," or any
architectural embellishment of a building not intended to communicate
information.



122.   “Sign, advertising” - a sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, activity or entertainment not necessarily
conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.



123.   “Sign, business” - a sign which directs attention to a business
or profession or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or offered
upon the premises where such a sign is located.



124.   “Sign, flashing” - any illuminated sign on which such
illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all
times when such sign is in use.



125.   “Sign, illuminated” - any sign which has characters, letters,
figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes
as part of the sign.



126.   “Sign, name plate” - any sign which states the name or address
of the business or occupant of the lot where the sign is placed.



127.   “Sign, projecting” - a sign, other than a wall sign, which
projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.



128.   “Sign, pylon” - a free standing sign erected upon a single
pylon or post which is in excess of 10 feet in height with a sign mounted on
top thereof.



129.   “Sign, rotating” - a sign which revolves or rotates on its axis
by mechanical means.



130.   “Sign, surface area of” - the entire area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual sign
surface.  It does not include any structural elements outside the limits of
such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.



131.   “Sign, wall - flat” - a sign affixed directly to an exterior
wall and confined within the limits thereof of any building and which
projects from that surface less than 18 inches at all points.



132.   "Site and building plans" - plans that specifically illustrate:
location of trees and water resources, streets, utilities, stormwater
improvements, buildings, and parking areas; proposed site grading, tree
removal, and landscaping; building elevations and signs; and other
information as may be reasonably required by the city.



133.   “Slope” - the inclination of the natural surface of the land
from the horizontal, commonly described as a percentage derived from the
height divided by the length.



134.   “Slope, toe of” - the lower point of a 50-foot segment with an
average slope of at least 20 percent.



135.   “Slope, top of” - the higher point of a 50-foot segment with an
average slope of at least 20 percent.



136.   “Steep slope” - a slope that has an average grade of 20 percent
or more, that covers an area at least 100 feet in width (side to side),
except that the 100 feet width does not apply in the shoreland zoning
district,  and that rises at least 25 feet above the toe of the slope. The
average grade of a steep slope will be measured between the toe and the top
of the slope.



137.   “Storage” - goods, materials or equipment placed or left in a
location on a premises.



138.    “Story” - that portion of a building included between the
upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next
above. It is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two
successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the top most
story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joist or,
where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the finished rafters. If the
finished floor level directly above a usable or unused space is more than six
feet above grade for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more
than 12 feet above grade at any point, such usable or unused space will be
considered a story.



139.   “Street” - a vehicular way located within road right-of-way, as
defined and designated in the subdivision ordinance and comprehensive guide
plan.



140.   “Structure” - anything placed, poured, constructed, or erected,
the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something
having a location on the ground. Examples include, but are not limited to:
buildings, parking ramps, sport courts, patios, and pools.



141.   "Structure, accessory" - on non-riparian lots, an uninhabited
structure over 200 square feet in area, located on the same lot, subordinate
to, and associated with the principal structure. On riparian lots and lots
within the shoreland, floodplain, and wetland zoning districts, the same
definition, but including structures over 120 square feet in area and as
modified by sections 300.23, 300.24, and 300.25 of this ordinance.



142.   "Structure, enclosed" - a structure that is surrounded by a roof
and walls composed of any type of material.



143.   "Structure, unenclosed" - a structure that is not surrounded by a
roof and walls composed of any type of material.



144.   “Structure, principal” - the structure in which the primary use
of the lot occurs.



145.   "Substantial compliance" - relative to an approved master
development plan, or approved final site and building plans:



   a)   streets, utilities, stormwater improvements, buildings, parking
areas, and landscaping are in generally the same location;



   b)   the number of residential units has not changed by more than 5
percent;



   c)   the gross floor area of non-residential buildings has not been
changed by more than 5 percent or the gross floor area of any individual
building has not been changed by more than 10 percent;



   d)   The number of stories of any building has not increased;



   e)   The square-footage of grading on any individual lot has not
increased by more than 1,000 square feet;



   f)   the amount of open space has not decreased by more than 5
percent or been altered in such a way as to change its original design or
intended use;



   g)   all special conditions attached to the approval are met.



146.   “Substantial damage” - damage of any origin sustained by a
structure when the cost of restoring the structure to its undamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.



147.   “Substantial improvement” - reconstruction, rehabilitation
(including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, within a consecutive 365-day period, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement.  This term
includes an improvement to a structure that has incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not include
either:



   a)   improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications that have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and that are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



   b)   an alteration of an historic structure as defined in 44 code of
federal regulations, part 59.1, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure.



148.   “Transient sales” - use of a structure or lot for the temporary
sale of goods, wares or merchandise. Transient sales do not include the sale
of food products of a farm or garden occupied and cultivated by the seller.



149.   “Transitional area” - an area in the process of changing from
one use to another use or an area which functions as a buffer between land
uses of different types or intensity.



150.   “Transmission line” - an overhead or underground facility
consisting of utility poles, lines, underground conduit, and related devices
used to carry electricity generally to a location other than the ultimate
user, with a nominal voltage greater than 35 kilovolts.



151.   "Tributary creek" - a water course mapped on the public water
inventory including the Minnehaha Creek, Nine Mile Creek, and Purgatory Creek
(including both branches), and the public water course that flows out of Glen
Lake. These waters include those defined as tributary rivers by the Minnesota
department of natural resources.



152.   “Use” - the purpose or activity for which a premises is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.



153.    "Use, Accessory" - a use that is subordinate to, associated with,
and located on the same property as the principal use.



154.   "Use, Commercial" - a use that involves the sale of goods or
services.



155.   "Use, Conditional" - a use that is permitted in a particular zoning
district when certain and specific standards and conditions outlined in the
ordinance are met. The city may impose conditions beyond those outlined in
ordinance when necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare.



156.   "Use, Permitted" - a use that is allowed by right when ordinance
standards are met.



157.   "Use, Primary" - a use for which a premises is designed, arranged,
or intended or for which it is or may be occupied.



158.   “Utility pole” - a structure which is owned by a governmental
agency or utility company and which is used to support illumination devices
or lines and other equipment carrying electricity or communications.



159.   “Variance” - a modification from the literal requirements of
this ordinance as specified in section 300.07 of this ordinance.



160.   "Water oriented accessory structure" - a detached, above ground
small building or structure that does not exceed 120 square feet in size or
10 feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, that's use is directly related
to the surface water. Examples include sheds, gazebos, screen porches and
detached decks. Stairways, fences, retaining walls and docks are not
considered water oriented accessory structures. Boat houses are not water
oriented accessory structures.



161.   "Water Resource" - for purposes of this ordinance, a lake, creek,
wetland, stormwater pond, ditch, or other similar natural feature.



162.   “Water resources management plan” - the document entitled City
of Minnetonka Water Resources Management Plan dated January 25, 1999, and as
amended.



163.   “Wetlands” - a low area where the water table is usually at or
near the surface, or where the land is covered by shallow water. Wetlands
must: (1) have hydric soils; (2) be inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of hydrophytic vegetation; and (3) under normal circumstances support a
prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation.



164.   “Wind energy conversion system (WECS) or windmill” - an
apparatus capable of converting wind energy into electricity.



165.   “Yard, front” - the area between the front lot line and the
principal structure. (Figure 13)



166.   “Yard, rear” - the area between the rear lot line and the
principal structure. (Figure 13)



167.   “Yard, side” - the area between front and rear yards extending
from the side lot lines to the principal structure. (Figure 13)



Figure 13







(Amended by Ord. 2016-05, effective February 29, 2016; amended by Ord.
2014-18, adopted May 19, 2014; amended by Ord. 2014-07, adopted March 24,
2014; amended by Ord. 2012-13, adopted September 18, 2012; amended by Ord.
2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012; amended
by Ord. 2011-29, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord. 2008-25, adopted
August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. 2008-10, adopted March 24, 2008; amended by
2007-03, adopted Jan. 22, 2007; amended by Ord. 2006-10, adopted May 8, 2006;
amended by Ord. 2006-01, adopted January 9, 2006; amended by Ord. #2004-24,
adopted August 23, 2004; amended by Ord. #2004-07, adopted March 15, 2004)



SECTION 300.03.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



1.  Administration.



The city planner shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement
of this ordinance.  The city planner shall create and maintain such systems
of records and files and establish such administrative procedures as are
necessary to promote the efficient administration of this ordinance.  The
city planner may designate such additional persons as may be necessary or
convenient to administer and enforce this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by
any procedure or decision of the city planner may appeal to the planning
commission.  The decision of the planning commission regarding any decision
first made by the city planner may be appealed to the city council in
accordance with the procedures outlined in section 300.04 of this ordinance.



2.  Violations and Penalties.



a)   A person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or
permits the violation of a provision of this chapter 3 or who knowingly makes
or submits a false statement or document in connection with an application or
procedure required by this chapter 3 is guilty of a misdemeanor.  A person
who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits the
violation of a performance standard required by section 300.28 of this
chapter 3 must reimburse the city or its agent for the actual cost of the
tests, measurements or other procedures necessary to demonstrate that
violation.  In addition, the person must pay a fee twice that which is
specified in section 710 of the code of city ordinances for any application
that is submitted in connection with or as a result of the violation.  Each
day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.



b)   If a building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or if a building, structure, or land is
used in violation of this chapter 3, the city planner may initiate any lawful
action or proceeding in the name of the city of Minnetonka and has the powers
of a peace officer to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. 
Nothing in this chapter 3 prevents the city planner from taking any other
lawful action that is deemed necessary to prevent or remedy a violation of
this chapter 3.



c)   A violation of a provision of this chapter 3 or of a condition
imposed under authority of chapter 3 is a public nuisance, except if
enforcement of the violation would result in the removal or relocation of a
principal or accessory structure, or a part of it.  The public nuisance may
be abated in accordance with the provisions of section 845 of this code.



d)   No section or part of this chapter 3 designating the duties of an
official, employee or appointee of the city may be construed to make that
official, employee or appointee liable for the penalty provided by the code
of city ordinances for violation of this chapter 3.



3  Notice.



Failure to give notice or to give adequate notice when such is required by
this ordinance shall not invalidate any proceeding, provided that a good
faith attempt has been made to comply with the notice requirement.



4.  Fees.



The fees required by this ordinance shall be those specified by section 710
of the code of city ordinances.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012; amended by Ord. #2003-25,
adopted October 27, 2003)



SECTION 300.04.  PLANNING COMMISSION.



1.  Establishment.



A planning commission of seven members is established and will constitute the
planning agency of the city.  Members of the planning commission must be
residents of the city and will be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the
city council.  Members will serve staggered terms of two years and may be
removed by a vote of two-thirds of the full city council. Members will hold
office until their successors are appointed and qualified, not to exceed an
additional 90 days.



2.  Powers and Duties.



The planning commission shall have such powers and duties as may be conferred
upon it by statute, charter or ordinance.  The planning commission's actions
shall be advisory to the city council except with regard to those matters in
which its decisions are final but subject to appeal to the city council. In
addition, the planning commission shall have the power:



a)   to hear requests and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative officer in the enforcement of this ordinance; and



b)   to hear requests for variances from the literal provisions of this
ordinance in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue
hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under
consideration, and to grant such variances only when it is demonstrated that
such actions will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this ordinance.



3.  Procedures.



The planning commission shall elect from among its members such officers as
it may deem appropriate.  The planning commission may adopt bylaws or rules
for the conduct of its business.



4.  Staff Liaison.



The city planner shall serve as liaison between the planning department and
planning commission.  The city planner shall prepare reports and information
for the planning commission, attend its meetings and participate in hearings
and discussions held by the commission but shall not vote on any item before
the planning commission.



5.  Actions.



The planning commission shall make recommendations to the city council or
decisions on items before it within a reasonable time or such time as shall
be prescribed by statute, charter or ordinance.  Failure by the planning
commission to make a recommendation or decision within the required period
shall be deemed to be a denial if the delay is appealed by the applicant. 
The planning commission may condition its recommendations or approval in
order to effect the intent of this ordinance.  The planning commission shall
accompany its decision to deny an application with a statement of its
findings regarding the matter.  The planning commission shall serve a copy
of any decision in which its action is final upon the applicant by mail.



6.  Appeals.



a)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission
regarding an application on which the decision of the planning commission may
be final may appeal such decision to the city council.  The appeal shall be
submitted in writing within 10 days of the date of the decision or the
decisions stands.  Upon appeal, the city council shall consider the request
within 90 days unless an extended period is agreed with the appellant.  The
city council may reverse the decision of the planning commission by an
affirmative vote of two-thirds of its full membership.



b)   A person aggrieved by a decision of the city planner or the city
engineer that is made under the authority of this ordinance may appeal such
decision to the planning commission.  The appeal must be submitted in
writing within 10 days of the date of the decision.  A person aggrieved by a
decision of the planning commission regarding such appeal may appeal the
decision of the planning commission to the city council.  The appeal must be
submitted in writing within 10 days of the decision.  The city council may
reverse the decision of the planning commission by an affirmative vote of at
least two-thirds of its full membership.



c)   In any matter in which the planning commission's decision is not
final but is a recommendation to the city council, the city council may
adopt, modify or reject the recommendation of the planning commission by vote
of a simple majority of those present, unless otherwise required by this
ordinance.



d)   Any applicant who obtains a building permit, starts construction,
begins a use in reliance upon the decision of the planning commission, or any
combination of those activities, prior to the termination of the appeal
period, assumes the risk that the decision may be reversed upon appeal. 
When an appeal is received by the city the applicant will be notified of the
appeal and informed as to the date of the city council meeting where it will
be heard.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012, Ord. #2004-24, adopted
August 23, 2004; amended by Ord. #2001-15, adopted May 21, 2001)



SECTION 300.05  INTERIM USE PERMITS



1.   Definition and Purpose.



a)   An interim use is a temporary use of property until a particular
date, until the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations
no longer permit it.

b)   The purposes for allowing interim uses are:

   1)   To allow a use for a temporary period of time until a permanent
location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction;

   2)   To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City
Council, but that with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be
acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or
conditional use allowed within the respective district;

   3)   To allow a use that is seasonal in nature; or

   4)   To allow a use for a limited period of time that reasonably
uses the property where it is not reasonable to use it in the manner
otherwise provided in the zoning ordinance or comprehensive plan.



2.   Permit Required.



It is unlawful to use any structure or land for any purpose requiring an
interim use permit in the zoning district in which the property is located
without first obtaining an interim use permit from the city.  Where
applicable, a building permit must also be obtained from the city.



3.   Application.



An application for an interim use permit must comply with the provisions for
a conditional use permit application in section 300.06, subdivision 2, and in
addition, must contain the following:



a)   written documentation that includes a complete description of the
use, schedule for commencement and termination of the use, hours and dates of
operation and anticipated employment,



b)   site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and existing topography;



c)   location of all buildings and the size of each, including square
footage;



d)   curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street
loading areas, and sidewalks;



e)   natural features such as woodlands, wetlands, shorelines, etc;



f)   landscaping and screening plans, including species and size of trees
and shrubs proposed;



g)   proposed finished grading and drainage plan sufficient to drain and
dispose of all surface water accumulated;



h)   proposed floor plan and elevations of any building with use indicated;



i)   proposed outdoor storage spaces (if applicable); and



j)   any special studies requested by the city planner when there is
evidence that the proposed use may negatively impact public infrastructure,
the environment or adjacent land uses. These studies may examine the impacts
on such things as traffic environment, wetlands, and utilities.



4.   Procedure.



An interim use application will be processed in accordance with the procedure
for conditional use permits in section 300.06, subd. 3 and 4. No application
for an interim use permit that has been denied wholly or in part may be
resubmitted for a period of one year after the date of denial, except on
grounds of new evidence or proof of changes of conditions found to be valid
by the city council.



5.   General Standards.



No interim use permit may be granted unless the city council determines that
the use will comply with the following:



a)   the general performance standards in section 300.16, subd. 2 will be
met;



b)   the use will not delay anticipated development or redevelopment of
the site;



c)   the use will not be in conflict with any provisions of the city code
on an ongoing basis;



d)   the use will not adversely affect the adjacent property, the
surrounding neighborhood, or other uses on the property where the use will be
located;



e)   the property on which the use will be located is currently in
compliance with all applicable city code standards;



f)   the use is allowed as an interim use in the applicable zoning
district;



g)   the date or event that will terminate the use can be identified with
certainty;



h)   the use will not impose additional unreasonable costs on the public;
and



i)   the applicant agrees in writing to any conditions that the city
council deems appropriate for the use, including a requirement for a
financial security to ensure removal of all evidence of the use upon
termination.



6.   Effect of Permit.



a)   An interim use permit is effective only for the location specified in
the application.



b)   The issuance of an interim use permit does not confer on the property
any vested right.



7.   Termination.



a)   An interim use permit expires and the interim use must terminate at
the earlier of:



   1)   the expiration date in the interim use permit;



   2)   the occurrence of any event identified in the interim use
permit for the termination of the use;



   3)   revocation of the interim use permit; or



   4)   an amendment of the city code that no longer allows the interim
use.



b)   An interim use permit expires one year after approval if the proposed
use has not commenced or a building permit for a structure to support the
interim use has not been issued.



c)   An interim use permit expires if the interim use ceases operation for
a continuous period of at least one year.



8.  Revocation or Modification.



The city council may review an interim use permit periodically and may revoke
a permit upon violation of any condition of the permit, any law of the United
States or the state of Minnesota, or any city ordinance.  If it is
discovered after approval of the interim use permit that the city's decision
was based at least in part on false, misleading, or fraudulent information,
the city council may revoke the permit, modify the conditions or impose
additional conditions to ensure compliance with this section.  The procedure
for revocation will be the same as that for licenses specified in section
700.035 of the city code.



(New section 300.05 added by Ord. 2011-19, adopted August 22, 2011; former
section 300.05 repealed by Ord. 92-621, adopted April 16, 1992)



SECTION 300.06.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



1.  Permit Required.



It shall be unlawful to use any structure or land for any purpose requiring a
conditional use permit in the zoning district in which the property is
located without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the city. 
Where applicable, a building permit shall also be obtained from the city.



2.  Application.



Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the city planner on
forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the following:



a)   the legal description of the property;



b)   a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties
situated wholly or partially within 400 feet of the property as such appear
on the certified records of the Hennepin county auditor;



c)   evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



d)   the fee required by section 710 of the code of city ordinances;



e)   a plat or map of the property which shows, at a minimum, all lot
lines, existing and proposed structures, driveways and parking areas; and



f)   such other information as may be required by the city.



3.  Public Hearing.



a)   After receipt of a completed application, a date must be set for a
public hearing before the planning commission.  Not less than 10 days before
the public hearing, the city must publish notice in the official newspaper
and send notice by mail to the applicant and to the owners of all properties
located wholly or partially within 400 feet.  Following the hearing or any
continuance that is not appealed by the applicant, the planning commission
must make a recommendation to the city council.



b)   The public hearing must be held before the city council instead of
the planning commission if the application is for a city-owned park, the
project has no variances, and a public hearing complying with the notice
provisions of this paragraph has been held at a neighborhood meeting or by
the Minnetonka park board.



4.  City Council.



After receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city
council must consider the request and hold whatever hearing it deems
advisable.  In evaluating an application for a conditional use permit, the
city council must consider and adopt findings regarding compliance with the
general and specific criteria outlined in sections 300.16 or 300.21 of this
ordinance. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may
impose conditions on granting the permit in order to ensure compliance with
the criteria or to effect the purpose of this ordinance. The city council
must make a decision within the time period specified in state law. The
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources must be notified of conditional use
permit applications and decisions in the shoreland district as provided for
in section 300.25.



5.  Revocation or Modification.



The city council may review conditional use permits periodically and may
revoke a permit upon violation of any condition of the permit, any law of the
United States or the state of Minnesota, or any city ordinance.  If it is
discovered after approval of the conditional use permit that the city's
decision was based at least in part on fraudulent information, the city
council may revoke the conditional use permit, modify the conditions or
impose additional conditions to ensure compliance with section 300.16 or
300.21 of this ordinance.  The procedure for revocation shall be the same as
that for licenses specified in section 700.035 of the code of city ordinances.



6.  Recording.



A certified copy of the conditional use permit shall be filed by the
applicant with the Hennepin county recorder or registrar of titles.  The
permit shall contain a legal description of the property.



7.  Term of CUP.



A conditional use permit shall remain in effect for so long as the conditions
agreed upon are observed.  A conditional use permit shall expire if normal
operation of the use has been discontinued for 12 or more months.  Time
shall be calculated as beginning on the day following the last day in which
the use was in normal operation and shall run continuously thereafter.



8.  Violations.



A person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits
the violation of the terms or conditions of a conditional use permit is
guilty of a misdemeanor.  A violation is a violation of the permit and
renders the permit null and void.  A violation also constitutes a public
nuisance that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of section 845.



(Amended by Ord. #2008-10, adopted March 24, 2008; amending by Ord. #2004-37,
adopted December 20, 2004; amended by Ord. #2003-25, adopted October 27, 2003)



SECTION 300.07.  VARIANCES.



1.  Limitations.



a)   A variance may be granted from the requirements of this ordinance
including those placed on nonconformities. A variance is only permitted when
it is in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this ordinance and
when the variance is consistent with the comprehensive plan. A variance may
be granted when the applicant establishes that there are practical
difficulties in complying with this ordinance. Practical difficulties means
that the property owner proposes to use the property in a reasonable manner
not permitted by this ordinance, the plight of the landowner is due to
circumstances unique to the property not created by the landowner, and the
variance, if granted, would not alter the essential character of the
locality.  Economic considerations alone do not constitute practical
difficulties.  Practical difficulties also includes inadequate access to
direct sunlight for solar energy systems. Inadequate access means the failure
to achieve reasonable access to direct sunlight, not optimal or maximal
access. Variances must be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined
in state law, when in harmony with this ordinance. The city may impose
conditions in the granting of a variance. A condition must be directly
related to and must bear a rough proportionality to the impact created by the
variance.



b)   A lot that does not meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance
and section 400 is not buildable unless a variance is granted. No variance
will be granted to declare a substandard lot buildable unless, in addition to
meeting the criteria enumerated in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the
applicant has exhausted all reasonable possibility of combining the lot with
an adjacent vacant lot.  Notwithstanding the above, no variance is needed to
declare buildable any lot which was a lot of record zoned for single family
residential use on February 12, 1966 and which meets all of the following
minimum standards:



   1)   15,000 square feet;



   2)   90 feet in width at building setback line; and



   3)   110 feet in depth.



c)   No variance shall be granted to permit a use which is not allowed as
a permitted use, accessory use or conditional use under this ordinance for
property in the district in which the land is located.



d)   No variance shall be granted in the wetlands, floodplain or shoreland
districts which allows for a lesser degree of flood protection than is
required by sections 300.23, 300.24 or 300.25 of this ordinance.



e)   A variance from the standards applicable to another land use
approval, such as a site plan, conditional use permit, and subdivision, does
not require a separate application, but the applicant for the underlying land
use approval must provide a written narrative explaining the justification
for any requested variance.  The planning commission and city council may
act separately on such a variance at their discretion, but if no separate
action is taken, the variance will be considered approved or denied as part
of the underlying application.



2.  Application.



Application for a variance shall be made to the zoning administrator.  The
application shall be on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied
by the following:



a)   a plat or map of the property which shows, at a minimum, all lot
lines, existing and proposed structures, driveways and parking areas,
significant topographical features and mature trees;



b)   a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties
located wholly or partially within 400 feet of the property as such appear on
the certified records of the Hennepin county auditor;



c)   evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



d)   the fee required by section 710 of the code of city ordinances; and



e)   such other information as may be required by the city.



3.  Public Hearing.



Upon receipt of a completed application, a date shall be set for a public
hearing before the planning commission.  The public hearing shall be held
only after notice has been sent by mail to the owners of all properties
situated wholly or partially within 400 feet, as reflected in the certified
records of the Hennepin county auditor.



4.  Decisions.



Following the public hearing or any continuance that is not appealed by the
applicant, the planning commission must decide the matter before it. Appeals
from orders, requirements, decisions or determinations of an administrative
officer will be decided by the planning commission by vote of a simple
majority of those present. The planning commission may grant a variance only
upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds of its full membership.  The planning
commission may impose conditions in granting variances to effect the intent
of this ordinance and to protect adjacent properties.  The planning
commission must accompany its decision to deny a variance with a statement of
its findings and must serve a copy of its decision upon the applicant by
mail. The planning commission action will be final action subject to the
right of appeal, except:



a)   if the application is for a variance from the provisions of section
300.29, Subd. 3(g) with respect to the time limit for amortizing
non-conforming uses; or



b)   if the variance is an integral part of another land use application
that requires city council action.



   In those circumstances, the planning commission action will be a
recommendation to the city council, and action by the planning commission
will require only approval of a majority of its full membership.  Approval
of the variance by the city council will require an affirmative vote of
two-thirds of its full membership. The Minnesota Department of Natural
Resources must be notified of variance applications and decisions in the
shoreland district as provided for in section 300.25.



5.  Term of Variance.



Any variance granted by the city shall run with the land and shall be
perpetual unless prior to December 31 of the year following the year of
approval and no building permit has been issued or substantial work performed
on the project, in which case the variance shall be null and void. The
planning commission may extend the period for construction upon finding that
the interest of the owners of neighboring properties will not be adversely
affected by such extension.  If the variance is part of an approved site and
building plan, extension of the time period for construction shall be
contingent upon a similar extension of the time period for the site and
building plan by the planning commission as required by section 300.27 of
this ordinance.  Once the project is completed as approved, the variance
becomes perpetual.



6.  Specific Project.



A variance shall be valid only for the project for which it was granted. 
Construction of any project shall be in substantial compliance with the
building plans and specifications reviewed and approved by the planning
commission or city council.



7.  Appeals.



Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission regarding a
variance or an order, requirement, decision or determination first made by an
administrative officer may have such decision reviewed by the city council if
a request for review is submitted to the zoning administrator within 10 days
of the date of the decision.  The appeal shall be in writing and shall
include a statement of the alleged errors or omissions of the planning
commission.  The city council may reverse a decision of the planning
commission by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of its full
membership.  The city council shall make a decision within 120 days of
submission of a completed application or such longer period not objected to
by the applicant.  If the city council fails to make a timely decision, the
appeal shall be deemed to have been approved.



8.  Recording.



A certified copy of the variance shall be filed by the applicant with the
Hennepin county recorder if the variance applies to abstract property.  The
variance shall contain a legal description of the property affected.



9.  Violations.



A person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits
the violation of the terms or conditions of a variance is guilty of a
misdemeanor.  A violation is a violation of the variance and renders the
variance null and void.  A violation also constitutes a public nuisance that
may be abated in accordance with the provisions of section 845.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-10, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. 2010-18,
adopted December 20, 2010; amended by Ord. 2008-10, adopted March 24, 2008;
amended by Ord. 2007-17, adopted May 7, 2007; Ord. #2003-25, adopted October
27, 2003)



SECTION 300.08.  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



1.  Certificate Required.



It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or portion of building constructed, erected, enlarged, altered,
converted or moved onto a lot within the city until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued.



2.  Application.



Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made on forms provided by
the city.



3.  Issuance.



A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days of completion of
the building but only upon demonstration that the building and use are in
conformance with all requirements of the code of city ordinances and that all
conditions of approval have been met.  A record shall be kept of all
certificates issued.



4.  Temporary Certificates.



A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed
six months. Additionally, one extension of a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period not to exceed six months may be authorized. Conditions
may be imposed on the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy in
order to ensure compliance with this ordinance, including posting financial
security acceptable to the city.  Issuance of a temporary certificate will
not alter the rights or obligations of the owner, tenant or city with respect
to full compliance with the requirements of this ordinance or other
provisions of the code of city ordinances.



(Amended by Ordinance No. 2011-02, adopted April 18, 2011)



5.  Non-conforming Uses.



A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all non-conforming uses or
buildings.  The certificate issued for non-conforming uses or buildings
shall state the manner and extent to which the requirements of this ordinance
are not met.



6.  Revocation.



A certificate of occupancy may be revoked if the building or use is no longer
in compliance with this ordinance.  The procedure for revocation shall be
the same as that for licenses specified in section 700.035 of the code of
city ordinances. The city shall have authority to enforce the revocation of
the certificate of occupancy by appropriate means.  Upon revocation the
building shall not be used for any purpose until issuance of a new
certificate of occupancy.









SECTION 300.09.  ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS.



1.  Initiation of Amendment.



An amendment of this ordinance may be initiated by petition of the owner of
the property to be rezoned, upon recommendation of the planning commission or
by the city council.  The ordinance may be amended whenever consistent with
the public health, safety or general welfare.  All amendments shall be
consistent with the intent of this ordinance and of the comprehensive plan.



2.  Application.



An application for a change in the boundaries of a zoning district made by
the owner of the property shall be submitted to the city planner on forms
provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the following:



a)   a map or plat of the property and the land within 400 feet thereof;



b)   a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties
located wholly or partially within 400 feet of the property as such appear on
the certified records of the Hennepin county auditor;



c)   evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



d)   the fee required by section 710 of the code of city ordinances; and



e)   such other information as may be required by the city.



   An application for a change in the boundaries of a zoning district
which would result in the creation of a zoning district which is inconsistent
with the land use designation of the property in the comprehensive plan must
be accompanied by an application for an amendment to the comprehensive plan.



3.  Public Hearing.



A public hearing before the planning commission shall be held on all
applications for amendments to this ordinance.  Notice regarding an
amendment which involves a change in the boundaries of a zoning district
shall be published in the official newspaper at least 10 days prior to the
public hearing and shall be sent by mail within a similar time to the
applicant and to the owners of all property located wholly or partially
within 400 feet, as reflected in the certified records of the Hennepin county
auditor. Notice regarding an amendment which does not involve a change in the
boundaries of a zoning district shall be published in the official newspaper
not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing.  The planning commission
shall make a decision within 60 days following the hearing or any continuance
which is not appealed by the applicant.



4.  City Council Action.



After receiving the planning commission's recommendation, the city council
must consider the matter and may hold whatever hearing it deems advisable.
The city council must act upon the amendment within 60 days of submission of
a completed application or such longer period agreed to by the applicant. 
The city may take an additional 60 days for a decision upon notifying the
applicant of the reasons for such an extension. In the case of an amendment
involving a change in the boundaries of a zoning district, the city must mail
a copy of its decision to the applicant.  If the council fails to make a
timely decision, the amendment will be deemed to have been approved.  The
city council may adopt an amendment to this ordinance only upon a majority
vote, except that the city council may only adopt a rezoning from residential
to any commercial or industrial zone upon an affirmative vote of at least
two-thirds of its full membership.  In the case of a rezoning to PUD,
planned unit development, or the approval of a master development plan, the
required votes will be based on the gross floor area of the proposed uses. 
In these cases, a commercial or industrial zone will be considered to be any
plan with more than 25% of the gross floor area in commercial or industrial
use.



5.  Effective Date.



Any amendment to this ordinance adopted by the city council shall be
effective upon adoption or at such later date as may be specified in the
amendment.



(Amended by Ord. #2001-25, adopted September 24, 2001)



SECTION 300.10.  R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the R-1 district is to provide a district for single family
detached dwellings in those areas where such development is consistent with
the low density residential designation of the comprehensive plan and
compatible with surrounding land use characteristics.  Development within
this district shall occur at densities not exceeding four dwelling units per
acre. The allowed density for a piece of property will be determined by the
city at the time of the development application. The determination will be
based upon the site specific characteristics of the property and the
requested development. Factors to be considered in increasing or decreasing
the allowed density include the existing environmental conditions such as
wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, and significant trees; the specific site
plan; the type of housing units proposed, including whether greater density
is desirable because the development contains affordable housing that is
consistent with the city’s affordable housing goals but that avoids
unacceptable concentrations of such housing; the requested zoning; the
minimum standards of this ordinance; the potential impact from traffic
generated by the development; and the surrounding area.  The burden of
establishing the appropriateness of the high end of the density range will be
on the applicant.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the R-1 district no structure or land shall be used except for one or
more of the following permitted uses and the accessory and conditional uses
in subdivisions 3 and 4:



a)   single family detached dwelling units, but not more than one dwelling
unit per lot;



b)   manufactured homes built in conformance with Minn. Stat. §§ 327.31
et seq.;



c)   public park and recreational areas owned and operated by a
governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures
consistent with the area, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



d)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities serving six or fewer persons, a licensed day care facility
serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family day care facility licensed
under Minnesota Rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve 14 or fewer
children, except a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat
juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of
criminal statutes relating to sex offenses;



e)   agriculture, farming, and truck gardening; or



f)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller than 60
feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major roadway such
as a freeway.



g)   private recreational uses and structures for the exclusive use of
surrounding property owner(s) as a principal use. Such uses and structures
include tennis courts, pools, patios, and docks, which cannot be used for
commercial purposes or non-recreational uses. The only permitted buildings
are gazebos and storage sheds. Storage sheds may be no larger than 120 square
feet. All structures mentioned in this subsection must be at least 50 feet
from a front property line and meet all other minimum-required setbacks and
maximum area requirements for accessory structures.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-10, adopted June 24, 2013; amended by Ord. 2008-19,
adopted July 14, 2008)



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the R-1 district only the following uses shall be permitted as
accessory uses, provided they are subordinate to, associated with and located
on the same lot as a permitted use:



a)   private swimming pools, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



b)   detached garages, one storage shed of any size or other accessory
structures, except swimming pools, unless covered with an accessory
structure, not exceeding 12 feet in height or an aggregate of 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area or occupying more than 30 percent of the area of the
side or rear yard in which they are located and except as provided for in
subdivision 4;



c)   receive only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices up to
a maximum height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is
located subject to the requirements provided in section 300.15, subd. 12; and
radio devices no larger than one cubic foot in size that are attached to
utility poles, if there is no more than one per pole;



d)   solar equipment;



e)   greenhouses not exceeding 12 feet in height or 1,000 square feet in
gross floor area or occupying more than 30 percent of the side or rear yard
in which they are located and provided they are not used for commercial
purposes;



f)   private tennis courts, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



g)   living facilities for no more than two boarders or roomers within a
single family dwelling unit, provided that such facilities do not constitute
an accessory apartment and that adequate off-street parking is provided;



h)   home occupations  that comply with the provisions of section 300.15,
subd. 14;



i)   minor mass transit facilities including benches, which benches may
include advertising signs consistent with the provisions of section 325 of
the code of city ordinances, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



j)   recreational facilities and structures, provided they contain less
than 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, and except as provided for in
subdivision 4;



k)   evergreen material sales if in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.15, subd. 13, and the city planner has given
approval;



l)   public or private schools having a course of instruction meeting the
compulsory education requirements of the Minnesota board of education for
students enrolled in grades K-12, or any portion thereof, provided that each
school:



   1)   serves no more than 12 students, unless each and every one of
the students is living in the structure and is the child, grandchild, parent,
grandparent, spouse, or ward of a family member living in the structure;



   2)   has no residential facilities for students who are not the
child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, spouse, or ward of a family member
living in the structure;



   3)   has no more than one employee or independent teaching
contractor who lives outside the structure, unless the total number of
traffic trips generated by these people does not exceed the total of one trip
to and from the structure for each day of instruction;



   4)   complies with the sign regulations for permitted residential
uses, not conditionally permitted uses, in the applicable zoning district; and



   5)   complies with all other applicable city ordinances regarding
parking.



m)   licensed day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons, and
licensed group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer children,
provided that there is not more than one outside employee in any such
facility;



n)   garage sales, estate sales, yard sales, rummage sales, and other
sales of personal property that have similar traffic and parking patterns, if:



   1)    the sales occur during no more than two periods of a maximum
of three consecutive days each in any 12-month period,



   2)    the items offered for sale consist only of items owned by a
person who occupies the property as his/her residence or by friends of the
resident



   3)    none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for
resale or received on consignment for purposes of resale, and



   4)   paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 do not apply to conditionally permitted
educational, religious, and public institutions; and



o)   other uses that are not regulated by this code and that are
customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted use, as reasonably
determined by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2012-05,
adopted March 26, 2012; amended by Ord. 2009-13, adopted September 14, 2009;
amended by Ord. 2008-19, adopted July 14, 2008)



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the R-1 district no structure or land shall be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.16 of this ordinance:



a)   educational institutions and facilities, except as provided for in
subdivision 3;



b)   religious institutions and facilities;



c)   mass transit facilities, except as provided for in subdivision 3;



d)   accessory apartments;



e)   licensed day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons, provided
they are located within suitably designed structures which are not also used
for residential purposes or are not within religious or educational buildings;



f)   detached garages, storage sheds or other accessory structures, except
as provided for in subdivision 3;



g)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities serving 7 through 12 persons;



h)   private, non-profit recreational facilities as a principal use;



i)   wind energy conservation systems or windmills;



j)   cemeteries;



k)   marinas;



l)   public buildings or facilities, except for recreational buildings
that contain less than 1,000 square feet, and utility cabinets larger than
150 cubic feet;



m)   public or private nursing or convalescent homes;



n)   telecommunication facilities as defined in Section 300.34;



o)   golf courses;



p)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act;



q)   commercial nurseries;



r)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined
by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-10, adopted June 24, 2013; amended by Ord. 2012,
adopted March 26, 2012)



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the R-1 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   building height: maximum of 35 feet;



b)   front yard setback: minimum of 35 feet from the right-of-way of local
and neighborhood collector streets and railroad lines, or 50 feet from the
right-of-way of major collector or arterial roadways as identified in the
comprehensive plan.  In the case of a corner lot, one front yard setback may
be reduced by 10 feet. On double frontage lots, the setback may be reduced by
10 feet towards the direction perceived by the city planner to be the rear
yard. (Figure 13)  For a neck lot or one which is serviced by a driveway
easement, see section 300.10, subd. 5(e);



c)   side yard setback: the sum of the side yard setbacks shall not be
less than 30 feet, with a minimum setback of 10 feet; (Figure 14)



Figure 14







d)   rear yard setback: minimum of 40 feet or 20 percent of the depth of
the lot, whichever is less;



e)   minimum setbacks for principal buildings on lots-behind-lots: 40 feet
or 20% of the average distance between opposite lot lines, whichever is less,
but no less than 25 feet. The city council may reduce all or some of these
setbacks to no less than 25 feet, where:



   1)   the new home would be substantially screened from homes on
adjacent lots or from the buildable area of adjacent undeveloped lots;



   2)   a home cannot be built on a lot adjacent to the side with the
proposed reduced setback; or



   3)   an existing home on a lot-behind-lot is adjacent to the side
with the proposed reduced setback and has a setback on that side that is less
than those required above



   minimum setback for detached, accessory buildings: 10 feet.



f)   driveway setback for flag/neck lots and lots served by a driveway
easement: minimum of 7 feet from side and rear lot lines, except to the
extent reasonably necessary to share a street access point with an adjacent
lot.  For a lot encumbered by a driveway easement serving another lot, the
driveway across that easement must also be set back a minimum of 17 feet from
the easement line which is adjacent to the buildable area of the encumbered
lot, except as reasonably necessary for the driveway to also serve the
residence on that lot;



g)   lot area: established in section 400 of this code;



h)   lot width: established in section 400 of this code;



i)   lot depth: established in section 400 of this code.



6.  Additional Requirements.



a)   All dwellings, including manufactured homes, shall have a depth of at
least 20 feet for at least 50 percent of their width.  All dwellings,
including manufactured homes, shall have a width of at least 20 feet for at
least 50 percent of their depth.



b)   All dwellings shall have a permanent foundation in conformance with
the Minnesota state building code.



c)   Accessory structures shall conform to the setbacks established for
principal structures, except for the following:



   1)   all accessory structures located more than 10 feet from a
principal structure may be located a minimum of 10 feet from a rear or side
lot line;



   2)   all accessory structures except detached garages which are
located between the principal structure and the front lot line shall maintain
a minimum setback of 50 feet;



   3)   sheds or storage buildings less than 120 square feet in size
shall be located behind the rear building line of the house; and



   4)   swimming pools shall be located behind the front building line
of the house, and 15 feet side and rear setbacks as measured to the water
line are required. On corner lots, swimming pools shall be subject to front
yard setbacks established for principal structures.



d)   Off-street parking shall be provided for at least two vehicles for
all single family dwellings.  A suitable location for a garage measuring at
least 20 feet by 24 feet which does not require a variance shall be provided
and indicated as such on a survey or site plan to be submitted when applying
for a building permit to construct a new dwelling or alter an existing garage.



e)   Each lot must have a buildable area as defined by this ordinance and
established in section 400 of this code. The purpose for a buildable area is
to ensure that each lot has a reasonable area for the location of a house,
attached garage, and associated decks or patios and that there is sufficient
room for the location of the house to be positioned to minimize the physical
impacts on the lot and to be consistent with the surrounding neighborhood.
This does not require that a house pad occupy the entire buildable area. Each
lot must comply with the following:



   1)   The buildable area must be designated by the applicant and
approved by the city council at the time of the subdivision creating the
lot.  For pre-existing lots, the buildable area will be designated by the
city planner based on the standards contained in this ordinance and section
400 of this code.



   2)   The city may require that construction within the buildable
area be located where the city determines it would reasonably:



      a.   minimize the amount of adverse impacts to the physical
environment on the lot, including such things as significant trees, grading,
erosion, and surface water drainage, and



      b.   be consistent with the location of the structures in the
surrounding neighborhood.



   3)   No principal structure, or any portion of it, may be located
outside the buildable area, except when intrusions into setbacks are allowed
by this code.



   4)   If a home exists on a lot with less than the minimum buildable
area, the home may be enlarged or rebuilt within the applicable setbacks
without a variance from the buildable area standard.



7.  Exceptions for Qualifying Small Lots.



a)   The buildable status of R-1 lots is determined in accordance with
section 300.07, subd. 1(b).  If a substandard lot has been declared
buildable, the provisions of this subdivision (section 300.10, subd. 7) may
be applied.



b)   In recognition of the exceptional circumstances of nonconforming
small lots located in neighborhoods of similarly sized lots, the R-1 district
setback standards are reduced for qualifying small lots meeting the following
criteria:



   1)   less than 15,000 square feet;



   2)   lot of record as of February 12, 1966, or lots approved by the
city subsequent to this date; and



   3)   located in an area in which the average size of all residential
lots within 400 feet is less than 15,000 square feet.



c)   The following standards apply to principal structures located on
qualifying small lots:



   1)   front yard setback: average front setback of principal
structures located on adjoining parcels, but in no case less than 20 feet
from the right-of-way (Figure 17);



Figure 17







   2)   side yard setback: 10 percent of lot width measured at the
building setback line on each side of the structure, but in no case less than
seven feet (Figure 17); and



   3)   rear yard setback: 20 percent of lot depth, but in no case less
than seven feet (Figure 17).



d)   The following standards apply to accessory structures located on
qualifying small lots: (Figure 17)



   1)   front yard setback: same as for principal structure;



   2)   side yard setback: seven feet; and



   3)   rear yard setback: seven feet.



e)   The buildable area for a qualifying small lot must meet the minimums
established in section 400 of this code.



8.   Interim Uses.



The following uses are allowed by interim use permit in the R-1 district:



a)   Home occupation:



   1) must comply with the provisions of section 300.15, subd. 14.



b)   Leasing, sales or management office for a development if the office
exceeds 1,000 square feet of floor area:



   1)   must be designed to be architecturally consistent with the
principal buildings in the project;



   2)   must meet the parking standards provided in section 300.28,
subd. 12, for office use; and



   3)   must have any signs designed to be consistent with the
principal use.



c)   Commercial kennel for dogs, cats, or both:



   1)   must have a minimum lot size of two acres;



   2)   must be located next to a collector or arterial street, as
identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise located so that access to
the site will not conduct significant traffic on local residential streets;



   3)   must screen exterior storage, including refuse, from view from
adjacent properties or public streets;



   4)   must not include the use of a crematory;



   5)   must screen parking areas for patrons from adjacent properties;



   6)   must maintain a minimum setback of 100 feet between the kennels
and all property lines;



   7)   must keep all dogs and cats within an enclosed building at all
times, except for supervised walks;



   8)   must not cause annoyance or disturbance to another person by
frequent howling, yelping, barking, or other kinds of noise. This paragraph
only applies when the noise has continued for a 5-minute period. This
requirement applies to the cumulative barking from the kennel, including one
or several dogs;



   9)   must provide at least one parking space per employee and one
parking space for each ten kennel cages;



   10)   must maintain a valid city kennel license and must comply with
all applicable city and state building, health and maintenance standards;



   11)   is subject to site and building plan review pursuant to
section 300.27 of this ordinance; and



   12)   is subject to a reasonable limitation on the total number of
animals or the size of the facilities. This will be determined by the city
based on the size of the property, the uses of adjoining properties, the
existence of buffering and other appropriate factors.



d)   A use or improvement that is not permitted in this zoning district or
that does not comply with the standards for this zoning district, if such
action is required as a reasonable accommodation under the federal Americans
with disabilities act, the federal fair housing act, or other federal or
state law.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012; amended by Ord. 2010-18,
adopted December 20, 2010; amended by Ord. 2007-03, adopted January 22, 2007;
Ord. #2006-05, adopted March 27, 2006; amended by Ord. #2004-37, adopted
December 20, 2004; amended by Ord. #2002-24, adopted October 14, 2002;
amended by Ord. #2002-04, adopted February 11, 2002; amended by Ord.
#2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord. #2000-19, adopted October
16, 2000; amended by Ord. #99-25, adopted October 11, 1999)



SECTION 300.11.  R-2 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the R-2 district is to provide a district for two family
dwellings in those areas where such development is consistent with the
low-density residential designation of the comprehensive plan and compatible
with surrounding land use characteristics. Development within this district
may occur at densities not exceeding three dwelling units per acre.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the R-2 district no structure or land may be used except for any one
or more of the following permitted uses and the accessory and conditional
uses in subdivisions 3 and 4:



a)   two-family dwellings;



b)   manufactured homes built in conformance with Minn. Stat. §§ 327.31
et seq., except not more than one home per lot.



c)   public park and recreational areas owned and operated by a
governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures
consistent with the area, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



d)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities serving six or fewer persons, a licensed day care facility
serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family day care facility licensed
under Minnesota Rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve 14 or fewer
children, except a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat
juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of
criminal statutes relating to sex offenses;



e)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller than 60
feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major roadway such
as a freeway.



f)   private recreational uses and structures for the exclusive use of
surrounding property owner(s) as a principal use. Such uses and structures
include tennis courts, pools, patios, and docks, which cannot be used for
commercial purposes or non-recreational uses. The only permitted buildings
are gazebos and storage sheds. Storage sheds may be no larger than 120 square
feet. All structures mentioned in this subsection must meet other
minimum-required setbacks and maximum area requirements for accessory
structures.



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the R-2 district only the following uses are permitted as accessory
uses, provided they are subordinate to, associated with and located on the
same lot as a permitted use:



a)   private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other sport courts;



b)   detached garages, storage sheds, or other accessory structures not
exceeding 12 feet in height, an aggregate of 600 square feet of gross floor
area, or occupying more than 30 percent of the area of the side or rear yard
in which they are located and except as provided for in subdivision 4;



c)   solar equipment;



d)   home occupations that comply with the provisions of section 300.15,
subd. 14;



e)   minor mass transit facilities including benches, except as provided
for in subdivision 4;



f)   licensed day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons, and
licensed group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer children,
provided that there is not more than one outside employee in any such
facility;



g)   garage sales, estate sales, yard sales, rummage sales, and other
sales of personal property that have similar traffic and parking patterns, if:



   1)    the sales occur during no more than two periods of a maximum
of three consecutive days each in any 12-month period,




   2)    the items offered for sale consist only of items owned by a
person who occupies the property as his/her residence or by friends of the
resident




   3)    none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for
resale or received on consignment for purposes of resale, and



h)   other uses that are not regulated by this code and that are
customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted use, as reasonably
determined by the city.



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the R-2 district no structure or land shall be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.16 of this ordinance:



a)   accessory apartments;



b)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines that
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act;



c)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined
by the city.



5.  Specific District Standards.



a)   Lots must meet all of the following minimum standards:



   1)   Lot area: 12,500 square feet per dwelling unit



   2)   Lot width at front yard setback: 55 feet per dwelling unit



   3)   Lot width at right-of-way: 55 feet per dwelling unit



   4)   Lot depth: 125 feet



   5)   Buildable area: 2,400 square feet



   6)   Buildable area dimensions: minimum of four sides with 30 feet
per side



b)   Principal structures must conform with the following:



   1)   building height: maximum of 35 feet, except if the building
includes a walkout or lookout elevation, in which case the maximum height is
25 feet.



   2)   front yard setback:



      a.   From streets located outside of the R-2 plat, a minimum
of 35 feet from the right-of-way of streets and railroad lines. In the case
of a corner lot, one front yard setback may be reduced by 10 feet. On double
frontage lots, the setback may be reduced by 10 feet towards the direction
perceived by the city planner to be the rear yard.



      b.   From streets located within the R-2 plat, and only serve
the lots within the R-2 plat, a minimum of 25 feet.



   3)   side yard setback: 10 feet



   4)   rear yard setback: minimum of 30 feet or 20 percent of the
depth of the lot, whichever is less



   5)_   maximum impervious surface: 50 percent



   6)   maximum floor area ratio: 0.25



c)   Accessory structures must conform to the setbacks established for
principal structures, except for the following:



   1)   all accessory structures located more than 10 feet from a
principal structure must be located a minimum of 10 feet from a rear or side
lot line;



   2)   all accessory structures except detached garages located
between the principal structure and the front lot line, must maintain a
minimum setback of 50 feet;



   3)   sheds or storage buildings less than 120 square feet in size
must be located behind the rear building line of the house; and



   4)   swimming pools and sport courts must be located behind the
front building line of the house, and set back a minimum of 15 feet  from
side and rear property lines as measured to the water line of pool or edge of
the sport court. On corner lots, swimming pools and sport courts are subject
to front yard setbacks established for principal structures.



d)   All dwellings, including manufactured homes, must have a depth of at
least 20 feet for at least 50 percent of their width and a width of at least
20 feet for at least 50 percent of their depth.



e)   All dwellings must have a permanent foundation in conformance with
the Minnesota state building code.



f)   For each unit in a two family dwelling, suitable off-street parking
must be provided for at least two vehicles. No two family dwelling may be
constructed nor may any existing required garage be converted unless there is
shown and designated on a survey or site plan submitted with the application
for a building permit a location on the lot suitable for construction of a
single car garage without requiring a variance.



g)   The city may require that construction within the buildable area of
an R-2 lot be located where the city determines it would reasonably:



   1)   minimize the amount of adverse impacts to the physical
environment on the lot, including such things as significant trees, grading,
erosion, and surface water drainage, and



h)   No principal structure, or any portion of it, may be located outside
the buildable area, except when intrusions into setbacks are allowed by this
code.



(Section 300.11 replaced and replaced by Ord. 2014-23, adopted September 15,
2014)



SECTION 300.12.  R-3 LOW OR MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the R-3 district is to provide a district for attached
dwelling units in those areas where such development is consistent with the
low or medium density residential designation of the comprehensive plan and
compatible with the development pattern of the surrounding area.  Clustering
of buildings to permit more orderly development and to enhance the
preservation of open space is encouraged within the district. Development
within the district shall occur at densities not exceeding 12 dwelling units
per acre. The allowed density for a piece of property will be determined by
the city at the time of the development application. The determination will
be based upon the site specific characteristics of the property and the
requested development.  Factors to be considered in increasing or decreasing
the allowed density include the existing environmental conditions such as
wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, and significant trees; the specific site
plan; the type of housing units proposed, including whether greater density
is desirable because the development contains affordable housing that is
consistent with the city’s affordable housing goals but that avoids
unacceptable concentrations of such housing; the requested zoning; the
minimum standards of this ordinance; the potential impact from traffic
generated by the development; and the surrounding area.  The burden of
establishing the appropriateness of the high end of the density range will be
on the applicant.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the R-3 district no structure or land shall be used except for one or
more of the following permitted uses and the accessory and conditional uses
in subdivisions 3 and 4:



a)   dwelling units not exceeding four attached units;



b)   manufactured homes built in conformance with Minn. Stat. §§ 
327.31 et seq.;



c)   public park and recreational areas owned and operated by a
governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures
consistent with the area, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



d)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities serving six or fewer persons, a licensed day care facility
serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family day care facility licensed
under Minnesota Rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve 14 or fewer
children, except a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat
juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of
criminal statutes relating to sex offenses; or



e)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that utility poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller
than 60 feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major
roadway such as a freeway.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-10, adopted June 24, 2013; amended by Ord. 2008-19,
adopted July 14, 2008)



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the R-3 district only the following uses shall be permitted as
accessory uses, provided they are subordinate to, associated with and located
on the same lot as a permitted use:



a)   garages for any residential structure;



b)   swimming pools, tennis courts and similar recreational facilities,
provided they are developed for joint use by members of the homeowners'
association or similar organization;



c)   individually owned hot tubs and pools, provided they are located on
individually owned property, including decks or rear yards, do not exceed 80
square feet, and are subject to review by the homeowners' association or
similar organization, if one exists;



d)   storage sheds, greenhouses or other accessory structures, provided
they do not exceed 120 square feet in gross floor area;



e)   solar equipment;



f)   receive only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices up to
a maximum height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is
located subject to the requirements provided in section 300.15, subd. 12; and
radio devices no larger than one cubic foot in size that are attached to
utility poles, if there is no more than one per pole;



g)   home occupations that comply with the provisions of section 300.15,
subd. 14;



h)   minor mass transit facilities including benches, which benches may
include advertising signs consistent with the provisions of section 325 of
the code of city ordinances, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



i)   licensed day care facilities for five or fewer persons, subject to
review as a home occupation;



j)   evergreen material sales if in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.15, subd. 13, and the city planner has given
approval;



k)   public or private schools having a course of instruction meeting the
compulsory education requirements of the Minnesota board of education for
students enrolled in grades K-12, or any portion thereof, provided that each
school:



   1)   serves no more than 12 students, unless each and every one of
the students is living in the structure and is the child, grandchild, parent,
grandparent, spouse, or ward of a family member living in the structure;



   2)   has no residential facilities for students who are not the
child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, spouse, or ward of a family member
living in the structure;



   3)   has no more than one employee or independent teaching
contractor who lives outside the structure, unless the total number of
traffic trips generated by these people does not exceed the total of one trip
to and from the structure for each day of instruction;



   4)   complies with the sign regulations for permitted residential
uses, not conditionally permitted uses, in the applicable zoning district; and



   5)   complies with all other applicable city ordinances regarding
parking.



l)   garage sales, estate sales, yard sales, rummage sales, and other
sales of personal property that have similar traffic and parking patterns, if:



   1)    the sales occur during no more than two periods of a maximum
of three consecutive days each in any 12-month period,



   2)    the items offered for sale consist only of items owned by a
person who occupies the property as his/her residence or by friends of the
resident



   3)    none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for
resale or received on consignment for purposes of resale, and



   4)   paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 do not apply to conditionally permitted
educational, religious, and public institutions; and



m)   other uses that are not regulated by this code and that are
customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted use, as reasonably
determined by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2012-05,
adopted March 26, 2012; amended by Ord. 2009-13, adopted September 14, 2009;
amended by Ord. 2008-19, adopted July 14, 2008)



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the R-3 district no structure or land shall be used for the following,
except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.16 of this ordinance:



a)   educational institutions and facilities, except as provided for in
subdivision 3;



b)   religious institutions and facilities;



c)   mass transit facilities, except as provided for in subdivision 3;



d)   licensed day care facilities serving 13 through 16 persons, provided
they are located within common or community spaces or free-standing
structures, such as educational or religious facilities;



e)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities serving 7 through 16 people;



f)   private, non profit recreational facilities as a principal use;



g)   cemeteries;



h)   marinas;



i)   public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment;



j)   telecommunication facilities as defined in Section 300.34;



k)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act;



l)   commercial nurseries;



m)   commercial dog and/or cat kennels; or



n)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined
by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-10, adopted June 24, 2013)



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the R-3 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   building height: maximum of 35 feet;



b)   front yard setback: minimum of 35 feet from the right-of-way of local
and neighborhood collector streets as identified in the comprehensive plan;
or a minimum of 50 feet from railroad lines and from the right-of-way of
major collector or arterial roadways as identified in the comprehensive plan;



c)   side yard setback: minimum of 15 feet plus two feet for every foot by
which the building exceeds 25 feet in height. Side yard setbacks may be
reduced to zero feet along the common property line when dwellings share
common walls and are subject to site and building plan review;



d)   rear yard setback: minimum of 40 feet from exterior property lines. 
Rear yard setbacks may be reduced to zero feet by the city for attached
dwellings located within cluster developments which are subject to site and
building plan review;



e)   building spacing: minimum spacing between buildings shall be the
average of the heights of the buildings.  Spacing requirements may be
reduced to zero feet by the city for dwellings which share common walls and
are subject to site and building plan review;



f)   lot area: established in chapter 400 of this code; and



g)   accessory structures: accessory structures must be located a minimum
of 10 feet from any required exterior side or rear lot line.  The setback
may be reduced to zero feet along common property lines for detached
accessory structures in conjunction with attached dwellings.



6.   Interim Uses.



The following uses are allowed by interim use permit in the R-3 district:



a)   Home occupation:



   1) must comply with the provisions of section 300.15, subd. 14.



b)   Commercial kennel for dogs, cats, or both:



   1)   must have a minimum lot size of two acres;



   2)   must be located next to a collector or arterial street, as
identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise located so that access to
the site will not conduct significant traffic on local residential streets;



   3)   must screen exterior storage, including refuse, from view from
adjacent properties or public streets;



   4)   must not include the use of a crematory;



   5)   must screen parking areas for patrons from adjacent properties;



   6)   must maintain a minimum setback of 100 feet between the kennels
and all property lines;



   7)   must keep all dogs and cats within an enclosed building at all
times, except for supervised walks;



   8)   must not cause annoyance or disturbance to another person by
frequent howling, yelping, barking, or other kinds of noise. This paragraph
only applies when the noise has continued for a 5-minute period. This
requirement applies to the cumulative barking from the kennel, including one
or several dogs;



   9)   must provide at least one parking space per employee and one
parking space for each ten kennel cages;



   10)   must maintain a valid city kennel license and must comply with
all applicable city and state building, health and maintenance standards;



   11)   is subject to site and building plan review pursuant to
section 300.27 of this ordinance; and



   12)   is subject to a reasonable limitation on the total number of
animals or the size of the facilities. This will be determined by the city
based on the size of the property, the uses of adjoining properties, the
existence of buffering and other appropriate factors.



c)   A use or improvement that is not permitted in this zoning district or
that does not comply with the standards for this zoning district, if such
action is required as a reasonable accommodation under the federal Americans
with disabilities act, the federal fair housing act, or other federal or
state law.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012; amended by Ord. 2010-18;
amended December 20, 2010; amended by Ord. #2002-04, adopted February 11,
2002; amended by Ord. #2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord.
#2000-19, adopted October 16, 2000; amended by Ord. #99-25, adopted October
11, 1999)



SECTION 300.13.  R-4 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the R-4 district is to provide a district for attached and
multiple family dwellings in those areas designated for medium density
residential development in the comprehensive plan.  Development within this
district shall occur at densities greater than four but not exceeding 12
dwelling units per acre. The allowed density for a piece of property will be
determined by the city at the time of the development application. The
determination will be based upon the site specific characteristics of the
property and the requested development.  Factors to be considered in
increasing or decreasing the allowed density include the existing
environmental conditions such as wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, and
significant trees; the specific site plan; the type of housing units
proposed, including whether greater density is desirable because the
development contains affordable housing that is consistent with the city’s
affordable housing goals but that avoids unacceptable concentrations of such
housing; the requested zoning; the minimum standards of this ordinance; the
potential impact from traffic generated by the development; and the
surrounding area.  The burden of establishing the appropriateness of the
high end of the density range will be on the applicant.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the R-4 district no structure or land may be used except for one or
more of the following permitted uses and the accessory and conditional uses
in subdivisions 3 and 4:



a)   attached dwelling units;



b)   multiple family dwelling units;



c)   public park and recreational areas owned and operated by a
governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures
consistent with the area, except as provided for in subdivision 4



d)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities for six or fewer persons;



e)   licensed day care facilities serving three or fewer persons within
any dwelling unit, excluding children residing in the dwelling unit; or



f)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that utility poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller
than 60 feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major
roadway such as a freeway.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-10, adopted June 24, 2013; amended by Ord. 2008-19,
adopted July 14, 2008)



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the R-4 district only the following uses shall be permitted as
accessory uses, provided they are subordinate to, associated with and located
on the same lot as a permitted use:



a)   attached garages for any residential structure;



b)   detached garages, provided they are located in a common building or
space approved by the city under a uniform plan;



c)   swimming pools, tennis courts and similar recreational facilities,
provided they are developed for joint use by members of the homeowners'
association or similar organization;



d)   storage buildings designed for common use by members of the
homeowners' association or similar organization or for use by the maintenance
staff for storage or as a workshop associated with normal upkeep of the
property;



e)   solar equipment;



f)   receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices up to
a maximum height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is
located subject to the requirements provided in section 300.15. subd. 12; and
radio devices no larger than one cubic foot in size that are attached to
utility poles, if there is no more than one per pole.



g)   one leasing, sales or management office per development, provided it
is used solely for leasing, sales or management of units within the
development, does not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area and except as
provided for in subdivision 4;



h)   minor mass transit facilities including benches, which benches may
include advertising signs consistent with the provisions of section 325 of
the code of city ordinances, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



i)   evergreen material sales if in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.15, subd. 13, and the city planner has given
approval;



j)   public or private schools having a course of instruction meeting the
compulsory education requirements of the Minnesota board of education for
students enrolled in grades K-12, or any portion thereof, provided that each
school:



   1)   serves no more than 12 students, unless each and every one of
the students is living in the structure and is the child, grandchild, parent,
grandparent, spouse, or ward of a family member living in the structure;



   2)   has no residential facilities for students who are not the
child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, spouse, or ward of a family member
living in the structure;



   3)   has no more than one employee or independent teaching
contractor who lives outside the structure, unless the total number of
traffic trips generated by these people does not exceed the total of one trip
to and from the structure for each day of instruction;



   4)   complies with the sign regulations for permitted residential
uses, not conditionally permitted uses, in the applicable zoning district; and



   5)   complies with all other applicable city ordinances regarding
parking.



k)   garage sales, estate sales, yard sales, rummage sales, and other
sales of personal property that have similar traffic and parking patterns, if:



   1)    the sales occur during no more than two periods of a maximum
of three consecutive days each in any 12-month period,



   2)    the items offered for sale consist only of items owned by a
person who occupies the property as his/her residence or by friends of the
resident



   3)    none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for
resale or received on consignment for purposes of resale, and



   4)   paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 do not apply to conditionally permitted
educational, religious, and public institutions; and



l)   other uses that are not regulated by this code and that are
customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted use, as reasonably
determined by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2009-13,
adopted September 14, 2009; amended by Ord. 2008-19, adopted July 14, 2008)



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the R-4 district no structure or land shall be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.16 of this ordinance:



a)   educational institutions and facilities, except as provided for in
subdivision 3;



b)   religious institutions and facilities;



c)   mass transit facilities, except as provided for in subdivision 3;



d)   licensed day care facilities serving four through 16 persons in
suitably designed and designated common areas or structures which are not
also used for residential purposes;



e)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities;



f)   private, non-profit recreational facilities as a principal use;



g)   public or private nursing or convalescent homes;



h)   cemeteries;



i)   marinas;



j)   public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment;



k)   telecommunication facilities as defined in Section 300.34;



l)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act;



m)   commercial nurseries;



n)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined
by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-10, adopted June 24, 2013; amended by Ord. 2012-05,
adopted March 26, 2012)



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the R-4 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   height: building height shall be regulated generally by floor area
ratio and yard area requirements but shall be evaluated along with other
design parameters under site and building plan review.  The planning
commission or city council may impose reasonable height limitations when any
of the following conditions are found to exist:



   1)   the proposed building is located within 200 feet of any
designated low density residential district;



   2)   the proposed building is located within 100 feet of any
designated public park;



   3)   the proposed building is highly visible to a large number of
parcels containing or designated on the comprehensive plan to contain low
density residential uses due to site conditions, including topography and
lack of mature vegetation; or



   4)   the proposed building will be of an inappropriate site or
architectural design due to existing or planned topography or sight lines.



   In imposing height limitations, it shall be the intent of the planning
commission and city council to mitigate potential negative impacts rather
than to limit the density of the project.



b)   front yard setback:  minimum of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
local and neighborhood collector streets as identified in the comprehensive
plan; or a minimum of 50 feet from railroad lines or from the right-of-way of
major collector or arterial roadways as identified in the comprehensive plan,
or the height of the building, whichever is greater;



c)   side and rear yard setback:  side and rear yard setbacks shall be
1½ times the height of the building up to a maximum of 100 feet, but in no
case less than the following when measured from land designated accordingly
in the comprehensive plan:



   1)   50 feet from low density residential;



   2)   40 feet from medium or high density residential, commercial or
office;



   3)   30 feet from industrial; and



   4)   20 feet from institutional or open space;



      Side and rear yard setbacks may be reduced to zero feet where
dwellings are designed to share common walls.



d)   floor area ratio: maximum of 0.5;



e)   lot area: established in chapter 400 of this code;



f)   access: by permit from a public body.  Principal access shall be to
a collector or arterial roadway as designated in the comprehensive plan;



g)   building spacing: minimum spacing between buildings shall be the
average of the heights of the buildings;



h)   outdoor recreational area: minimum  of 10 percent of the gross
project  area shall be in private recreational  uses for project
residents.  Such area  shall be for active or passive  recreational uses
suited to the needs  of the residents of the project,  including swimming
pools, trails,  nature areas, tot lots and saunas.  (Figure 20)



Figure 20







6.   Interim Uses.



The following uses are allowed by interim use permit in the R-4 district:



a)   Home occupation:



   1) must comply with the provisions of section 300.15, subd. 14.



b)   Leasing, sales or management office for a development if the office
exceeds 1,000 square feet of floor area:



   1)   must be designed to be architecturally consistent with the
principal buildings in the project;



   2)   must meet the parking standards provided in section 300.28,
subd. 12, for office use; and



   3)   must have any signs designed to be consistent with the
principal use.



c)   Commercial kennel for dogs, cats, or both:



   1)   must have a minimum lot size of two acres;



   2)   must be located next to a collector or arterial street, as
identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise located so that access to
the site will not conduct significant traffic on local residential streets;



   3)   must screen exterior storage, including refuse, from view from
adjacent properties or public streets;



   4)   must not include the use of a crematory;



   5)   must screen parking areas for patrons from adjacent properties;



   6)   must maintain a minimum setback of 100 feet between the kennels
and all property lines;



   7)   must keep all dogs and cats within an enclosed building at all
times, except for supervised walks;



   8)   must not cause annoyance or disturbance to another person by
frequent howling, yelping, barking, or other kinds of noise. This paragraph
only applies when the noise has continued for a 5-minute period. This
requirement applies to the cumulative barking from the kennel, including one
or several dogs;



   9)   must provide at least one parking space per employee and one
parking space for each ten kennel cages;



   10)   must maintain a valid city kennel license and must comply with
all applicable city and state building, health and maintenance standards;



   11)   is subject to site and building plan review pursuant to
section 300.27 of this ordinance; and



   12)   is subject to a reasonable limitation on the total number of
animals or the size of the facilities. This will be determined by the city
based on the size of the property, the uses of adjoining properties, the
existence of buffering and other appropriate factors.



d)   A  use or improvement that is not permitted in this zoning district
or that does not comply with the standards for this zoning district, if such
action is required as a reasonable accommodation under the federal Americans
with disabilities act, the federal fair housing act, or other federal or
state law.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012; amended by Ord. 2010-18,
adopted December 20, 2010; Ord. #2002-04, adopted February 11, 2002; amended
by Ord. #2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord. #2000-19, adopted
October 16, 2000; amended by Ord. #99-25, adopted October 11, 1999)



SECTION 300.14.  R-5 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the R-5 district is to provide a district for multiple family
dwelling units in those areas designated for high density residential
development in the comprehensive plan.  Development within this district
shall occur at densities greater than 12 dwelling units per acre. The allowed
density for a piece of property will be determined by the city at the time of
the development application. The determination will be based upon the site
specific characteristics of the property and the requested development. 
Factors to be considered in increasing or decreasing the allowed density
include the existing environmental conditions such as wetlands, floodplains,
steep slopes, and significant trees; the specific site plan; the type of
housing units proposed, including whether greater density is desirable
because the development contains affordable housing that is consistent with
the city’s affordable housing goals but that avoids unacceptable
concentrations of such housing; the requested zoning; the minimum standards
of this ordinance; the potential impact from traffic generated by the
development; and the surrounding area.  The burden of establishing the
appropriateness of the high end of the density range will be on the applicant.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the R-5 district no structure or land shall be used except for one or
more of the uses permitted within the R-4 medium density residential district.



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the R-5 district any use permitted as an accessory use within the R-4
medium density residential district shall be permitted provided it is
subordinate to, associated with and located on the same lot as a permitted
use.



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the R-5 district any use permitted as a conditional use within the R-4
medium density residential district shall be permitted by conditional use
permit when in compliance with the standards specified in section 300.16 of
this ordinance.



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the R-5 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   height: building height shall be regulated generally by floor area
ratio and yard area requirements but shall be evaluated along with other
design parameters under site and building plan review.  The planning
commission or city council may impose reasonable height limitations when any
of the following conditions are found to exist:



   1)   the proposed building is located within 200 feet of any
designated low density residential district;



   2)   the proposed building is located within 100 feet of any
designated public park;



   3)   the proposed building is highly visible to a large number of
parcels containing or designated on the comprehensive plan to contain low
density residential uses due to site conditions, including topography and
lack of mature vegetation; or



   4)   the proposed building will be of an inappropriate site or
architectural design due to existing or planned topography or sight lines.



   In considering height limitations, the intent of the planning
commission and city council shall be to mitigate potential negative impacts
and not to place limits on the density of the project.



b)   front yard setback:  minimum of 35 feet from the right-of-way of
local and neighborhood collector streets as identified in the comprehensive
plan; or a minimum of 50 feet from railroad lines or from the right-of-way of
major collector or arterial roadways as identified in the comprehensive plan,
or the height of the building, whichever is greater;



c)   side and rear yard setback: side and rear yard setbacks shall be 1½
times the height of the building, up to a maximum of 100 feet, but in no case
less than the following when measured from land designated accordingly in the
comprehensive plan:



   1)   50 feet from low density residential;



   2)   40 feet from medium or high density residential, commercial or
office;



   3)   30 feet from industrial; and



   4)   20 feet from institutional or open space.



d)   floor area ratio: maximum of 1.0;



e)   lot area: established in chapter 400 of this code;



f)   access: by permit from the appropriate public body. Principal access
shall be to a collector or arterial roadway as designated in the
comprehensive plan;



g)   building spacing:  minimum spacing between buildings shall be the
average of the heights of the buildings;



h)   outdoor recreational area:  minimum of  10 percent of the gross
project area  shall be in private recreational uses for  project
residents.  Such area shall be  for active or passive recreational uses 
suited to the needs of the residents of  the project, including swimming
pools,  trails, nature areas, picnic areas, tot  lots and saunas. (Figure
21)



Figure 21







(Amended by Ord. 2010-18, adopted December 20, 2010; amended by Ord.
#2002-04, adopted February 11, 2002)



6.    Interim Uses.



Any use permitted as an interim use within the R-4 medium density residential
district is permitted within the R-5 district by interim use permit.



(Added by Ord. 2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012)



SECTION 300.15.  GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



1.  Signs.



Signs within the residential districts shall be regulated by section 325 of
the code of city ordinances.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016)



2.  Review Standards.



All residential structures except single family detached and two-family
dwellings, and all non-residential principal structures are subject to site
and building plan review under section 300.27 of this ordinance.  The
property owner must ensure that all landscaping, natural vegetation, parking
areas and other site improvements are maintained in accordance with the
approved site and building plan. Property that does not comply with this
requirement is declared a public nuisance that may be abated in accordance
with the provisions of section 845.  All residential structures except
single family detached dwellings are subject to the performance standards
specified in section 300.28.



3.  Driveways.



Driveways which access onto public streets shall be subject to review under
section 1105 of the code of city ordinances.  In reviewing driveways, the
city shall utilize guidelines for driveway design and location by the
institute of traffic engineers as a reference.  Driveways which access onto
county or state roadways shall be subject to review by the appropriate
authorities.  Paved turn-around areas shall be required for driveways on
collector or arterial streets as designated in the comprehensive plan and in
locations where sight distance is inadequate as determined by the city.  All
parking areas except those serving one and two family dwellings on local
streets shall be designed so that cars shall not have to back into the street.



4.  Water Resources Management Plan.



All residential developments shall comply with the requirements of the city's
water resources management plan.  Easements, ponding areas, culverts, storm
sewers or similar improvements may be required by the city. No construction
on or alteration of land shall be permitted which creates unreasonable
drainage on adjacent properties.



5.  Wetlands, Floodplain and Shoreland Controls.



All residential developments occurring in areas identified on city floodplain
and wetland maps as a wetlands, floodplain or shoreland district shall comply
with the provisions of sections 300.23, 300.24 or 300.25 of this ordinance.



6.  Conditional Uses.



All residential conditional uses shall be subject to review under the
standards and criteria established in section 300.16 of this ordinance.



7.  Parking.



a)   Off-street parking shall be provided for at least two vehicles for
all single family dwellings.  A suitable location for a garage measuring at
least 20 feet by 24 feet which does not require a variance shall be provided
and indicated as such on a survey or site plan to be submitted when applying
for a building permit to construct a new dwelling or alter an existing garage.



b)   Off-street parking shall be provided for at least two vehicles for
each unit in two family dwellings.  At least one space per unit shall be
enclosed.  A suitable location for a single car garage which does not
require a variance shall be provided and indicated as such on a survey or
site plan to be submitted when applying for a building permit to alter an
existing garage.



c)   Off-street parking shall be provided for all attached and multiple
family dwelling units. At least one space per unit shall be enclosed.



d)   All residential dwelling units shall also be subject to the parking
regulations specified in section 300.28 of this ordinance.



8.  Height Regulations.



Height limitations within the residential districts shall not apply to water
towers, chimneys, flag poles, church spires, church belfries or church domes
not containing habitable space.



9.  Yard and Setback Regulations.



a)   Fire escapes, landing places, uncovered porches, decks, heating, air
conditioning and ventilation equipment, open terraces, outside stairways,
cornices, canopies, swimming pool aprons and pool equipment, fireplaces and
other similar architectural features may extend into a required front, side
or rear yard setback by a distance not to exceed five feet.  The provisions
of this paragraph shall not be construed as permitting any such feature to
extend closer than 10 feet from any side lot line or, in the case of double
frontage or corner lots, to extend any further into the front yard setback
than the 10 foot reduction allowed in section 300.10, subd. 5(b).  In the
case of qualifying small lots, the provisions of this paragraph shall not be
construed as permitting any such feature to extend towards any front, side or
rear lot line a distance greater than allowed under the provisions of section
300.10, subd. 7 of this ordinance.



b)   Detached retaining walls, fences, patio slabs, public utility poles,
light poles, mail boxes, hedges and means of access such as sidewalks,
driveways, steps and roadways may occupy any part of a required front, side
or rear yard setback.  The preceding sentence shall not apply to driveways
and roadways in the R-3, R-4 and R-5 districts, which shall be governed by
the standards of section 300.28, subd. 12(b)(4).



c)   On double frontage lots the required front yard setback shall be
provided on both streets.  However, in R-1 and R-2 districts the setback may
be reduced by 10 feet towards the direction perceived by the city planner to
be the rear yard.



d)   On corner lots, the required front yard setback shall be provided on
both streets. However, in R-1 and R-2 districts the setback may be reduced by
10 feet towards the direction perceived by the city planner to be the side
yard.



e)   No wall, fence, structure, tree, shrub,  vegetation or other
obstruction shall be  permitted in any yard or setback which  poses a
danger to traffic by obscuring the  view from any street or roadway. 
Visibility  from any street or roadway shall be  unobstructed above the
height of two and  one-half feet within the triangle described as 
beginning from a point at the paved edge of  the intersection, two sides of
which extend a  distance of 25 feet along the edge of each  street and the
third side being a line  connecting the other sides. (Figure 22)



Figure 22







f)   The following uses are exempt from the lot area, lot width and
setback requirements of this section: overhead utility poles and lines that
are less than two feet in diameter, underground utility lines and
distribution equipment, traffic signals, traffic regulatory signs, mailboxes
and other equipment that provides an essential public service.



10.  Lot Area.



a)   No lot may be so reduced that its area or dimensions are less than
required by section 400 of this code.



b)   Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, any lot which
meets the requirements for a variance specified in section 400.055 of this
code or for which a variance reducing lot area or dimensions has been granted
may be used for construction of a dwelling unit.  Any lot of record not
meeting the requirements of section 300.07, subd. 1(b) of this ordinance or
for which no variance has been granted may be used for construction of a
dwelling unit only upon the granting of a variance pursuant to section 300.07
of this ordinance.



11.  Exterior Storage.



All exterior storage of trash and maintenance equipment for multiple dwelling
buildings shall be located in an appropriately sited structure. The structure
shall provide visual screening of the storage area and shall be constructed
of materials which are compatible with the principal structure.



12.  Accessory Structures.



Any accessory building attached to a principal structure shall be made a
structural part of the principal structure and shall comply with all
requirements relating to principal structures.  No accessory building which
is not attached to a principal structure shall be located within six feet of
a principal structure unless in conformance with fireproof requirements of
the uniform building code.  Accessory structures shall conform to the
setbacks established for principal structures, except in R-1 and R-2
districts the following shall apply:



a)   all accessory structures located more than 10 feet from a principal
structure may be located a minimum of 10 feet from a rear or side lot line;



b)   all accessory structures except detached garages which are located
between the principal structure and the front lot line shall maintain a
minimum setback of 50 feet from the front lot line; and



c)   receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices
subject to the following requirements:



   1)   shall be in compliance with all city building and electrical
code requirements;



   2)   verification that the structural design has been approved by a
professional engineer;



   3)   verification that the mounting system and installation have
been approved by a professional engineer;



   4)   one per building or, if more than one antenna is proposed, the
antennas shall be clustered in a single, screened location;



   5)   submission of written authorization from the property owner;



   6)   no advertising message shall be on the antenna structure;



   7)   shall comply with setback requirements for accessory structures
and in no event shall be located between the principal structure and the
front lot line;



   8)   shall be screened to the greatest extent practicable to
minimize visual impacts on surrounding properties.  Screening shall include
landscape materials for ground mounted antennas and materials compatible with
those utilized on the exterior of the building for roof mounted antennas;



   9)   antennas located closer to a property line than the height of
the antenna shall be designed and engineered to collapse progressively within
the distance between the antenna and the property line;



   10)   shall be in compliance with all applicable federal
communications commission (FCC) requirements; and



   11)   antenna height shall be no more than 60 feet as measured from
the ground upon which it is located.



13.  Residential Accessory Uses.



Within all residential districts, the following uses shall be permitted
provided they are subordinate to, associated with and located on the same lot
as a permitted use and in conformance with the specified standards.



a)   Evergreen material sales may be permitted by the city planner once
per calendar year if in compliance with the following standards:



   1)   is located in a suitable off-street location and does not
extend into adjacent right-of-way;



   2)   does not unreasonably interrupt vehicle circulation on the site
or obstruct parking spaces;



   3)   has written authorization from property owner who also agrees
to clean up the site if the applicant does not;



   4)   has all applicable licenses and approvals from the city, county
or other appropriate jurisdictions;



   5)   meets the requirements for sight visibility clearance at street
intersections and access points in accordance with section 300.15, subd. 9(e)
of this ordinance or as required by the city to protect public safety;



   6)   has no more than one sign with a maximum area of 32 square feet
and a maximum height of 8 feet;



   7)   is kept in a neat and orderly fashion;



   8)   has no more than one temporary shelter not to exceed 120 square
feet;



   9)   agrees to clean up and restore the site to its prior condition
within 10 days of completion of sales; and



   10)   submits the deposit specified in section 710 at the time of
permit application. The deposit will be returned upon timely restoration of
the site.



(Amended by Ord. #2010-18, adopted December 20, 2010; Ord. #2006-20, adopted
November 6, 2006; amended by Ord. #2003-25, adopted October 27, 2003)



14.   Home Occupations.



a)   The intent of this subdivision is to maintain the character and
integrity of residential areas by establishing standards regulating home
occupations so that they can be conducted in a manner that does not
jeopardize the health, safety and general welfare of residential
neighborhoods. The purpose of this subdivision is to distinguish between
those home occupations that have minimal or no secondary impact and those
that have the potential for adverse effects upon neighboring properties.



b)   A home occupation is allowed in all residential districts as a
permitted accessory use if in compliance with the general standards listed in
paragraph (d) below and if all of the people who work in the dwelling unit as
part of the home occupation live at the dwelling unit. The home occupation
may have additional employees that do not work in the dwelling but these
employees may not come to the property on a regular basis.



c)   A home occupation that does not meet the requirements related to
employees in paragraph (b) above, that regularly has customer, client, or
patient visits to the home, or that is not in compliance with the general
standards listed in paragraph (d) below, is allowed in all residential
districts only as an interim use and only if it obtains the appropriate
permit and is in compliance with all conditions attached to the permit.



d)   All home occupations permitted by this section must comply with the
following general standards:



   1)   The home occupation must be clearly secondary to the
residential use and not change the nature of the residential use;



   2)   No more than 25% of the habitable area of the dwelling may be
devoted to a home occupation. A home occupation is not permitted to conduct
any of the business in an attached garage or a detached accessory building or
outside of any building.



   3)   There must be no exterior evidence of the occupation, including
no exterior storage or signs.



   4)   There must be no exterior alterations to the dwelling that
involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings, except
where required to comply with fire and building code requirements.



   5)   A home occupation must be in compliance with all applicable
fire and building codes.



   6)   A home occupation must be in compliance with the provisions of
the city's nuisance regulations.



   7)   No retail or wholesale sales activity may be conducted on the
premises, except by telephone, mail, Internet or other electronic medium.
This provision is not intended to exclude garage sales, estate sales, yard
sales, rummage sales, and other sales of personal property that have similar
parking and traffic patterns.



   8)   A home occupation must not create additional vehicle trips in
excess of 10 trips per day averaged over a period of five days per week. One
trip is counted for each vehicle that arrives at the property, and an
additional trip is counted for each vehicle that leaves the property.



   9)   All parking demands generated by the home occupation must be
accommodated within a garage and the existing driveway area. Vehicle parking
generated by employees, customers, visitors and invitees of the home
occupation may not exceed four vehicles parked outside on the property. No
vehicles used in connection with the home occupation and no vehicles of
employees, customers, visitors and invitees of the home occupation may be
parked on public or private streets. Parking for a home occupation in
multi-family residential buildings is limited to two parking spaces in
external parking areas.



   10)   A vehicle used in connection with a home occupation that has
exterior ladders, pipes, tools, buckets, tanks, snow plow, vehicle towing
equipment, trailers, or any other attachment and a vehicle licensed as a cab
or limousine must be parked in a garage when at the site of the home
occupation. All vehicle attachments must be stored in an accessory building
or screened from public view.



   11)   There must be no significant increase in pollution levels of
noise, light, air, or other types of pollution outlined in city code section
300.28.



   12)   The following types of uses have a tendency to increase in
size or intensity beyond the conditions imposed for home occupations and may
adversely affect nearby residential properties. Therefore, the following
types of businesses are prohibited as home occupations:



      a.   mortuaries;



      b.   automobile or equipment sales;



      c.   landscaping and lawn maintenance;



      d.   massage therapy;



      e.   repair, service, and painting of motor vehicles,
appliances, and small engines; and



      f.   other uses similar to those prohibited by this section,
as reasonably determined by the city.



(Added by Ord. 2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012)



SECTION 300.16.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



1.  Purpose.



It is the intent of the city in establishing general and specific criteria
for conditional uses that such uses be subject to careful evaluation to
ensure that their location, size and design are consistent with the
standards, purposes and procedures of this ordinance and the comprehensive
plan.  The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose
conditions on such uses in order to effect the purpose of this ordinance.



2.  General Standards.



No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the city council determines
that all of the following standards will be met:



a)   the use is consistent with the intent of this ordinance;



b)   the use is consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the
comprehensive plan;



c)   the use does not have an undue adverse impact on governmental
facilities, utilities, services or existing or proposed improvements; and



d)   the use does not have an undue adverse impact on the public health,
safety or welfare.



3.  Specific Standards.



In addition to the standards specified in subdivision 2, no conditional use
permit shall be granted unless the city council determines that all of the
specific standards contained in this subdivision will be met.



a)   Educational institutions and facilities:



   1)   direct access limited to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets; the use is not permitted on property that has access only by way of
a private road or driveway that is used by more than one lot;



   2)   buildings set back 50 feet from all property lines and parking
setbacks subject to section 300.28 of this ordinance;



   3)   school bus pick-up and drop-off areas located outside of the
public right-of-way and designed to enhance vehicular and pedestrian safety;



   4)   recreational areas designed for group outdoor activities set
back 25 feet from residential property, suitable buffering provided to
protect neighboring properties from noise and adverse visual impacts, and
lighted playing fields permitted only upon demonstration that off-site
impacts can be mitigated substantially;



   5)   no more than 60 percent of the site to be covered with
impervious surface and the remainder to be suitably landscaped;



   6)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance; and



   7)   not connected to, or part of, any residential dwelling.



b)   Religious institutions and facilities:



   1)   direct access limited to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



   2)   buildings set back 50 feet from all property lines;



   3)   parking spaces and parking setbacks subject to section 300.28
of this ordinance;



   4)   no more than 70 percent of the site to be covered with
impervious surface and the remainder to be suitably landscaped; and



   5)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



c)   Mass transit facilities:



   1)   bus shelters subject to the following:



      a.   screened from adjoining residential uses if required by
the city;



      b.   a concrete pad to be provided for the shelter and
immediately surrounding area;



      c.   signs to conform to section 325 of the code of city
ordinances unless determined by the city to be necessary for economic
viability of shelter;



      d.   paved bus standing area to be provided if determined by
the city to be necessary for safe and efficient traffic flow; and



      e.   incorporation of architectural features compatible with
surrounding area if required by the city.



   2)   park and ride facilities and inter-modal transfer points
subject to the following:



      a.   permitted only along collector or arterial roadways as
identified in the comprehensive plan;



      b.   screened from adjoining residential uses if required by
the city;



      c.   all parking areas to be paved and maintained; and



      d.   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to
section 300.27 of this ordinance.



d)   Accessory apartments:



   1)   Accessory apartments shall be allowed for the following
purposes:



      a.   more efficient utilization of the existing single family
housing stock in the city;



      b.   enjoyment of the benefits of rental income, decreased
housekeeping responsibilities or the companionship of tenants by persons
residing in houses which are too large for their present needs;



      c.   provision of housing which allows privacy and
independence for older family members;



      d.   preservation of property values and maintenance of the
character of existing single family neighborhoods; and



      e.   provision of housing for live-in employees, such as
nannies.



   2)   For the purpose of this subdivision, the following definitions
shall apply:



      a.   “housekeeping unit” - all persons residing within a
single family house whose relationship includes a substantial amount of
social interaction including the sharing of housekeeping responsibilities or
expenses or the taking of meals together;



      b.   “living space” - the area within a house which is
suitable for human habitation including suitable finished basement areas but
excluding garages, services areas and unfinished portions of the building;



      c.   “owner” - the person who holds fee title or is a bona
fide purchaser under a contract for deed of the property;



      d.   “unit of housing” - one or more rooms designed,
occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities separate from those of another unit of
housing and intended for the exclusive use of a single housekeeping unit; and



      e.   “temporary absence” - establishing residence outside
of the twin cities metropolitan area for a period not to exceed 12 months but
during which period the subject property continues to be the applicant's
legal or principal residence.



   3)   no accessory apartment shall be created or used except in
conformity with the following:



      a.   to be created only on property zoned for single family
detached dwellings and no more than one apartment to be created in any
dwelling;



      b.   structures in which an accessory apartment is created to
be owner-occupied, with the owner residing in either unit on a continuous
basis except for temporary absences throughout the period during which the
permit is valid;



      c.   adequate off-street parking to be provided for both units
of housing with such parking to be in a garage, carport or on a paved area
specifically intended for that purpose but not within a required turnaround;



      d.   may be created by the conversion of living space within
the house but not by conversion of garage space unless space is available for
a two car garage on the lot without the need for a variance;



      e.   an accessory apartment must be no more than 35 percent of
the gross living area of the house or 950 square feet, whichever is
smaller.  The gross living area includes the accessory apartment.  The city
council may approve a larger area where the additional size would not
substantially impact the surrounding neighborhood.



      f.   exterior changes to the house must not substantially
alter the single family character of the structure;



      g.   no apartment to be created except in compliance with all
applicable building, housing, electrical, plumbing, heating and related codes
of the city;



      h.   to be permitted only where it is demonstrated that the
accessory unit will not have an undue adverse impact on adjacent properties
and where there will not be a substantial alteration of the character of the
neighborhood; and



      i.   all other provisions of this ordinance relating to single
family dwelling units to be met, unless specifically amended by this
subdivision.



e)   Licensed day care facilities in common areas or in structures which
are not also used for residential purposes:



   1)   located only on a collector or arterial roadway as designated
in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can be provided
without conducting significant traffic on local residential streets;



   2)   buildings set back 50 feet from all property lines and parking
lots set back 15 feet from streets and non-residential property and 25 feet
from residential property;



   3)   pick-up and drop-off areas located outside of parking setback
area;



   4)   outdoor recreational areas to be set back 15 feet from all
property lines and screening provided to mitigate noise and adverse visual
impacts on neighboring properties;



   5)   one parking space provided for each six children based upon the
licensed capacity of the center;



   6)   site and building plan of all free standing centers subject to
review pursuant to section 300.27 of this ordinance, with particular
attention to compatibility of facility with surrounding neighborhood; and



   7)   review by city planner of facilities in common areas to
determine whether externally visible modifications are significant enough to
require formal site and building plan review.



f)   Detached garages, storage sheds or other accessory structures in
excess of 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or 12 feet in height or
occupying more than 30 percent of the side or rear yard in which they are
located:



   1)   side and rear setbacks equal to the height of the structure or
15 feet, whichever is greater;



   2)   no additional curb cuts to be permitted;



   3)   not to be used for commercial activities;



   4)   structure to be architecturally consistent with the principal
structure;



   5)   landscaping to be required to buffer views when the structure
is highly visible from adjoining properties; and



   6)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



g)   Licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities:



   1)   3,000 square feet of lot area for each overnight resident,
based on proposed capacity;



   2)   300 square feet of residential building area for each overnight
resident, based on proposed capacity;



   3)   in R-1 and R-2 districts, for new construction including
additions, a floor area ratio (FAR) that is no more than 100% of the highest
FAR of the homes within 400 feet of the lot lines and within 1,000 feet of
the lot along the street where it is located, including both sides of the
street. The FAR applies to an existing structure only if it seeks to expand.
The city may exclude a property that the city determines is not visually part
of the applicant's neighborhood and may add a property that the city
determines is visually part of the applicant's neighborhood. The city may
waive or modify the floor area requirement where:



      a.   the proposed use would be relatively isolated from the
rest of the neighborhood by slopes, trees, wetlands, undevelopable land, or
other physical features; or



      b.   the applicant submits a specific building design and site
plan, and the city determines that the proposed design would not adversely
impact the neighborhood character because of such things as setbacks,
building orientation, building height, or building mass. In this case, the
approval is contingent upon implementation of the specific site and building
plan.



   4)   no external building improvements undertaken in R-1 and R-2
districts which alter the original character of the home unless approved by
the city council. In R-1 and R-2 districts, there must be no exterior
evidence of any use or activity that is not customary for typical residential
use, including no exterior storage, signs, and garbage and recycling
containers;



   5)   traffic generation:  a detailed documentation of anticipated
traffic generation must be provided.  In order to avoid unreasonable traffic
impacts to a residential neighborhood, traffic limitations are established as
follows:



      a.   in R-1 and R-2 districts, the use is not be permitted on
properties that gain access by private roads or driveways that are used by
more than one lot;



      b.   the use must be located on, and have access only to, a
collector or arterial roadway as identified in the comprehensive plan;



      c.   the use must prepare, and abide by, a plan for handling
traffic and parking on high traffic days, such as holidays, that has been
reviewed and approved by city staff.



   6)   no on-street parking to be allowed.  Adequate off-street
parking will be required by the city based on the staff and resident needs of
each specific facility. In R-1 and R-2 districts, the parking area must be
screened from the view from other R-1 and R-2 residential properties. Private
driveways must be of adequate width to accommodate effective vehicle
circulation and  be equipped with a turnaround area to prevent backing
maneuvers onto public streets.  Driveways must be maintained in an open
manner at all times and be wide enough for emergency vehicle access. Driveway
slope must not exceed 8 percent unless the city determines that site
characteristics or mitigative measures to ensure safe vehicular circulation
are present.  Adequate sight distance at the access point must be available;



   7)   all facilities to conform to the requirements of the Minnesota
state building code, fire code, health code, and all other applicable codes
and city ordinances;



   8)   landscape buffering from surrounding residential uses to be
provided consistent with the requirements contained in section 300.27 of this
ordinance.  A privacy fence of appropriate residential design may be
required to limit off-site impacts. Landscape screening from surrounding
residential uses may be required by the city depending on the type, location
and proximity of residential areas to a specific facility;



   9)   submission of detailed program information including goals,
policies, activity schedule, staffing patterns and targeted capacity which
may result in the imposition of reasonable conditions to limit the off-site
impacts;



   10)   submission of a formal site and building plan review if a new
building is being constructed, an existing building is being modified, or the
city otherwise determines that there is a need for such review; and



   11)   additional conditions may be required by the city in order to
address the specific impacts of a proposed facility.



h)   Private, non-profit recreational facilities as a principal use:



   1)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



i)   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS):



   1)   set back from the nearest property line a distance equal to the
height of the tower plus one-half the diameter of the rotor;



   2)   certified by a professional engineer as being of a design
adequate for the atmospheric conditions of the twin cities;



   3)   equipped with over-speed or similar controls designed to
prevent disintegration of the rotor in high winds;



   4)   compliance with all building and electrical code requirements
of the city, the noise regulations of the Minnesota pollution control agency
and the rules and regulations of the federal communications commission and
federal aviation administration;



   5)   if the WECS has not been operated for a period of one year or
fails to meet the conditions of this ordinance, the city council may order it
dismantled and the site restored to its original condition; and



   6)   if the owner or person responsible for the WECS does not
maintain it or comply with all requirements of this ordinance, the city may
take such steps as are necessary to achieve compliance.  The cost of such
work, including administrative costs, shall be a lien against the property
and may be collected as a special assessment.  The city may sell salvaged
and valuable materials at public auction on 10 days' notice.



j)   Cemeteries:



   1)   minimum lot size of five acres;



   2)   located in proximity to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



   3)   direct views from all adjoining residential parcels shall be
buffered by appropriate means; and



   4)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



k)   Marinas:



   1)   minimum lot size of two acres;



   2)   located in proximity to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



   3)   direct views from all adjoining areas shall be screened, with
particular attention to screening exterior storage;



   4)   approval by city fire marshall and by all governmental agencies
having jurisdiction over adjacent body of water; and



   5)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



l)   Public buildings or facilities, except for recreational buildings
that contain less than 1,000 square feet, and utility cabinets larger than
150 cubic feet:



   1)   site and building plans subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



   2)   direct access limited to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



   3)   buildings set back 50 feet from all property lines;



   4)   parking spaces and parking setbacks subject to section 300.28
of this ordinance; and



   5)   no more than 70 percent of the site to be covered with
impervious surface and the remainder to be suitably landscaped; and



   6)   stand-alone utility buildings, such as lift stations, are only
subject to site and building plan review. 



m)   Public or private nursing or convalescent homes:



   1)   direct access limited to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



   2)   buildings set back 50 feet from all property lines;



   3)   parking spaces and parking setbacks subject to section 300.28
of this ordinance;



   4)   no more than 70 percent of the site to be covered with
impervious surface and the remainder to be suitably landscaped; and



   5)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



n)   Telecommunication facilities are subject to the provisions of Section
300.34.



o)   Golf courses:



   1)   the minimum size is nine holes and 15 acres with no hole to be
shorter than 100 yards. For an 18 hole golf course, minimum size is 60 acres;



   2)   a maximum of one principal structure for use as a clubhouse is
permitted. One primary accessory building for equipment storage is required.
All maintenance equipment must be stored inside. Except for structures which
are used for customer shelters, starter kiosks, or concession sales, a
maximum of two accessory structures not to exceed 120 square feet each is
permitted. Site plan review according to section 300.27 is required for all
structures that exceed 120 square feet. The clubhouse design is to be of a
residential character and exterior materials are to be primarily wood or
brick;



   3)   a minimum of two satellite restrooms or other acceptable
facilities are required for each nine holes. The satellites are to be
centrally located away from property lines and painted an earth-tone color;



   4)   driving ranges are not permitted except as accessory practice
areas for golf courses with nine or more holes and greater than 60 acres.
Retail sales are limited to concessions and golf related items that are
commonly used by on-premises customers;



   5)   the location must be on or in reasonable proximity to a
collector or arterial roadway as defined in the comprehensive plan or
otherwise located so that access can be provided without conducting
significant traffic on local residential streets. Stop signs are to be
installed at all driveway connections to public streets;



   6)   the minimum building setback is 50 feet from all property lines
except accessory structures less than 120 square feet for which 25 feet is
required. Parking areas are to be set back 20 feet from public right-of-way
and 25 feet from residential uses. All parking areas must be screened with
berms and landscaping;



   7)   no exterior light sources are permitted on the golf course
except:



      a.   building lighting; wall mounted decorative fixtures with
low wattage, incandescent luminaires as would commonly be found at single
family dwelling units; and



      b.   parking lot lighting; freestanding decorative fixtures,
located along parking areas, driveways or sidewalks as would commonly be
found at single family dwelling units. When in proximity to low density
residential uses, fixture height is limited to 10 feet and low wattage,
incandescent luminaires must be used. At isolated, screened locations, a 20
foot fixture height is permitted as long as the luminaire is shielded from
off-site views.



   8)   no exterior speakers or public address systems are permitted.
Equipment operation must be in accordance with section 850 of the code of
ordinances of the city of Minnetonka;



   9)   all tees, greens, fairways and landscaped areas must be
equipped with an automatically operated, timed irrigation system;



   10)   water quality protective measures are required as follows:



      a.   maintenance of erosion control barriers during
construction and until all ground cover is established;



      b.   a 50 foot undisturbed buffer between turf areas and
natural water bodies, watercourses or wetlands must be maintained. The buffer
must contain natural vegetation and shall not be chemically treated;



      c.   to the extent practicable, runoff must be directed to
on-site holding/sedimentation ponds with a water quality control structure
installed at the outlet prior to water discharge from the premises;



      d.   site areas in proximity to fuel and chemical storage
areas shall be designed to direct all runoff to an on-site ponding area;



      e.   a chemical storage area must be designated within the
accessory building. The area must be surrounded with a curbed barrier;



      f.   all herbicide, insecticide, fungicide and rodenticide
chemicals must be stored in a locked enclosure;



      g.   an inventory manifest of stored chemicals must be posted
at the entrance of the accessory building;



      h.   at any time widespread or non-spot application of
herbicide, insecticide, fungicide or rodenticide is to occur, notification
signs must be posted at property lines. The signs are to state the type and
name of the chemical, date and time of application, and other appropriate
information;



      i.   all chemical applications must be by a Minnesota
department of agriculture licensed applicator;



      j.   chemicals shall meet the requirements of the federal
insecticide, fungicide and rodenticide act (FIFRA), the environmental
protection agency (EPA), the Minnesota pesticide control law and the
Minnesota fertilizer control law; and



      k.   an annual chemical application management plan must be
submitted for review and approval by the city. The plan is to specify
chemicals used, number of annual applications, application rates and method,
and other appropriate information.



   11)   a golf course architect or professional landscape architect
with experience in designing golf courses must review and approve the safety
aspects of the golf course plan;



   12)   to the extent practicable, the golf course must be designed to
minimize a potential for activity spill-over onto adjacent properties;



   13)   based on the design of the golf course, the city may require
fencing and installation of a lockable gate at access points;



   14)   based on the proximity of adjacent low density residential
uses,  the number of proposed motorized golf carts, or both, the city may
require use of electric golf carts only. Overnight golf cart storage is to be
within a building or at a location which is screened from off-site views;



   15)   for 18 hole golf courses, a paved or crushed rock cart path is
required along all tee and green areas;



   16)   one sign with maximum area of 30 square feet is permitted.
Directional signs not to exceed seven square feet each are exempt from this
requirement. The primary sign must be set back 10 feet from public
right-of-way unless the city determines that a closer setback will not
adversely impact sight distances at driveway or street intersections;



   17)   a landscape plan in accordance with section 300.27, subd. 14,
must be provided;



   18)   evidence of liability insurance which specifically covers
claims for damage to private property and sudden and accidental pollution
events in the amount of $500,000 must be submitted;



   19)   in order to ensure that the site can be restored to prior
conditions should golf course construction not be completed, the city may
require posting of a financial security acceptable to the city;



   20)   no off-season exterior activity is permitted unless authorized
by the city and the owner; and



   21)   evidence that all required jurisdictions including but not
limited to watershed district; Minnesota department of natural resources and
United States army corps of engineers have approved the golf course plan must
be provided.



p)   Utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, transmission lines that are not
subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act, and
substations and other related facilities:



   Phase I (Application for Conditional Use Permit):



   1)   The applicant must first participate in a task force study with
city staff. The task force may also include landowners representing
residential interests that may be affected. The task force will review
alternatives for the proposed location. The applicant must submit an
alternatives analysis to the task force that includes:



      a.   documentation demonstrating the need and purpose for such
a facility so that alternatives to the facility can be adequately assessed;



      b.   all of the alternatives considered by the applicant;



      c.   alternative locations;



      d.   a “no-build” alternative that discusses measures that
could be taken in an attempt to meet the documented need without construction
of the facility; and



      e.   designation of the applicant's preferred location.



   2)   The city may retain an independent technical expert paid for by
the applicant to assist the task force. The expert must be acceptable to the
applicant, who may not unreasonably withhold this acceptance. The applicant
will have five business days to reject the city's selected expert after
receiving notice from the city. If the applicant does not reject the expert
within that time, the expert will be deemed to be acceptable. The task force
will conduct an analysis of the alternatives and present its report to the
city council. The council will narrow the alternatives to two for each
facility. One of those alternatives may be a no-build alternative.



   3)   The applicant will then submit an application for a conditional
use permit with the following information for each alternative selected by
the city council:



      a.   the cost;



      b.   the amount of vegetation that would be removed or damaged;



      c.   for an electrical transmission line or substation, a
summary of current research regarding the health effects of EMF levels,
conducted by health and scientific professionals, including those who do and
do not receive utility sponsorship;



      d.   for an electrical transmission line or substation, EMF
levels under maximum and average anticipated loading at the base of the
utility poles, underneath the wires between the poles, at ground level above
underground wires, at the edge of the property line, at the edge of the
closest habitable building, and at the point above ground where there would
be the greatest EMF level;



      e.   for an electrical transmission line or substation,
reasonable and prudent measures to minimize EMF levels along all alternative
routes; and



      f.   depictions of the views of the proposed facility, if
above ground, from at least two directions selected by city staff.



   4)   All alternative routes for transmission lines must comply with
the following unless the applicant shows that this is not reasonable or
prudent:



      a.   the routes must be on or along corridors presently used
for public roads, public trails, railroads, or above-ground utilities, or on
corridors which were previously used for such purposes and which are being
retained for future public or utility purposes;



      b.   arterial or collector streets must be used instead of
local roadways, except that local roadways may be used where above-ground
electrical lines already exist; and



      c.   platted utility easements in residential zones which do
not abut public roads or roadway easements may not be used, unless the lines
are placed underground.



   5)   After receiving a complete application, the planning commission
must hold a public hearing on the application. At least 10 days before this
hearing, the city must mail notice of the hearing to all owners of property
wholly or partially within a 400-foot radius of any portion of the
alternative locations to be presented to the planning commission.



   6)   The planning commission will recommend a preferred alternative
to the city council. The city council will select an alternative for each
facility by a majority vote of the members present. The planning commission
and council may impose reasonable conditions as part of the approval to
protect adjacent property and people.



   7)   In making their decisions, the planning commission and city
council must consider the following factors:



      a.   the potential adverse aesthetic, economic, environmental,
social, health, and safety impacts on adjacent properties or people;



      b.   the potential interference with public use of public
property;



      c.   the applicant's need to adequately and reliably serve
customers within the relevant service area now and in the foreseeable future;



      d.   compliance with the requirements in subparagraph 4;



      e.   cost; and



      f.   the purposes in section 300.01 and the general standards
in section 300.16, subd. 2 and section 300.21, subd. 2.



   8)   The applicant may notify the city and request selection of a
different alternative after the council's action if the applicant believes
that it cannot use the selected alternative because of a reason that was
beyond its own control and not apparent during the selection process. The
council will choose a different alternative if it finds that the applicant is
prevented from the using the selected location.



   Phase II (Site Plan Review):



   9)   The applicant must apply for site plan approval after receiving
the conditional use permit and before beginning construction. At the
applicant’s request, the city council may choose to consider the site plan
at the time of the conditional use permit. The application must comply with
the conditions specified in paragraphs (9) through (13). The applicant must
obtain sufficient interest in the property needed for that alternative before
applying for the approval. The city planner must reject an application for a
location other than the selected alternative, and it will not be considered.



   10)   The applicant must submit a landscape plan prepared by a
registered landscape architect. The plan must be designed to mitigate the
amount of trees removed for the facility and must minimize the visual impact
on abutting properties caused by the facility. The landscape plan will be
subject to review and approval by the city pursuant to section 300.27, subd.
14 through subd. 19 of this code, except the minimum landscape requirements
in subd. 15(a). The applicant must submit financial security acceptable to
the city to ensure compliance and must install and maintain the landscaping
in compliance with those code provisions and the plan as approved by the
city.  With the concurrence of the abutting property owner, the landscape
plan may include plantings on abutting property. In that case, the applicant
will be responsible for installation, and the abutting property owner will be
responsible for the maintenance of the landscaping.



   11)   The applicant must design the facility to minimize its visual
impact. The applicant must submit configuration, material and color options
that are technically feasible. The city may require the applicant to design
the facility in a manner that reduces the visual impact of the project,
including regulating the height and spacing of utility poles. Utility poles
may not exceed 80 feet in height, except when needed to cross a major roadway
such as a freeway.



   12)   The facility must not interfere with the use of public
right-of-way, including use for vehicular and pedestrian travel, snow
storage, and lateral support.



   13)   The applicant and any subsequent owner must continually
maintain the facility in good condition, including repainting or restaining
deteriorated surface finishes, securing poles and guy wires to the ground,
and replacing poles that are in a deteriorated condition.



q)   Commercial nurseries:



   1)   shall have a minimum lot size of two acres;



   2)   shall be located next to a collector or arterial street, as
identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise located so that access to
the site will not conduct significant traffic on local residential streets;



   3)   shall not have any exterior display except plants, unless
approved by the city council;



   4)   shall screen exterior storage and materials from view from
adjacent properties or public streets;



   5)   shall provide at least 10 parking spaces plus one space for
each 90 square feet of floor area in the principal building;



   6)   shall only be permitted where it is demonstrated that the
nursery will not have an undue adverse impact on adjacent properties and
where there will not be a substantial alteration of the neighborhood
character; and



   7)   shall be subject to site and building plan review pursuant to
section 300.27 of this ordinance.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2013-10,
adopted June 24, 2013; amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord.
2012-05, adopted March 26, 2012; amended by Ord. 2011-02, adopted April 18,
2011; amended by 2010-18, adopted December 20, 2010; amended by Ord.
#2004-37, adopted December 20, 2004; amended by Ord. #2002-08, adopted April
22, 2002; amended by Ord. #2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord.
#2000-19, adopted October 16, 2000; amended by Ord. #99-25, adopted October
11, 1999; amended by Ord. #99-2, adopted January 11, 1999)



SECTION 300.17.  B-1 OFFICE BUSINESS DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the B-1 district is to provide a district for office and
accessory service uses but which excludes general retail and service uses. 
Retail sales shall be prohibited except for uses established primarily in
support of the principal office use.  Exterior display of merchandise shall
be prohibited.  The B-1 district is intended for those areas of the city
identified for office development by the comprehensive plan or for
transitional areas between residential and more intense uses.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the B-1 district no structure or land shall be used except for one or
more of the following uses;



a)   administrative, executive, professional or other offices; or



b)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that utility poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller
than 60 feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major
roadway such as a freeway.



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the B-1 district the following shall be permitted provided they are
subordinate to and associated with a permitted use:



a)   receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices up to
a maximum height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is
located subject to the requirements found in section 300.28, subd. 13; and
radio devices no larger than one cubic foot in size that are attached to
utility poles, if there is no more than one per pole;



b)   evergreen material sales if in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.15, subd. 13, and the city planner has given
approval; and



c)   other uses customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted
use, as determined by the city.



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the B-1 district no structure or land shall be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and except in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.21 of this ordinance:



a)   business service uses normally associated with office developments
and containing limited retail activity;



b)   residential dwelling units;



c)   restaurants and cafeterias incorporated within a principal structure
and oriented predominantly towards serving the needs of employees of the
surrounding area but excluding drive-up and exterior walk-up facilities;



d)   storage, assembly or servicing incidental to the principal use;



e)   hospitals and medical clinics;



f)   minor manufacturing or assembly incidental to the principal use;



g)   heliports;



h)   hotels and motels;



i)   financial institutions, with or without drive-up facilities;



j)   licensed day care facilities;



k)   cemeteries;



l)   marinas;



m)   public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment;



n)   telecommunication facilities as defined in Section 300.34;



o)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act; or



p)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined
by the city.



None of the uses permitted by conditional use permit shall occupy more than
25 percent of the gross floor area of the building or of several buildings
developed under a unified site plan.



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the B-1 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   building height: buildings located within 200 feet of any residential
district shall be limited to four stories or 45 feet, whichever is less. 
The height of all other buildings shall be regulated by setback and floor
area requirements;



b)   front yard setback: minimum of 35 feet from the right-of-way of local
and neighborhood collector streets as identified in the comprehensive plan;
or a minimum of 50 feet from railroad lines and from the right-of-way of
major collector or arterial roadways as identified in the comprehensive plan;
or the height of the building, whichever is greater.  The most restrictive
of the above shall apply up to a maximum of 100 feet;



c)   side and rear yard setbacks: side and rear yard setbacks shall comply
with the following formula: setback = (1.5 times building height) - 10 feet
up to a maximum setback of 100 feet but in no case shall the setbacks be less
than the following when measured from land designated accordingly in the
comprehensive plan:



   1)   50 feet from low density residential;



   2)   40 feet from medium and high density residential; and



   3)   20 feet from commercial, office, industrial, institutional and
public park.



d)   floor area ratio: maximum of 1.0;



e)   lot coverage: maximum lot coverage shall be 85 percent and shall be
calculated to include building footprints; parking areas; driveways; loading,
storage and trash areas and other areas covered by any impervious surface;



f)   access: by permit from a public body with principal access from a
collector or arterial roadway as designated in the comprehensive plan or a
street specifically designed to accommodate commercial traffic; and



g)   trash enclosures or accessory buildings not to exceed 600 square feet
in size shall be located behind the front building line of the principal
building.  Setbacks shall be equal to the parking setback as specified in
section 300.28, subd. 12(b)(4).



6.  Additional Requirements.



a)   All developments shall be subject to site and building plan review
pursuant to section 300.27 of this ordinance.



b)   All developments shall comply with the wetlands, floodplain and
shoreland regulations contained in sections 300.23, 300.24 and 300.25 of this
ordinance.



c)   Parking shall be regulated pursuant to section 300.28 of this
ordinance.



d)   All developments shall comply with the city's water resources
management plan.



e)   Signs shall be regulated pursuant to section 325 of the code of city
ordinances.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2002-04,
adopted February 11, 2002; amended by Ord. 2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002;
amended by Ord. 2000-19, adopted October 16, 2000)



SECTION 300.18.  B-2 LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the B-2 district is to provide a district for low intensity,
service oriented commercial uses in areas designated as neighborhood or
community centers in the comprehensive plan.  Since these areas are often
near residential areas, limitations are placed on the type, size and
intensity of commercial uses in the district.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the B-2 district no structure or land shall be used except for one or
more of the following uses:



a)   administrative, executive or professional offices;



b)   general retail and service commercial uses occurring within an
enclosed building, except as provided for in subdivision 4; or



c)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that utility poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller
than 60 feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major
roadway such as a freeway.



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the B-2 district the following uses shall be permitted provided they
are subordinate to and associated with a permitted use:



a)   storage, assembly or servicing related to a permitted use and
occupying no more than 10 percent of the gross floor area of the principal
structure;



b)   receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices up to
a maximum height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is
located subject to the requirements found in section 300.28, subd. 13; and
radio devices no larger than one cubic foot in size that are attached to
utility poles, if there is no more than one per pole;



c)   sidewalk sales may be authorized by the city planner, at his or her
discretion, up to three times per calendar year so long as they will be held
on sidewalks located adjacent to the principal structure, will not block
pedestrian or handicapped access, will not block any required parking or
drive aisle, will not be located in any required setback area, will be
limited to a maximum duration of two days, will use signage no larger than 4
feet by 4 feet per sign at the sale location with all other signage in
compliance with city ordinances and upon completion of the sale that the site
will be restored and cleaned as necessary. If a permitted sale does not
comply with these standards, the city planner may require that it be
immediately removed. Decisions of the city planner may be appealed to the
planning commission. Cash deposits or other financial security acceptable to
the city may be required if deemed necessary based upon the proposal or prior
actions concerning the site;



d)   evergreen material sales if in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.15, subd. 13, and the city planner has given
approval; and



e)   other uses customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted
use, as determined by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-02, adopted April 18, 2011)



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the B-2 district, no structure or land shall be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.21 of this ordinance:



a)   outside storage, display, sales or servicing;



b)   service stations and other automobile related uses having service
bays except auto body repair and painting;



c)   non-service station retail facilities having gasoline pumps;



d)   uses having a drive-up window;



e)   storage, assembly or servicing related to a permitted use occupying
between 10 and 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure;



f)   fast food restaurants with or without drive-up facilities, except
those located in community or regional shopping centers;



g)   automobile, truck, trailer or boat sales or rentals that are
accessory to another use;



h)   theaters;



i)   restaurants having on-sale intoxicating liquor or dance hall licenses;



j)   licensed day care facilities;



k)   hospitals and medical clinics;



l)   cemeteries;



m)   marinas;



n)   public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment;



o)   telecommunication facilities as defined in Section 300.34;



p)   accessory sidewalk cafes and outdoor eating areas;



q)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act;



r)   microbreweries;



s)   residential dwelling units; or



t)   other uses similar to those permitted in this section, as determined
by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-07; adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2011-19,
adopted August 22, 2011)



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the B-2 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   building height: maximum of 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less;



b)   front yard setback: minimum of 50 feet;



c)   side and rear yard setback: minimum of 35 feet;



d)   floor area ratio: maximum of 0.8;



e)   lot coverage: maximum lot coverage shall be 85 percent and shall be
calculated to include building footprints; parking areas; driveways; loading,
storage and trash areas and other areas covered by any impervious surface;



f)   access: by permit from a public body with principal access from a
collector or arterial roadway as designated in the comprehensive plan or a
street specifically designed to accommodate commercial traffic; and



g)   trash enclosures or accessory buildings not to exceed 600 square feet
in size shall be located behind the front building line of the principal
building.  Setbacks shall be equal to the parking setback as specified in
section 300.28, subd. 12(b)(4).



6.  Additional Requirements.



a)   All developments shall be subject to site and building plan review
pursuant to section 300.27 of this ordinance.



b)   All developments shall comply with the wetlands, floodplain and
shoreland regulations contained in sections 300.23, 300.24 or 300.25 of this
ordinance.



c)   Parking shall be regulated pursuant to section 300.28 of this
ordinance.



d)   All developments shall comply with the city's water resources
management plan.



e)   Signs shall be regulated pursuant to section 325 of the code of city
ordinances.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2002-03,
adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord. 2000-19, adopted October 16, 2000)



7.  Interim Uses.



The following uses are allowed in the B-2 district only pursuant to an
approved interim use permit and in conformance with the standards specified
in section 300.05 of this ordinance and the additional standards specified
below:



a)   transient sales;



   1)   must be located in a suitable off-street location and shall not
extend into adjacent right-of-way or other public property;



   2)   must not interrupt vehicular circulation on the site or
obstruct parking spaces needed by permanent business established on the site;



   3)   must have written authorization from property owner;



   4)   business operator must secure all applicable licenses and
approvals from the city, Hennepin county or other appropriate jurisdictions;



   5)   sight visibility clearances at street intersections and access
points must be provided in accordance with section 300.15, subd. 9(e) of this
ordinance or as determined by the city to protect public safety;



   6)   no portion of the use may take place within 100 feet of any
developed property zoned for residential use;



   7)   signs are subject to the following:



      a.   no more than four signs are allowed, which do not exceed
32 square feet in aggregate;



      b.   incidental product or pricing signs must be placed
directly next to the appropriate product;



      c.   product advertising is permitted, but must be included in
the maximum allowed sign area;



      d.   the signs must have a professional appearance and must be
securely mounted or erected in a safe location; and



      e.   these limitations apply to all signs associated with the
use, including those affixed to vehicles;



   8)   any display of items must be limited to representative samples
and be arranged in as compact a manner as reasonably practicable;



   9)   the interim use permit will be issued in the name of the person
requesting the permit and will be for the purpose of selling a particular
item or range of items at a specific location.  Any change in the person,
location or items sold will render the permit invalid; and



   10)   violation of the above standards or other conditions placed
upon the interim use permit will result in immediate revocation of the
interim use permit;



b)   outside sales and display of plant materials except those associated
with a commercial nursery;



   1)   is allowed only for nursery type merchandise that is normally
associated with the principal use and sold outdoors;



   2)   must be located in compliance with building setback
requirements except side or rear yard setbacks when the city determines that
locations in those areas will not impact adjacent properties or public views;



   3)   is not permitted where there is a shortage of parking spaces or
where it would cause in excess of 10 percent of parking spaces to be removed
from service;



   4)   must be located in a controlled or cordoned area which does not
obstruct vehicular circulation;



   5)   must be kept in a neat and orderly fashion;



   6)   must not include a public address system;



   7)   must not include the display of banners, stringers or
advertising items except as permitted in section 325; and



   8)   is not permitted within 200 feet of the nearest existing or
potential residential structure (a potential location is measured from the
closest setback line on a residentially zoned property) and must be screened
from views of residential and office business property; the city may
determine that outdoor display and sales is becoming a permanent site feature
and require that permanent facilities attached and complimentary to the
principal building be constructed;



c)   sidewalk sales exceeding allowable standards described for accessory
uses and carnivals:



   1)   permits will only be granted if the applicant can demonstrate
that the operation is located in an area that is removed from residential
parcels and that adequate buffering is provided to minimize adverse impacts
on residential property from the operation.  Buffering adequate to comply
with this standard may include substantial physical separation supplemented
by one or more of the following: a landscaped buffer, natural vegetation, or
location of a building between the operation and property line as determined
by the city;



   2)   the use of outdoor speaker systems is prohibited;



   3)   a loss of the use of parking stalls determined by the city to
be required to accommodate both normal parking demand and demands associated
with the proposed operation is not allowed;



   4)   hours of operation will be imposed by the city dependant on the
level of activity and adverse impacts on adjacent properties;



   5)   compliance with sign limitations imposed by the ordinance for
temporary signs is required;



   6)   pedestrian access in and around the site cannot be blocked or
impaired;



   7)   the retention of an off-duty police officer(s) may be required
if deemed necessary by the chief of police to control large crowds and direct
traffic if there is interference with normal traffic flow;



   8)   evidence of liability coverage of at least $300,000, with the
city identified as an additional insured, must be provided for carnivals, in
a form acceptable to the city attorney;



   9)   financial security acceptable to the city to insure compliance
with the stipulations of approval and maintenance of the site must be
posted.  The minimum amount of the financial security is $5,000.    Higher
amounts may be required by the city if deemed appropriate based upon the size
of the event and potential for problems in these areas;



   10)   compliance with applicable health, public safety and building
code regulations as imposed by the city is required;



   11)   traffic flow must not unreasonably interfere with traffic on
adjacent streets, intersections and curb cuts; events will not be approved
when roads and intersections serving the site are under construction or
repair to the extent that traffic capacities and flows are impaired;



   12)   only one event per site per calendar year will be allowed;



   13)   an acceptable plan must be submitted detailing the boarding
and hygiene facilities to be used by the employees associated with the
carnival operations and sale.  Such employees are not permitted to be
boarded overnight in temporary or mobile structures placed on the site; and



   14)   if a promotional carnival places an undue burden on the city
or adjacent properties as evidenced by police responses or complaints, the
city may deny future promotional carnival conditional use permits at that
location.



d)   outdoor entertainment;



   1)   must be located:



      a.   at least 100 feet from any residential property as
measured from the closest property lines of the properties. The city may
modify this distance based on physical characteristics of the commercial and
residential properties such as: existing sight lines, existing or proposed
physical barriers, existing natural resources, and proposed landscaping;



      b.   in proximity to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



      c.   in a controlled or cordoned area; and



      d.   to not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation;



   2)   must not use public address systems, speakers, or other audio
equipment which is audible anywhere on a residential lot that is within 400
feet, and must not create noise that is unreasonably disturbing to a
reasonable person of ordinary sensitivity anywhere on a residential lot that
is within 400 feet. The distance will be measured from the property lines of
the source and receiving properties that are closest to each other. Whether
the sound is unreasonably disturbing to a reasonable person will be
determined under section 850.005;



   3)   Must not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
and



   4)   Must be in compliance with applicable health, public safety,
and building code regulations as imposed by the city or other pertinent
agency.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2014-07,
adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2012-13, adopted September 18, 2012;
added by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2011-19, adopted August
22, 2011)



SECTION 300.19.  B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the B-3 district is to provide a district for general
commercial development in areas so designated in the comprehensive plan and
which are removed from residential areas.  The intensity of development
permitted in this district shall be determined by the city's assessment of
the quality  of the site and building plan and upon the ability to mitigate
off-site impacts.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the B-3 district no structure or land shall be used except for one or
more of the following uses:



a)   retail, business, office or service uses occurring within an enclosed
building, except as provided for in subdivision 4; or



b)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that utility poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller
than 60 feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major
roadway such as a freeway.



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the B-3 district the following uses shall be permitted provided they
are subordinate to and associated with a permitted use:



a)   storage, assembly or servicing related to a permitted use and
occupying no more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal
structure;



b)   receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices up to
a maximum height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is
located subject to the requirements found in section 300.28, subd. 13; and
radio devices no larger than one cubic foot in size that are attached to
utility poles, if there is no more than one per pole;



c)   sidewalk sales may be authorized by the city planner, at his or her
discretion, up to three times per calendar year so long as they will be held
on sidewalks located adjacent to the principal structure, will not block
pedestrian or handicapped access, will not block any required parking or
drive aisle, will not be located in any required setback area, will be
limited to a maximum duration of two days, will use signage no larger than 4
feet by 4 feet per sign at the sale location with all other signs at the
location in compliance with city ordinances and will restore and clean up the
site to its prior condition upon completion of the sale.  If a permitted
sale does not comply with these standards, the city planner may require that
it be immediately removed. Decisions of the city planner may be appealed to
the planning commission. Cash deposits or other financial security acceptable
to the city may be required if deemed necessary based upon the proposal or
prior actions concerning the site;



d)   evergreen material sales if in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.15, subd. 13 and the city planner has given
approval; and



e)   other uses customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted
use, as determined by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-02, adopted April 18, 2011)



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the B-3 district no structure or land shall be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.21 of this ordinance:



a)   outside storage, display, sales or servicing;



b)   service stations and other automobile related uses having service
bays except auto body repair and painting;



c)   non-service station retail facilities having gasoline pumps;



d)   uses having a drive-up window;



e)   storage, assembly or servicing related to a permitted use and
occupying between 25 and 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal
structure;



f)   fast food restaurants with or without drive-up facilities, except
those located in community or regional shopping centers;



g)   automobile, truck, trailer or boat sales or rentals;



h)   theaters;



i)   restaurants having on-sale intoxicating liquor or dance hall licenses;



j)   licensed day care facilities;



k)   hospitals and medical clinics;



l)   cemeteries;



m)   marinas;



n)   public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment;



o)   telecommunication facilities as defined in Section 300.34;



p)   accessory sidewalk cafes and outdoor eating areas;



q)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act;



r)   microbreweries;



s)   residential dwelling units; or



t)   other uses similar to those permitted in this section, as determined
by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-07, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2011-19,
adopted August 22, 2011)



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the B-3 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   building height: building height to be regulated by setbacks and
floor area ratio requirements;



b)   front yard setback: minimum of 50 feet;



c)   side and rear yard setback: side and rear yard setbacks shall comply
with the following formula: setback = (1.5 times building height) - 10 feet
up to a maximum of 100 feet but in no case shall the setbacks be less than
the following when measured from land designated accordingly in the
comprehensive plan:



   1)   50 feet from low density residential;



   2)   40 feet from medium and high density residential; and



   3)   20 feet from commercial, office, industrial, institutional and
public park.



d)   floor area ratio: maximum of 1.5;



e)   lot coverage: maximum lot coverage shall be 85 percent and shall be
calculated to include building footprints; parking areas; driveways; loading,
storage and trash areas and other areas covered by any impervious surface;



f)   access: by permit from a public body with principal access from a
collector or arterial roadway as designated in the comprehensive plan or a
street specifically designed to accommodate commercial traffic; and



g)   trash enclosures or accessory buildings not to exceed 600 square feet
in size shall be located behind the front building line of the principal
building.  Setbacks shall be equal to the parking setback as specified in
section 300.28, subd 12(b)(4).



6.  Additional Requirements.



a)   All developments shall be subject to site and building plan review
pursuant to section 300.27 of this ordinance.



b)   All developments shall comply with the wetlands, floodplain and
shoreland regulations contained in sections 300.23, 300.24 or 300.25 of this
ordinance.



c)   Parking shall be regulated pursuant to section 300.28 of this
ordinance.



d)   All developments shall comply with the city's water resources
management plan.



e)   Signs shall be regulated pursuant to section 325 of the code of city
ordinances.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2002-03,
adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord. 2000-19, adopted October 16, 2000)



7.  Interim Uses.



The following uses are allowed in the B-3 district only pursuant to an
approved interim use permit and in conformance with the standards specified
in section 300.05 of this ordinance and the additional standards specified
for the interim use in section 300.18, subd. 7:



a)   transient sales;



b)   outside sales and display of plant materials except those associated
with a commercial nursery;



c)   sidewalk sales exceeding allowable standards described for accessory
uses and carnivals; and



d)   outdoor entertainment.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-13, adopted September 18, 2012; added by Ord. 2011-19,
adopted August 22, 2011)



SECTION 300.20.  I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the I-1 district is to provide a district for industrial uses
in areas so designated in the comprehensive plan.  Development within the
district shall be regulated through the performance standards outlined in
section 300.28 of this ordinance to promote sensitive site design and to
mitigate external site impacts.



2.  Permitted Uses.



Within the I-1 district no structure or land may be used except for a
warehouse, storage, manufacturing, processing, office, wholesale or research
use occurring within an enclosed building, except as provided for in
subdivision 4.



3.  Accessory Uses.



Within the I-1 district the following uses are permitted provided they are
subordinate to and associated with a permitted use:



a)   living quarters for security personnel, provided they are located
within the principal structure;



b)   overnight outside storage of vehicles, provided the vehicles are
associated with the business and are screened from view from residential
properties or public views;



c)   outside storage, including fuel storage, provided it is screened from
general public view;



d)   retail or service uses not exceeding 25 percent of the gross floor
area of the principal structure;



e)   overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line,
receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices up to a
maximum height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is
located subject to the requirements found in section 300.28, subd. 13; except
that utility poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller than 60
feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major roadway such
as a freeway;



f)   evergreen material sales if in compliance with the standards
specified in section 300.15; subd. 13, and the city planner has given
approval; and



g)   other uses customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted
use, as determined by the city.



4.  Conditional Uses.



Within the I-1 district no land or structure may be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
contained in section 300.21 of this ordinance:



a)   heliport;



b)   retail, or service uses occupying between 25 and 50 percent of the
gross area of the principal structure;



c)   cemeteries;



d)   marinas;



e)   public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment;



f)   vehicle towing businesses;



g)   auto body repair and painting businesses;



h)   telecommunication facilities as defined in Section 300.34;



i)   waste transfer facilities;



j)   microbreweries;



k)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act; or



l)   other uses similar to those permitted in this section, as determined
by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-07, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2011-19,
adopted August 22, 2011)



5.  District Standards.



No building or land in the I-1 district shall be used except in conformance
with the following:



a)   building height: maximum of 35 feet;



b)   front yard setback: minimum of 35 feet from local and neighborhood
collector streets as identified in the comprehensive plan; or a minimum of 50
feet from railroad lines and from major collector or arterial roadways as
designated in the comprehensive plan;



c)   side and rear yard setbacks: minimum setbacks shall be in accordance
with the following when measured from land designated accordingly in the
comprehensive plan:



   1)   70 feet from low density residential;



   2)   50 feet from medium and high density residential;



   3)   30 feet from commercial, office and institutional; and



   4)   20 feet from industrial and public park.



d)   floor area ratio: maximum of 1.0;



e)   lot coverage: maximum lot coverage shall be 85 percent and shall be
calculated to include building footprints; parking areas; driveways; loading,
storage and trash areas and other areas covered by any impervious surface;



f)   access: by permit from the appropriate public authority with
principal access from a collector or arterial roadway as designated in the
comprehensive plan or a street specifically designed to accommodate
industrial traffic; and



g)   trash enclosures or accessory buildings not to exceed 600 square feet
in size shall be located behind the front building line of the principal
building.  Setbacks shall be equal to the parking setback as specified in
section 300.28, subd. 12(b)(4).



6.  Additional Requirements.



a)   All developments shall be subject to site and building plan review
pursuant to section 300.27 of this ordinance.



b)   All developments shall comply with the wetlands, floodplain and
shoreland regulations contained in sections 300.23, 300.24 or 300.25 of this
ordinance.



c)   Parking shall be regulated pursuant to section 300.28 of this
ordinance.



d)   All developments shall comply with the city's water resources
management plan.



e)   Signs shall be regulated pursuant to section 325 of the code of city
ordinances.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2002-18,
adopted May 20, 2002; amended by Ord. 2002-04, adopted February 11, 2002;
amended by Ord. 2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord. 2000-19,
adopted October 16, 2000)



SECTION 300.21.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR BUSINESS AND
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.



1.  Purpose.



It is the intent of the city in establishing general and specific criteria
for conditional uses that such uses be subject to careful evaluation to
ensure that their location, size and design are consistent with the
standards, purposes and procedures of this ordinance and the comprehensive
plan.  The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose
conditions on such uses in order to ensure compliance or to effect the
purpose of this ordinance.



2.  General Standards.



No conditional use permit shall be granted unless the city council determines
that all of the following standards will be met:



a)   the use is consistent with the intent of this ordinance;



b)   the use is consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the
comprehensive plan;



c)   the use does not have an undue adverse impact on governmental
facilities, utilities, services or existing or proposed improvements;



d)   the use is consistent with the city's water resources management plan;



e)   the use is in compliance with the performance standards specified in
section 300.28 of this ordinance; and



f)   the use does not have an undue adverse impact on the public health,
safety or welfare.



3.  Specific standards in the B-1, Office Business District.



In addition to the standards specified in subdivision 2, no conditional use
permit shall be granted unless the city council determines that each of the
following specific standards will be met.



a)   Business service uses normally associated with office developments
and containing limited retail activity:



   1)   shall not result in any exterior building modifications,
including truck docks, separate entrances, freestanding signs or overnight
truck parking; and



   2)   shall not exceed more than 25 percent of the gross floor area.



b)   Residential dwelling units:



   1)   building and site design shall provide a quality residential
environment which is compatible with the permitted use;



   2)   residential uses must be within an existing building or
constructed as part of a mixed use development;



   3)   at least two off-street parking spaces must be provided for the
dwelling unit, with such parking to be in a garage, carport or on a paved
area specifically intended for that purpose, but not within a required
turnaround;



   4)   the dwelling unit must be in compliance with all applicable
building, housing, electrical, plumbing, heating and related city codes;



   5)   the use will be permitted only where the dwelling unit will not
have an undue adverse impact on adjacent properties and where there will not
be a substantial alteration of the neighborhood character; and



   6)   the city may require buffering or screening if needed.



c)   Restaurants and cafeterias incorporated within a principal structure
and oriented predominantly towards serving the needs of employees of the
surrounding area but excluding drive-up and exterior walk-up facilities:



   1)   only wall mounted signs, subject to the limitations of section
325 of the code of city ordinances, shall be permitted;



   2)   shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area or 3,000
square feet, whichever is less;



   3)   parking and vehicular circulation shall be in compliance with
the requirements of section 300.28 of this ordinance and shall be adequate to
accommodate the restaurant;



   4)   shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated that
operation will not significantly lower the existing level of service as
defined by the institute of traffic engineers on streets and intersections;
and



   5)   hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.



d)   Storage, assembly or servicing incidental to the principal use:



   1)   shall not require any exterior modifications to the structure.



e)   Hospitals and medical clinics:



   1)   shall not be adjacent to low density residential areas;



   2)   site shall have direct access to collector or arterial street
as defined in the comprehensive plan; and



   3)   emergency vehicle access shall not be adjacent to or located
across a street from any residential use.



f)   Minor manufacturing or assembly incidental to the principal use:



   1)   shall be no outside storage of materials or trucks;



   2)   truck deliveries shall only be permitted when it is evident
that they will not detract from the site or adjoining residential areas; and



   3)   shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area.



g)   Heliports:



   1)   shall conform to all applicable federal aviation administration
regulations;



   2)   shall establish and utilize approach and departure routes over
non-residential areas to the maximum extent possible;



   3)   hours of operation limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
inclusive, excluding emergencies;



   4)   shall not be located within 500 feet of residential areas; and



   5)   shall be provided with a dust free landing pad.



h)   Hotels and motels:



   1)   shall not be located adjacent to any low density residential
parcels as identified in the comprehensive plan;



   2)   shall be developed to serve primarily the office district in
which the use is located; and



   3)   shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated that
operation will not significantly lower the existing level of service as
defined by the institute of traffic engineers on streets and intersections.



i)   Financial institutions, with or without drive-up facilities: 
drive-through facilities and stacking areas shall be subject to the following
requirements:



   1)   shall not be located adjacent to any residential lot lines;



   2)   shall be provided with a suitable visual screen from adjacent
properties;



   3)   stacking for a minimum of six cars per aisle shall be provided
within applicable parking lot setbacks; and



   4)   shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated that
operation will not significantly lower the existing level of service as
defined by the institute of traffic engineers on streets and intersections.



j)   Licensed day care facilities:



   1)   shall have loading and drop-off points designed to avoid
interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements;



   2)   outdoor play areas shall be located and designed in a manner
which mitigates visual and noise impacts on adjoining residential areas;



   3)   one parking space for each six children based on the licensed
capacity of the center; and



   4)   shall obtain all applicable state, county and city licenses.



k)   Cemeteries:



   1)   minimum lot size of five acres;



   2)   located in proximity to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



   3)   direct views from all adjoining residential parcels shall be
buffered by appropriate means; and



   4)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



l)   Marinas:



   1)   minimum lot size of two acres;



   2)   located in proximity to a collector or arterial roadway as
identified in the comprehensive plan or otherwise located so that access can
be provided without conducting significant traffic on local residential
streets;



   3)   direct views from all adjoining areas shall be screened, with
particular attention to screening exterior storage;



   4)   approval by city fire marshal and by all governmental agencies
having jurisdiction over adjacent body of water; and



   5)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



m)   Public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment:



   1)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance.



n)   Telecommunications facilities are subject to the provisions of
Section 300.34.



o)   Utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, transmission lines that are not
subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act, and
substations and other related facilities:



   Phase I (Application for Conditional Use Permit):



   1)   The applicant must first participate in a task force study with
city staff. The task force may also include landowners representing
residential interests that may be affected. The task force will review
alternatives for the proposed location. The applicant must submit an
alternatives analysis to the task force that includes:



      a.   documentation demonstrating the need and purpose for such
a facility so that alternatives to the facility can be adequately assessed;



      b.   all of the alternatives considered by the applicant;



      c.   alternative locations;



      d.   a “no-build” alternative that discusses measures that
could be taken in an attempt to meet the documented need without construction
of the facility; and



      e.   designation of the applicant's preferred location.



   2)   The city may retain an independent technical expert paid for by
the applicant to assist the task force. The expert must be acceptable to the
applicant, who may not unreasonably withhold this acceptance. The applicant
will have five business days to reject the city's selected expert after
receiving notice from the city. If the applicant does not reject the expert
within that time, the expert will be deemed to be acceptable. The task force
will conduct an analysis of the alternatives and present its report to the
city council. The council will narrow the alternatives to two for each
facility. One of those alternatives may be a no-build alternative.



   3)   The applicant will then submit an application for a conditional
use permit with the following information for each alternative selected by
the city council:



      a.   the cost;



      b.   the amount of vegetation that would be removed or damaged;



      c.   for an electrical transmission line or substation, a
summary of current research regarding the health effects of EMF levels,
conducted by health and scientific professionals, including those who do and
do not receive utility sponsorship;



      d.   for an electrical transmission line or substation, EMF
levels under maximum and average anticipated loading at the base of the
utility poles, underneath the wires between the poles, at ground level above
underground wires, at the edge of the property line, at the edge of the
closest habitable building, and at the point above ground where there would
be the greatest EMF level;



      e.   for an electrical transmission line or substation,
reasonable and prudent measures to minimize EMF levels along all alternative
routes; and



      f.   depictions of the views of the proposed facility, if
above ground, from at least two directions selected by city staff.



   4)   All alternative routes for transmission lines must comply with
the following unless the applicant shows that this is not reasonable or
prudent:



      a.   the routes must be on or along corridors presently used
for public roads, public trails, railroads, or above-ground utilities, or on
corridors which were previously used for such purposes and which are being
retained for future public or utility purposes;



      b.   arterial or collector streets must be used instead of
local roadways, except that local roadways may be used where above-ground
electrical lines already exist; and



      c.   platted utility easements in residential zones which do
not abut public roads or roadway easements may not be used, unless the lines
are placed underground.



   5)   After receiving a complete application, the planning commission
must hold a public hearing on the application. At least 10 days before this
hearing, the city must mail notice of the hearing to all owners of property
wholly or partially within a 400-foot radius of any portion of the
alternative locations to be presented to the planning commission.



   6)   The planning commission will recommend a preferred alternative
to the city council. The city council will select an alternative for each
facility by a majority vote of the members present. The planning commission
and council may impose reasonable conditions as part of the approval to
protect adjacent property and people.



   7)   In making their decisions, the planning commission and city
council must consider the following factors:



      a.   the potential adverse aesthetic, economic, environmental,
social, health, and safety impacts on adjacent properties or people;



      b.   the potential interference with public use of public
property;



      c.   the applicant's need to adequately and reliably serve
customers within the relevant service area now and in the foreseeable future;



      d.   compliance with the requirements in subparagraph 4;



      e.   cost; and



      f.   the purposes in section 300.01 and the general standards
in section 300.16, subd. 2 and section 300.21, subd. 2.



   8)   The applicant may notify the city and request selection of a
different alternative after the council's action if the applicant believes
that it cannot use the selected alternative because of a reason that was
beyond its own control and not apparent during the selection process. The
council will choose a different alternative if it finds that the applicant is
prevented from the using the selected location.



   Phase II (Site Plan Review):



   9)   The applicant must apply for site plan approval after receiving
the conditional use permit and before beginning construction. At the
applicant’s request, the city council may choose to consider the site plan
at the time of the conditional use permit. The application must comply with
the conditions specified in paragraphs (9) through (13). The applicant must
obtain sufficient interest in the property needed for that alternative before
applying for the approval. The city planner must reject an application for a
location other than the selected alternative, and it will not be considered.



   10)   The applicant must submit a landscape plan prepared by a
registered landscape architect. The plan must be designed to mitigate the
amount of trees removed for the facility and must minimize the visual impact
on abutting properties caused by the facility. The landscape plan will be
subject to review and approval by the city pursuant to section 300.27, subd.
14 through subd. 19 of this code, except the minimum landscape requirements
in subd. 15(a). The applicant must submit financial security acceptable to
the city to ensure compliance and must install and maintain the landscaping
in compliance with those code provisions and the plan as approved by the
city. With the concurrence of the abutting property owner, the landscape plan
may include plantings on abutting property. In that case, the applicant will
be responsible for installation, and the abutting property owner will be
responsible for the maintenance of the landscaping.



   11)   The applicant must design the facility to minimize its visual
impact. The applicant must submit configuration, material and color options
that are technically feasible. The city may require the applicant to design
the facility in a manner that reduces the visual impact of the project,
including regulating the height and spacing of utility poles. Utility poles
may not exceed 80 feet in height, except when needed to cross a major roadway
such as a freeway.



   12)   The facility must not interfere with the use of public
right-of-way, including use for vehicular and pedestrian travel, snow
storage, and lateral support.



   13)   The applicant and any subsequent owner must continually
maintain the facility in good condition, including repainting or restaining
deteriorated surface finishes, securing poles and guy wires to the ground,
and replacing poles that are in a deteriorated condition.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2014-07,
adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord.
2011-02, adopted April 18, 2011)



4.  Specific Standards in B-2, Limited Business District.



In addition to the standards specified in subdivision 2, no conditional use
permit shall be granted unless the city council determines that each of the
following specific standards will be met.



a)   Outside storage, display, sales or servicing:



   1)   shall be allowed for periods not exceeding 20 days per year and
shall include only items sold on the premises;



   2)   screening shall be provided from residential and office
business property;



   3)   no public address system shall be audible from any residential
property;



   4)   site shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion;



   5)   no uses shall be permitted in required parking or building
setback areas; and



   6)   shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any residential
parcel.



b)   Service stations and other automobile related uses having service
bays:



   1)   no vehicles which are unlicensed and inoperable shall be stored
on premises except in appropriately designed and screened storage areas;



   2)   all repair, assembly, disassembly and maintenance of vehicles
shall occur within closed buildings except minor maintenance, including tire
inflation, adding oil and wiper replacement;



   3)   no public address system shall be audible from any residential
parcel;



   4)   stacking for gas pumps shall be provided for at least one car
beyond the pump island in each direction in which access can be gained to the
pump.  The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking areas and shall not be permitted in any
public right-of-way, private access easement or within the required parking
setback;



   5)   no sales, storage or display of used automobiles, except when a
conditional use permit is approved allowing automobile, truck, trailer or
boat sales or rentals;



   6)   shall not be located within 100 feet of any low density
residential parcel or adjacent to medium or high density residential parcels,
as designated in the city's land use plan.  The city may reduce separation
requirements if the following are provided:



      a.   landscaping and berming to shield the auto service use;



      b.   parking lots are not located in proximity to residential
uses; and



      c.   lighting plans which are unobtrusive to surrounding
residential uses;



   7)   all canopy lighting shall be recessed lighting, flush mounted
with canopy ceiling and having a flat glass lens; and



   8)   canopies shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property
lines, but in no case shall the setbacks be less than 30 feet from land that
the city’s land use plan designates for residential use.



c)   Non-service station retail facilities having gasoline pumps:



   1)   no vehicles which are unlicensed and inoperable shall be stored
on premises;



   2)   no repair, assembly or disassembly of vehicles;



   3)   gasoline pumps, stacking lanes or access drives shall not be
located adjacent to low density residential properties unless separated from
the low density property by the principal structure or shall be screened from
views from mid or high density residential parcels, as designated in the
city's land use plan;



   4)   no public address system shall be audible from any residential
parcel;



   5)   stacking for gas pumps shall be provided for at least one car
beyond the pump island in each direction in which access can be gained to the
pump.  The required stacking shall not interfere with internal circulation
patterns or with designated parking areas and shall not be permitted in any
public right-of-way, private access easement or within the required parking
setback;



   6)   no sales, storage or display of used automobiles;



   7)   shall be screened from adjacent residential areas;



   8)   all canopy lighting shall be recessed lighting, flush mounted
with canopy ceiling and having a flat glass lens; and



   9)   canopies shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property
lines, but in no case shall the setbacks be less than 30 feet from land that
the city’s land use plan designates for residential use.



d)   Uses having a drive-up window:



   1)   drive-up windows and stacking areas shall not be located
adjacent to any residential parcel;



   2)   stacking areas shall provide for a minimum of six cars per
aisle; and



   3)   public address system shall not be audible from any residential
parcel.



e)   Storage, assembly or servicing related to the permitted use and
occupying between 10 and 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal
structure:



   1)   the building and site shall maintain a predominantly commercial
character;



   2)   no exterior storage shall be permitted;



   3)   no overnight parking of trucks on site; and



   4)   truck loading areas shall be fully screened and not located
adjacent to any residential lot line.



f)   Fast food restaurants with or without drive-up facilities, except
those located in community or regional shopping centers:



   1)   shall be located only on sites having direct access to minor
arterial streets or service roads;



   2)   public address systems shall not be audible from any
residential parcel;



   3)   stacking for a minimum of six cars per aisle shall be provided
within applicable parking lot setbacks;



   4)   shall not be permitted when traffic studies indicate
significant impacts on the levels of service as defined by the institute of
traffic engineers of adjacent streets and intersections; and



   5)   building shall be set back at least 100 feet and screened from
any adjacent property designated in the comprehensive plan for residential
use.



g)   Auto, truck, trailer or boat sales or rentals:



   1)   no vehicles that are unlicensed or inoperative, or both shall
be stored on the premises, unless they are being repaired and are kept in a
closed building;



   2)   all repair, assembly, disassembly or maintenance of vehicles
shall occur within a closed building, except minor maintenance, which
includes tire inflation, adding oil or wiper replacement;



   3)   no outside storage or display without a separate conditional
use permit, except automobiles, trucks, trailers or boats for sale or rent;



   4)   no public address system shall be audible from residential
property;



   5)   storage or display areas must be landscaped as required by the
parking lot landscaping provisions of section 300.27, subdivision 13;



   6)   the minimum required parking setback shall apply to any
automobile, truck, trailer or boat storage, display or waiting areas;



   7)   no test driving of vehicles on local residential streets;



   8)   shall be subject to sign covenants approved by the city;



   9)   the outdoor storage area, display area and building shall be at
least 100 feet from any residential zoning district and must include
landscaping as required by the city to screen the use from residential
zones.  The city may reduce the separation and landscaping requirements if
the following are provided:



      a)   The trucks are fully screened by the use of berming,
fencing or other means approved by the city.  The screen must be, at
minimum, equal to the height of the tallest trailer or vehicle; and



      b)   The principal structure must be between a residential
zone and the drop-off and pick-up areas when drop-off or pick-up activities,
or both, occur between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   10)   automobiles, trucks, trailers or boats must only be parked on
paved and striped parking spaces in a location approved by the city, but must
not be parked on required parking spaces;



   11)   must be accessory to another use on the same lot in the B-2
zones.  The storage area, drop-off/pick-up area, building area and other
areas used as part of the sales or rental operation must not exceed 25
percent of the lot area and must meet the standards established in section
300.27, subdivision 5, site and building plan review;



   12)   all vehicle dealers shall be licensed by the state.



   13)   must be located and designed so as not to interfere with
internal/external pedestrian and vehicular circulation.  A traffic study may
be necessary to determine traffic impacts; and



   14)   must not be located to obstruct parking spaces.  Parking
spaces may be removed for the use only if parking requirements specified in
section 300.28 are met.



h)   Theaters:



   1)   for theaters located within shopping centers or otherwise
utilizing joint parking arrangement, the applicant shall submit an analysis
of parking demand versus availability for review and approval by staff. 
Additional parking may be required based on this analysis;



   2)   for theaters located within existing structures, the city may
require the installation of appropriate building modifications to provide 
adequate pedestrian and vehicle access; and



   3)   interior and free standing theaters shall only be permitted
when it can be demonstrated that vehicular ingress and egress may be
accomplished without inducing undue traffic problems on area roadways.



i)   Restaurants having on-sale intoxicating liquor or dance hall licenses:



   1)   parking shall be in compliance with the requirements of section
300.28 of this ordinance;



   2)   shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated that
operation will not significantly lower the existing level of service as
defined by  the Institute of Traffic Engineers on streets and intersections;
and



   3)   shall not be located within 100 feet of any low density
residential parcel or adjacent to medium or high density residential
parcels.  The city may reduce separation requirements if the following are
provided:



      a.   landscaping and berming to shield the restaurant use;



      b.   parking lots not located in proximity to residential
uses; and



      c.   lighting plans which are unobtrusive to surrounding uses.



j)   Licensed day care facilities; the same standards as specified in
subdivision 3(j)(1) through (4), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



k)   Hospitals and medical clinics: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 3(e)(1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



l)   Cemeteries: the same standards as specified in subdivision 3(k)(1)
through (4), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



m)   Marinas: the same standards as specified in subdivision 3(l)(1)
through (5), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



n)   Public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment: the same standard as specified in
subdivision 3(m) of this section shall apply.



o)   Telecommunications facilities are subject to the provisions of
Section 300.34.



p)   Accessory sidewalk cafes and outdoor eating areas:



   1)   shall be located in a controlled or cordoned area with at least
one opening to an acceptable pedestrian walk.  When a liquor license is
involved, an enclosure is required and the enclosure shall not be
interrupted; access shall be only through the principal building;



   2)   shall not be permitted within 200 feet of any residential
parcel and shall be separated from residential parcels by the principal
structure or other method of screening acceptable to the city;



   3)   shall be located and designed so as not to interfere with
pedestrian and vehicular circulation;



   4)   shall not be located to obstruct parking spaces.  Parking
spaces may be removed for the use only if parking requirements specified in
section 300.28 are met;



   5)   shall be located adjacent to an entrance to the principal use;



   6)   shall be equipped with refuse containers and periodically
patrolled for litter pick-up;



   7)   shall not have speakers or audio equipment which is audible
from adjacent parcels; and



   8)   shall be located in compliance with building setback
requirements.



q)   Residential dwelling units: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 3(b)(1) through (6), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



r)   Utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act:
the same standards as specified in subdivision 4(1) through (19), inclusive,
of this section shall apply.



s)   Microbreweries:



   1)   parking requirements:



      a.   microbrewery: one parking space for each 1000 square feet
of floor area.



      b.   tap room: one parking space for each 50 square feet of
floor area.



   2)   shall have parking and vehicular circulation in compliance with
the requirements of section 300.28 of this code and which items must be
adequate to accommodate the restaurant; and



   3)   shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated that
operation will not significantly lower the existing level of service as
defined by the Institute of traffic engineers on the roadway system.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-07, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2012-07,
adopted June 25, 2012, Ord. 2011-19, adopted August 22, 2011; amended by Ord.
2011-02, adopted April 18, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-09, adopted April 4,
2005)



5.  Specific Standards in B-3, General Business District.



In addition to the standards specified in subdivision 2, no conditional use
permit shall be granted unless the city council determines that each of the
specific standards contained in this subdivision will be met.



a)   Outside storage, display, sales or servicing: the same standards as
specified in subdivision 4(a)(1) through (6), inclusive, of this section
shall apply.



b)   Service stations and other automobile related uses having service
bays: the same standards as specified in subdivision 4(b)(1) through (8),
inclusive, of this section shall apply.



c)   Non-service station retail facilities having gasoline pumps: the same
standards as specified in subdivision 4(c)(1) through (9), inclusive, of this
section shall apply.



d)   Uses having a drive-up window: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 4(d)(1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



e)   Storage, assembly or servicing related to the permitted use occupying
between 10 and 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure:
the same standards as specified in subdivision 4(e)(1) through (4),
inclusive, of this section shall apply.



f)   Fast food restaurants with or without drive-up facilities, except
those located in community or regional shopping centers: the same standards
as specified in subdivision 4(f)(1) through (4), inclusive, of this section
shall apply.



g)   Auto, truck or boat sales: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 4(g)(1) through (10), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



h)   Theaters: the same standards as specified in subdivision 4(h)(1)
through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



i)   Restaurants having on-sale intoxicating liquor or dance hall
licenses: the same standards as specified in subdivision 4(i)(1)  through
(3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



j)   Licensed day care facilities: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 4(j)(1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



k)   Hospitals and medical clinics: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 3(e)(1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



l)   Cemeteries: the same standards as specified in subdivision 3(k)(1)
through (4), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



m)   Marinas: the same standards as specified in subdivision 3(l)(1)
through (5), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



n)   Public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment: the same standard as specified in
subdivision 3(m) of this section shall apply.



o)   Telecommunication facilities are subject to the provisions of section
300.34.



p)   Accessory sidewalk cafes and outdoor eating areas: the same standards
as specified in subdivision 4(r)(1) through (8), inclusive, of this section
shall apply.



q)   Residential dwelling units: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 3(b)(1) through (6), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



r)   Utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act:
the same standards as specified in subdivision 4(1) through (19), inclusive,
of this section shall apply.



s)   Microbreweries: the same standards as specified in subdivision
4(s)(1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-07, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2011-19,
adopted August 22, 2011)



6.  Specific Standards in I-1 Industrial District.



In addition to the standards specified in subdivision 2, no conditional use
permit shall be granted unless the city council determines that each of the
following standards will be met:



a)   Heliports: the same standards as specified in subdivision 3(g)(1)
through (5), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



b)   Retail or service uses occupying between 25 and 50 percent of the
gross area of the principal structure:



   1)   shall be no exterior modifications to the building;



   2)   shall have no outside storage or display and no accessory
structures; and



   3)   shall have sufficient parking, consistent with the standards
specified in section 300.28 of this ordinance.



c)   Cemeteries: the same standards as specified in subdivision 3(k)(1)
through (4), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



d)   Marinas: the same standards as specified in subdivision 3(l)(1)
through (5), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



e)   Public buildings or facilities and cabinets larger than 150 cubic
feet that hold utility equipment: the same standard as specified in
subdivision 3(m) of this section shall apply.



f)   Vehicle towing businesses:



   1)   there shall be no impound lot on the proposed location;



   2)   no exterior storage of unlicensed and inoperative vehicles;



   3)   any exterior storage of towed vehicles or vehicles awaiting
service shall be screened from view of adjacent properties;



   4)   shall not be located within 200 feet of residential zoning
district; and



   5)   hours of operation may be limited by the city council if deemed
appropriate to protect residential properties in the area from adverse
impacts.



g)   Auto body repair and painting businesses:



   1)   shall not be located within 200 feet of any residential zoning
district;



   2)   shall not have any exterior storage of unlicensed or inoperable
vehicles;



   3)   shall have all repair activity take place within the principal
building; and



   4)   shall have all vehicles scheduled for repair parked in the
principal building or completely screened from view of adjacent properties.



h)   Telecommunication facilities are subject to the provisions of Section
300.34.



i)   Waste transfer facilities:



   1)   site and building plan subject to review pursuant to section
300.27 of this ordinance;



   2)   minimum site area shall be 10 acres;



   3)   the exterior surfaces of all buildings erected on the property
shall be faced with brick, stone, architectural concrete masonry units, or an
equivalent approved by the city;



   4)   exterior loading docks shall not be on any street frontage.
Handling all material brought to or removed from the site shall be on those
sides of the building that do not face a street or proposed street(s);



   5)   parking areas, driveways, circulation and stacking lanes shall
be designed, surfaced and curbed in accordance with city code;



   6)   the horizontal stacking of trucks and other equipment shall
occur on-site and off public rights-of-way;



   7)   an on-site stormwater collection system shall be installed to
collect and treat stormwater prior to release into the city's collection
system or natural drainageway;



   8)   the principal building structure shall maintain a 100 foot
setback from stormwater holding areas, natural drainage facilities, wetlands,
shorelands and floodplains;



   9)   all structures shall maintain a 500 foot setback from any
residential zoning district and all parking and loading areas and driveway
lanes shall maintain a 100 foot setback from any residential area;



   10)   all trucks and equipment traveling to or away from the site,
except for personal vehicles, shall be restricted to designated routes
established by the city. The operator of any transfer station shall be
responsible for notifying truck operators of the route designation by the
city. The city will not revoke a conditional use permit granted under this
subsection for off-site violations beyond the control of the transfer station
operator or owner;



   11)   access routes shall utilize arterial roadways;



   12)   no loading, unloading, cleaning of vehicles, equipment or
containers, shall occur outside of a fully enclosed structure;



   13)   on-site storage or handling of hazardous waste materials as
defined by state law is prohibited. Hazardous waste materials inadvertently
delivered to the facility shall be promptly removed from the site in
accordance with county and state requirements. Special programs for the
collection of residential hazardous waste may be conducted within the
facility with prior city approval;



   14)   there shall be no storage of solid waste outside of an
enclosed structure;



   15)   all parking, vehicular and operational use areas shall be
screened from public streets and adjacent properties;



   16)   all trucks and other operations equipment shall be parked in a
designated screened area of the site;



   17)   the emission of noxious matter shall be controlled so that no
concentration of such matter, at or beyond the lot line, will be detrimental
to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort or general welfare or cause
damage to property. Noxious matter means any solid, liquid or gaseous
material including but not limited to gases, vapors, odor, dusts, fumes,
mists, or combinations thereof, the emission of which does not comply with
federal or state environmental laws and standards. The operator of the
facility shall comply with a regular inspection schedule as approved by the
city sanitarian and shall submit quarterly reports of such inspections to the
city sanitarian;



   18)   air quality and the generation of dust or other particulates
related to transfer station operations, including vehicle emissions, shall be
periodically monitored. The operator of the facility shall be responsible for
monitoring the site quarterly, or more frequently as determined by the city
sanitarian and violations of state standards shall be abated;



   19)   the operator of the solid waste transfer station shall
cooperate with the city in order to facilitate periodic city inspections of
the facility as the city may deem necessary;



   20)   a pest control plan shall be implemented, that is acceptable
to the city sanitarian including, but not limited to, a contract with a
licensed pest control operator for regular service;



   21)   hours of operation shall not exceed the following: 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday for commercial haulers; 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. Monday through Friday for recycling center; 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Saturdays for all uses;



   22)   the operator of the site must ensure that the site and
operation is in constant compliance with all city ordinances;



   23)   the applicant shall obtain all applicable federal, state,
county, watershed district and city permits; and



   24)   other conditions as deemed necessary by the city to ensure
public health, safety and welfare.



j)   Utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines which
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act:
the same standards as specified in subdivision 4(1) through (19), inclusive,
of this section shall apply.



k)   Microbreweries: the same standards as specified in subdivision
4(s)(1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-07, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2011-19,
adopted August 22, 2011; amended by Ord. #2002-08, adopted April 22, 2002;
amended by Ord. #2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002; amended by Ord. #2000-19,
adopted October 16, 2000; amended by Ord. #1999-25, adopted October 11, 1999)



SECTION 300.22.  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



1. Purpose.



The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) zoning district is to
provide a district that grants flexibility from certain subdivision and
zoning regulations in order to realize public benefits that may not otherwise
be achieved through non-PUD development.



2. Applicability.



PUD zoning may be considered by the city when it would result in one of the
following public benefits:



a)   Greater preservation of existing natural resources, in number or
quality,  than would otherwise be provided under non-PUD development;



b)   Provision of affordable housing;



c)   Provision of a housing type or target housing price that is desirable
to the city;



d)   A mix of land use types;



e)   Development that is compatible with existing, surrounding development
type and intensity that is no longer allowed in other existing zoning
districts; or



f)   Greater energy conservation through building and site design than
would otherwise be achieved under non-PUD development;



g)   Other public benefits as recognized by the city.



3. Uses.



Within the PUD district all uses allowed as permitted and accessory uses
within any other zoning districts are allowed. All uses allowed by
conditional use permit within any other district are allowed by conditional
use permit. Uses must be reviewed for compliance with the applicable
conditional use permit standards and site and building plan standards
specified within city code.



4.   General Standards.



A PUD may be approved when the following general standards are met:



a)   The PUD results in at least one of the public benefits as outlined in
section 2 of this ordinance;



b)   The PUD is consistent with and advances the community-wide goals of
the comprehensive plan; and



c)   The PUD is appropriately integrated into existing and proposed
surrounding development. This does not mean the PUD reflects the specific
standards of the surrounding area such as lot size, density, setbacks, or
design. While integration may be achieved through such standards, it may also
be achieved through continuation of existing land use types, architectural
transitions, landscape buffering, or other means.



5.   Specific Standards.



Approval of a PUD may be conditioned upon compliance with the following
specific standards:



a)   If a PUD includes provision of affordable housing, a specific housing
type, or target housing price, details associated with the housing -
including number of units, unit size, and price - must be documented in a
legally-binding agreement approved by the city and recorded against the
properties within the PUD.



b)   If a PUD includes preservation of natural resources, those resources
must be permanently protected through a conservation easement or other
legally-binding agreement approved by the city and recorded against the
properties with the PUD.



c)   A homeowners association must be established where appropriate to
ensure on-going maintenance of infrastructure and public spaces, required
restoration and management of natural areas, or other actions and activities
specific to the PUD.



6.   Flexible Guidelines



a)   The standards outlined in the following city code sections serve as
development guidelines for structures within PUDs:



 

PUD Land Use
 
Development Guidelines


low-density residential
 
R-1, section 300.10


medium-density residential
 
R-3, section 300.12


high-density residential
 
R-5, section 300.14


commercial
 
B-2, section 300.18



 



b)   The standards outlined in section 300.28 subdivision 12 of this
ordinance serve as guidelines for parking and loading requirements within
PUDs.



c)   The standards outlined in section 400 of the ordinance serve as
guidelines for the design of lots and public streets within PUDs.



d)   The aforementioned are guidelines only and not development standards.



7.   Review Process.



a)   Rezoning and Master Development Plan Review



   1)   As with any rezoning, the decision to rezone a property to
PUD  is a policy decision that the city council may make in its legislative
capacity. In evaluating a proposal to rezone a property to PUD, the council
will consider its compliance with the standards outlined in subdivisions 4
and 5 of this ordinance.



   2)   The process to rezone a property to PUD is generally subject to
the procedures outlined in section 300.09 of this ordinance for a zoning map
amendment, except that:



      a.   Prior to concept plan review or introduction of the
rezoning ordinance, city staff will establish a public hearing notification
area. This area will include all properties located wholly or partially
within 400 feet of the property proposed to be rezoned PUD and further
extended to existing natural or manmade boundaries such as wetlands, creeks,
lakes, roadways, intersections, railroads or different land use
classifications.



      b.   At the time of concept plan review or ordinance
introduction, the council will determine whether the notification area is
appropriate. The council may require that the area be enlarged or retracted
prior to the public hearing before the planning commission. In no case will
the notification area be less than 400 feet.



      c.   At least 10 days prior to the public hearing before the
planning commission, notice regarding the rezoning will be published in the
official newspaper and sent by mail to the notification area as approved by
the council.



   3)   An application to rezone a property to PUD must be accompanied
by an application for master development plan review. The process to review
and approve a master development plan is subject to the procedures outlined
in section 300.09 of this ordinance for a zoning map amendment.



      a.   A master development plan must include:



         1.   type of land use;



         2.   building location;



         3.   building renderings or elevations;



         4.   grading and tree removal plan;



         5.   stormwater management plan;



         6.   street and utility plan, including locations and
sizes; and



         7.   landscape plan.



   4)   Approval of the master development plan constitutes approval of
the items outlined above.



   5)   An approved master development plan is the legal control
governing development of property within a PUD.



   6)   The city council may attach conditions to a master development
plan approval as it determines necessary or convenient to accomplish the
purposes of the PUD.



b)   Site and Building Plan Review Process



   1)   Site and building plan review and approval of final site and
building plans is subject to the procedures outlined in section 300.27 of
this ordinance.



   2)   Final site and building plans must be in substantial compliance
with the approved master development plan.



c)   Applicants may combine master development plan review and site and
building plan review. In such cases, all information required for both
processes must be submitted simultaneously.



d)   The city council may attach conditions to a final site and building
plan approval as it determines necessary or convenient to accomplish the
purposes of the PUD.



8. Term of Approval.



a)   If an application for final site and building plan approval is not
made by December 31 of the year following approval of a rezoning to PUD, or
of any extension granted by the city, the city council may rezone the
property to its original zoning classification.



b)   If construction has not started by December 31 of the year following
approval of final site and building plans, or of any extension granted by
city, the city council may rezone the property to its original zoning
classification.



c)   In reviewing extension requests, the city will consider the following:



   1)   whether there have been changes to city code or policy that
would affect the previous approval; and



   2)   whether an extension would adversely affect the neighboring
property owners.



9. Amendments.



a)   A major amendment to an approved master development plan may be
approved by the city council after review by the planning commission.  The
process to review and approve a major amendment is subject to the procedures
outlined in section 300.09 of this ordinance for a zoning map amendment. A
major amendment is any amendment that:



   1)   substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas
or roads;



   2)   increases or decreases the number of residential dwelling units
by more than 5 percent;



   3)   increases the gross floor area of non-residential buildings by
more than 5 percent or increases the gross floor area of any individual
building by more than 10 percent;



   4)   increases the number of stories of any building;



   5)   increases the square-footage of grading on any individual lot
by more than 1,000 square feet;



   6)   decreases the amount of open space by more than 5 percent or
alters it in such a way as to change its original design or intended use; or



   7)   creates non-compliance with any special condition attached to
the master development plan.



b)   Any other amendment may be made through review and approval by a 
majority vote of the planning commission.



10.  Exceptions.



This section does not apply to any PUD or planned unit residential
development (PURD) that received preliminary or final approval by the city
council prior to the effective date of this ordinance unless requested by the
property owner and approved by the city council. An amendment of a previously
approved PUD or PURD is subject to this section.



(Section 300.22 was repealed and new section adopted May 19, 2014; amended by
Ord. 2008-25, adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. 2008-10, adopted March
24, 2008; amended by Ord. #2002-04, adopted February 11, 2002)



SECTION 300.23.  WETLANDS PROTECTION.



1.  Purpose and Intent.



a)    The purpose of this section is to recognize, preserve and protect
the environmental, aesthetic and hydrologic functions of the city's wetlands
by regulating the use of wetlands and their adjacent properties.  These
functions include, but are not limited to, sediment control, pollution
control, filtration, fish and wildlife habitat and aquifer recharge.



b)    The intent of this section is to protect wetlands to the maximum
extent possible while allowing a reasonable use of the property.  This
section adopts the regulations and standards of the Wetland Conservation Act
of 1991 (WCA), Laws of Minnesota 1991, chapter 354, as amended, and the rules
adopted pursuant to the WCA.  It also establishes a wetland overlay
district. This overlay district further regulates the underlying land use as
allowed by other districts or the WCA.



2.  Designation of Protected Wetlands and Exemptions.



a)   The wetlands protected and regulated by this Section are types 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 wetlands, as defined in circular 39, “Wetlands of the
United States”, 1971 edition, United States Department of the Interior. 
Protected wetlands are further generally defined as follows:



   Type 1 Seasonally Flooded Basins or Floodplains: Type 1 wetlands are
seasonally flooded basins or flats in which soil is covered with water or is
waterlogged during variable seasonal periods but usually is well-drained
during much of the growing season.  Type 1 wetlands are located in
depressions and in overflow bottom lands along water courses. Vegetation
varies greatly according to the season and duration of the flooding, and
includes bottom land hardwoods, as well as herbaceous plants.



   Type 2 Inland Fresh Meadow: Occurs along the shallow edges of lakes,
marshes and floodplains, or in perched depressions.  The soil is usually
without standing water during much of the growing season, but is waterlogged
within at least a few inches of the surface.  Vegetation includes grasses,
sedges, rushes and various herbaceous plants.



   Type 3 Inland Shallow Fresh Marsh: Soil is usually water logged during
the growing season, often covered with as much as six inches or more of
water.  Vegetation includes grasses, bulrushes, cattails, arrowheads,
smartweeds and other emergent aquatic vegetation.



   Type 4 Inland Deep Fresh Marsh: Soil covered with six inches to three
feet or more of water during growing season. Vegetation includes cattails,
reeds, bulrushes and wild rice.  Open water areas may contain pondweeds,
naiads, coontail, water milfoils and other submergent aquatic vegetation.



   Type 5 Inland Open Fresh Water: Water is usually less than 10 feet deep
and is fringed by a border of emergent vegetation. Vegetation includes
pondweeds, naiads, coontail, water milfoils and other submergent aquatic
vegetation.



   Type 6 Shrub Swamp: Occurs along sluggish streams or on floodplains.
The soil is usually waterlogged during the growing season, and is often
covered with as much as six inches of water. Vegetation includes alder,
willow and dogwood.



   Type 7 Wooded Swamp: Occurs along sluggish streams, on floodplains, on
flat perched depressions and in shallow lake basins. The soil is waterlogged
to within a few inches of its surface during the growing season and is often
covered with as much as one foot of water. Vegetation typical to this wetland
includes tamarack, white cedar, black spruce, balsam fir, red maple and black
ash.



   Type 8 Bog: Occurs along sluggish streams, on flat perched depressions
and shallow lake basins. The soil is waterlogged and supports a spongy
covering of mosses. Vegetation typical to this wetland type includes sphagnum
moss, heath shrubs and sedges. Minnesota bogs contain leatherleaf, Labrador
tea, cranberries and pitcher plants. Scattered stunted black spruce and
tamarack also are common features of bogs.



b)   Areas that exhibit wetland characteristics but were created for a
purpose other than to create a wetland are exempt from this section. This
includes areas such as storm water ponds, roadway ditches, or other areas
that receive artificial hydrology. The landowner has the responsibility to
prove by a preponderance of the evidence that an area is exempt under this
paragraph.



c)   The reconstruction and maintenance of existing public roads and
associated public utilities are exempt from this section 300.23 as long as
they comply with the WCA as approved by city staff.



(Amended by Ord. 2005-04, adopted March 2, 2015)



3.  Boundaries of the Wetland Overlay Districts.



This section establishes the presumptive wetland overlay districts.  These
districts are subject to additional requirements beyond those required by the
WCA.  The boundaries of the presumptive wetland overlay districts are
identified by government survey section and contour elevation above mean sea
level in Appendix A to this section.  The city's official wetland map
graphically shows these boundaries.



If a specific wetland delineation has been done under WCA rules, then the
boundaries of the wetland overlay district for that location will be as shown
in the delineation rather than the presumptive boundaries.  The city may
require wetland delineations to determine compliance with WCA rules and this
section 300.23; however, property owners may have wetland delineations done
for their properties on their own initiative.  The delineation must be done
by a professional wetland delineator according to WCA rules and be acceptable
to the city planner . Public waters and public water wetlands are included in
the overlay district.



4.  Interpretation of Wetlands Boundaries.



Whenever a delineated wetland boundary is disputed or uncertain, the city
planner or designee may convene the technical evaluation panel according to
WCA rules. The owner must have the delineated wetland boundary staked in the
field in order for the panel to evaluate the area. The technical evaluation
panel and city planner or designee may require additional information to
resolve the dispute or uncertainty.  No boundary change may be authorized on
the basis of fill that was placed on the site after the city designated the
area as part of the wetland overlay district.  Persons aggrieved by a
decision of the city planner, or designee may appeal the decision as provided
in section 300.03, subdivision 1 of this ordinance and the WCA rules as
applicable.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-04, adopted March 2, 2015)



5.  Wetland Buffer Areas.



a)   This subsection establishes requirements for wetland buffer areas
around protected type 2-8 wetlands. Buffer areas are necessary and beneficial
to maintain the health of wetlands. Buffer areas protect the edge of wetlands
from erosion while filtering sediment, chemicals and other nutrients from
runoff that drains into wetlands. Buffer areas can improve the biological
diversity and health of a wetland environment while reducing the adverse
impacts of human activities.



b)   Buffer areas regulated by this section are areas of vegetative cover
that are upland of the wetland edge, and that occur in a natural condition or
through restoration. Buffer areas consist of shrubbery and trees, and native
grasses or forbs or both that are not mowed, fertilized or manicured in any
manner.



c)   Wetland buffer areas must be created or existing buffer areas must be
maintained around all protected type 2-8 wetlands in the following situations:



   1)   when wetlands are required to be replaced or restored;



   2)   when new development occurs. For purposes of this subsection,
new development means:



      a)   any subdivision that creates a new lot that has no
principal use on it;



      b)   construction of a principal use on an existing vacant
parcel of land;



   3)   when redevelopment occurs. For purposes of this section
redevelopment means the reconstruction of the principal structure if it
includes the removal of the principal structure by more than 50 percent of
the square footage of the building footprint or an increase of the square
footage of the building footprint by more than 50 percent. This requirement
does not apply if construction is the result of more than 50 percent of the
building being damaged by an involuntary force, such as fire, wind, or
vandalism;



   4)   when the city requires a buffer as part of a variance,
expansion permit, conditional use permit, or a site plan review; or



   5)   on any preserve wetland when grading or construction is
proposed that requires a city permit and the proposed activity could
potentially impact the quality of the wetland by increasing hard surface run
off, altering existing drainage, or impacting an existing buffer.



d)   Buffer area widths will be based on the wetland classification in the
city's water resources management plan. The following are the required buffer
area widths:




Wetland Classification            Width of Buffer Area





                     From the Wetland Boundary





   Manage 2                  16.5 feet





   Manage 1                  25 feet




   Preserve                  50 feet



e)    In cases of new development or redevelopment the city may require
that vegetation in the wetland buffer be installed prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy. To ensure installation of the buffer the city
may require a cash escrow or letter of credit equal to 150 percent of the
cost to install the required buffer.



f)   The city may allow the disturbance of an existing buffer area during
the course of construction activity. This disturbance must be kept to a
minimum, soils must be decompacted to a level that will accommodate root
growth, and the buffer area must be re-established as required by the city.
The city will determine the amount of allowable disturbance. The city may
require a cash escrow or letter of credit equal to 150 percent of the cost to
re-establish the buffer to its original condition.



g)   The city may require buffer area planting and maintenance when the
city determines that there is inadequate vegetation in the buffer area to
meet the intent of this section. The city may require a cash escrow or letter
of credit equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost of the vegetation and
installation. The escrow or letter of credit must be valid for up to two
years and may be used by the city to replace any vegetation that dies.



h)   The affected property owner or homeowner association that is
responsible for the maintenance must:



   1)   maintain and repair damage to buffer areas from such activities
as mowing, cutting, grading or other prohibited activities, unless mowing is
approved by city staff as a buffer management strategy. Permission must be
obtained from the city before implementing buffer management strategies,
which may include mowing, burning, and the use of herbicides.



   2)   be responsible for maintaining only the permitted vegetation in
the buffer area and must remove all noxious weeds and invasive, non-native
species such as European buckthorn;



   3)   ensure that all soil surfaces in the buffer area are planted
with the permitted vegetation and that there is no open soil surface that may
result in erosion.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2011-30, adopted
December 19, 2011)



6.  Permitted Uses.



a)   Within the wetland overlay districts no land may be used except for
one or more of the following uses:



   1)   native wetland vegetation, provided that no change is made to
the ground elevation;



   2)   wildlife and nature preserves;



   3)   public overhead utility lines and poles that are less than two
feet in diameter;



   4)   docks and reasonable access to the wetland, poles, posts or
footings that are less than two feet in diameter to be used for boardwalks
and bridges, and pervious hiking, skiing and horseback riding trails that
comply with WCA standards. Pervious will mean an area where water is able to
infiltrate into the ground;



   5)   public and private flood control structures, ponding and
drainage facilities and associated accessory appurtenances;



   6)   environmental monitoring or control facilities, including those
related to water quality and wildlife regulation;



   7)   in wetlands where impervious, public trails exist, maintenance
of the trail will be allowed as long as there is not an increased impact to
the wetland.



b)   Within wetland buffer areas no land may be used except for one or
more of the following uses:



   1)   native vegetation, provided that no change is made to the
ground elevation;



   2)   wildlife and nature preserves;



   3)   docks and reasonable access to the wetland, poles, posts or
footings that are less than two feet in diameter to be used for boardwalks
and bridges, and pervious hiking, skiing and horseback riding trails.
Pervious will mean an area where water is able to infiltrate into the ground;



   4)   public and private flood control structures, ponding and
drainage facilities and associated accessory appurtenances;



   5)   environmental monitoring or control facilities, including those
related to water quality and wildlife regulation;



   6)   public overhead utility poles and lines that are less than two
feet in diameter, underground public utility lines and distribution
equipment, light poles, traffic signals, traffic regulatory signs, mailboxes
and other equipment that provides an essential public service;



   7)   fences;



   8)   retaining walls if the city determines that the retaining wall
will protect the wetland from existing conditions of erosion;



   9)   in wetland buffer areas where impervious, public trails exist,
maintenance of the trail will be allowed as long as there is not any
additional impact to the wetland buffer area.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-04, adopted March 2, 2015; amended by Ord. 2011-30,
adopted December 19, 2011)



7.  Conditional Uses.



Within the wetland overlay districts and the wetland buffer areas no land may
be used for the following except by conditional use permit and except in
conformance with the standards specified in subsection 8 of this section:



a)   private and public recreational uses, including golf courses,
impervious trails, picnic grounds and boat ramps;



b)   public utilities not permitted under subdivision 6 of this section,
including necessary structures;



c)   other non-structural facilities similar to those permitted by this
section which also meet the intent of this section, as determined by the
city; or



d)   public structures associated with recreational uses permitted by this
subsection or by subsection 6 of this section that are designed in an
environmentally sensitive manner and will withstand periodic flooding, except
for structures designed or used for habitation or the storage of equipment.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-04, adopted March 2, 2015)



8.  Standards for Wetlands Districts, Buffer Areas and Neighboring Lands.



The following standards apply to all land within the wetland overlay
districts, wetland buffer areas, and to neighboring lands:



a)   Protection of wetlands and wetland buffer areas.



   1)   Except as modified or regulated by the standards of this
subsection, all requirements of the underlying zoning district apply.



   2)   No structures are allowed in the wetland overlay districts, or
wetland buffer area except those allowed as of right or by conditional use
permit by subsections 6 or 7 of this section.



   3)   Activities including, but not limited to, building, paving,
mowing, cutting, filling, dumping, yard waste disposal or fertilizer
application are prohibited. Mowing may be permitted when approved by city
staff as a buffer management strategy. However, invasive non-native
vegetation, such as European buckthorn and noxious weeds, may be removed.



   4)   Before grading or construction near a wetland overlay district
or buffer area, the owner or contractor must place erosion control fencing on
the upland side of the perimeter of the wetland overlay district or wetland
buffer area, which ever is more restrictive, or as required by the city. This
fencing must remain in place until all development activities that may affect
the wetland and the wetland buffer area have been finished and adequate
vegetative cover has been established.



   5)   All structures must have a minimum basement floor elevation not
less than two feet above the 100-year flood elevation.



   6)   All hard surface runoff must be treated in accordance with the
requirements of the city and the appropriate watershed district.  Treatment
may include site retention, skimmers, weirs, bioretention or infiltration
basins, or sedimentation ponds of appropriate scale.  Structures and ponds
serving this purpose must be properly maintained and serviced by the property
owner.



   7)   Discharge into the wetlands must occur at a rate no greater
than allowed by the city engineer in accordance with the city's water
resources management plan.



b)   Setbacks.



   1)   All structures, except those permitted within the wetland
overlay districts, must be setback at least 35 feet from a wetland overlay
district and at least 10 feet from a required wetland buffer, whichever is
greater. The distance for a pool will be measured from the water's edge of
the pool. However, uncovered porches, decks, patios, sport courts, tennis
courts, pool aprons, above ground hot tubs not exceeding 120 square feet
stairways and walkways, as well as cantilevered building areas, porticos, and
similar features may extend up to 10 feet into the required setbacks but not
into buffer areas. For purposes of this section a pool apron is the hard
surface or decking material that is contiguous to the water's edge of the
pool.



   2)   Parking areas, roadways, driveway areas, trails and any
retaining wall if it is structurally integral to the construction of these
items must not be located within 20 feet of a wetland overlay district and
must be outside of any required buffer area.



   3)   A setback is not required from the wetland overlay district for
overhead public utility poles and lines that are less than two feet in
diameter, underground public utility lines and distribution equipment, light
poles, traffic signals, traffic regulatory signs, mailboxes, and other
equipment that provides an essential public service.



   4)   A setback is not required from the wetland overlay district for
fences.



   5)   Retaining walls may not be within 25 feet of a wetland unless
needed to control existing conditions of erosion as field verified by city
staff. In this instance the location of the retaining wall must be approved
by city staff.



   6)   An existing structure, driveway or parking area meeting the
required setback from a city-designated wetland boundary or buffer area is
considered a legal nonconforming development if a later wetland delineation
or implementation of a wetland buffer shows that the wetland or its buffer is
closer than the required setback.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-04, adopted March 2, 2015; amended by Ord. 2011-30,
adopted December 19, 2011)



9.  Removal of Lands from the Wetlands Overlay District.



a)   Removal of wetlands from a wetland overlay district requires a zoning
amendment. An amendment must be made pursuant to the provisions of section
300.09 of this ordinance and WCA replacement rules. This amendment must be
consistent with the purpose of this ordinance, the city's water resources
management plan and the goals and policies of the comprehensive plan. In
determining the appropriateness of a rezoning request, the city council will
consider the size of the wetland overlay district, the magnitude of the area
proposed for removal, the overall impact on the function and value of the
wetland, the hydrological and ecological effects and the type and function of
wetlands involved in order to provide the maximum feasible protection.



b)   Wetlands within an overlay district may only be removed according to
WCA rules and if at least an equal area of new wetland is created to
compensate for the wetland being filled. Unless otherwise approved by the
city council, compensatory wetland area must be provided within the same
subwatershed district as the wetland being altered, it must be located
outside of any public easement and it must not result in the loss of
regulated trees. The city may require cash escrow or letter of credit equal
to 150 percent of the cost to mitigate for the wetland.



c)   In addition to application requirements, the city may require
submission and approval of the following information:



   1)   a concept plan showing ultimate use of the property;



   2)   a grading plan with appropriate drainage calculations and
erosion controls prepared by a registered engineer;



   3)   a landscaping or revegetation plan;



   4)   such other information as may be necessary or convenient to
evaluate the proposed rezoning; and



   5)   a determination of the function and value of the wetland using
the most recent version of the Minnesota routine assessment method (MNRAM)
for evaluating wetland functions (MNRAM) or other approved assessment
methodology.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-04, adopted March 2, 2015; amended by Ord. 2011-30,
adopted December 19, 2011)



10.  Alteration of the Wetlands.



a)   Except as provided below, no alteration of land within a wetland
overlay district or a wetland buffer is allowed without a wetlands alteration
permit, subject to recommendation by the planning commission and approval of
the city council. The planning commission must hold a public hearing after
notifying the property owners within 400 feet of the proposed alteration.
Activities that constitute an alteration regulated by this section include
changes to the size, depth or contour of the wetlands or its buffer,
dredging, or alterations of wetlands or buffer vegetation.



b)   A wetland alteration permit is not required:



   1)   when a wetland district is rezoned to another zoning
classification;



   2)   to remove vegetation from the wetland or its buffer pursuant to
a restoration management plan approved by qualified city staff;



   3)    to alter vegetation in a type 1 wetland;



   4)   to plant native wetland vegetation;



   5)   to selectively clear or prune trees or vegetation that are
dead, diseased, noxious or similar hazards;



   6)   to remove vegetation in a contiguous width not to exceed ten
feet in order to install a dock or gain access to the wetland as permitted in
6(a) or 6(b) of this section and as approved by city staff;



   7)   to repair and maintain existing public facilities such as
ponds, trails, and utilities if the work does not result in an increased
impact to the wetland or its buffer; or



   8)   to remove sediment and debris from the wetland that has
resulted from erosion, public works projects, transportation projects or
other similar activities. The removal of sediment must not result in the
removal of hydric soil from the wetland basin and must be approved by city
staff.



c)   Alteration of land within a wetland overlay district will only be
allowed if the wetland and its buffer are provided in an amount compensatory
to that being altered. Unless otherwise approved by the city council,
compensatory wetland area and its buffer must be provided within the same
subwatershed district as the wetland being altered, it must be located
outside of any public easement and it must not result in the loss of
regulated trees. The city may require cash escrow or letter of credit equal
to 150 percent of the estimated cost to restore the wetland and its buffer.



d)   In determining the appropriateness of an alteration request, the city
council will consider the size of the total wetland district, the magnitude
of the area proposed for alteration, the impact on the overall function and
value of the wetland, the aesthetic, hydrological and ecological effect, the
type and function of wetlands involved, and such other factors as may be
appropriate in order to provide the maximum feasible protection to the
wetlands. Application for a wetlands alteration permit must be accompanied by
such information as required by the city, including:



   1)   a concept plan showing the ultimate use of the property;



   2)   a grading plan, with appropriate drainage calculations and
erosion controls prepared by a registered engineer;



   3)   a landscaping or revegetation plan;



   4)   such other information as may be necessary or convenient to
evaluate the proposed permit; and



   5)   a determination of the function and value of the wetland using
the most recent version of the Minnesota routine assessment method (MNRAM)
for evaluating wetland functions or other approved assessment methodology.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-04, adopted March 2, 2015; amended by Ord. 2011-30,
adopted December 19, 2011)



11.  Public Control of Wetlands.



a)   The city council may require that the owner of any property affected
by this ordinance must record wetland and buffer area easements or
restrictive covenants within the property's chain of title. These easements
or covenants must describe the boundaries of the wetland and buffer area and
prohibit any building, paving, mowing (unless approved as a management
strategy), cutting, filling, dumping, yard waste disposal or fertilizer
application within the wetland and the buffer area. The owner or developer
must record these easements or covenants with the final plat, with deeds from
a lot division or, if no subdivision is involved, before the city issues a
grading permit or building permit for an affected property. The applicant
must submit evidence that the easement or covenant has been submitted to the
county for recording.



b)   If the city council does not require an easement or covenant, the
city may record a notice of the wetland and buffer area requirements against
the property. The property owner must still comply with the requirements of
this section.



12.  Wetland Buffer Markers.



When new development or redevelopment results in multifamily residential or a
business use, the developer must place markers at the upland boundary of the
wetland buffer edge at least every two hundred feet. The developer must use
uniform markers provided by the city. The city will charge a reasonable cost
for the markers.



APPENDIX A TO SECTION 300.23



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



1   267   936.5



   269   931.1



   269-1   933.1



   269-2   932.8



   272   932.8



   272-2   935.2



   419   937.4



   421   933.6



   451   915.9



   454   901.6



   454-1   901.8



   456   892.0



   456-1   892.0



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



2   410   928.9



   415   930.9



   425   920.4



   425-1   920.3



   436   922.5



   437   919.6



   440   921.2



   441   916.7



   441-1   915.7



   444   914.7



   444A   915.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



3   171   983.9



   172   966.4



   173   985.4



   174   974.6



   195   962.5



   196A   957.5



   197-1   951.6



   198   947.1



   198-1   950.0



   204A   945.0



   204A-1   952.7



   207A   939.4



   207B   936.4



   220A   935.4



   445   961.8



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



4   120   956.5



   128   942.0



   128-1   942.3



   128-2   943.2



   133A-8   941.1



   133A1   940.5



   133A2   937.2



   161   966.4



   184   974.6



   185   987.1



   185-1   968.8



   186-1   963.0



   303-1   957.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



5   128   942.0



   133A-9   936.2



   133A-11   932.0



   303-2   956.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



8   133A-11   936.2



   133A-12   932.0



   305   953.2



   306-3   941.9



   306-4   942.7



   307-1   932.0



   307-2   930.5



   G.B.4   931.9



   G.B.5   934.6



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



9   133A-1   962.4



   133A-4   940.0



   133A-5   940.5



   133A-7   941.1



   133A-8   941.1



   133A-11   936.2



   133A2   937.2



   134   947.0



   135   941.3



   135-2   946.4



   140   949.8



   141   937.5



   142   933.2



   143   940.3



   144A   935.0



   144A-4   943.0



   144B   934.5



   148   931.0



   152   953.9



   156   947.8



   158   963.7



   159   939.3



   161   966.4



   287   938.7



   304   943.3



   311   943.7



   312   939.3



   312-1   942.0



   313   939.4



   M.C.21   928.9



   M.C.22   929.2



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



10   154   951.6



   155   949.5



   159   939.3



   164   969.4



   164-1   966.3



   165   934.4



   168   969.2



   169   966.6



   175   955.8



   176   929.8



   182   929.7



   183   929.2



   209-1   955.4



   210   980.9



   212   973.0



   212-1   987.4



   215   939.1



   216   937.7



   220A   935.4



   220B   932.9



   227   939.3



   227-1   960.7



   228A   928.1



   228B   925.5



   228B-1   933.6



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



11   222A   958.6



   239   954.3



   241   933.8



   242   945.2



   244A-1   918.3



   244A-2   918.4



   246   910.9



   253   918.5



   254   914.5



   255   911.3



   256A   910.6



   256B   910.6



   403   988.5



   406   950.7



   407   952.3



   408   957.7



   410-1   928.6



   412   919.4



   413   919.1



   414   931.5



   415   930.9



   416   922.0



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



12   257   946.8



   260-1   909.5



   260B   908.0



   260C   907.1



   263   943.7



   266   936.7



   271   934.2



   272   930.9



   276   918.4



   277   914.8



   278-1   912.9



   278-2   912.8



   281   903.5



   315   899.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



13   260C   907.1



   M.C.15   913.7



   M.C.18   909.7



   M.C.19   903.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



14   95   978.7



   95-1   983.9



   96   956.1



   107   932.2



   109   912.1



   115   916.6



   116   934.4



   248-1   928.3



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



15   37   932.1



   38-2   930.8



   60   939.1



   61   930.8



   62   929.2



   76   941.8



   77   939.8



   78   936.2



   92   934.3



   150   933.1



   152-1   980.1



   164-1   966.3



   181   934.0



   228C-1   921.7



   228C-2   917.9



   228C-3   918.3



   229A   922.0



   234   943.2



   238   919.1



   238-1   918.1



   148   931.0



   152   953.9



   16E   933.6



   38-1   930.5



   38-2   930.8



   39   936.2



   43-1   928.5



   M.C.6   932.3



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



17   321   934.2



   322   930.6



   802   926.3



   804   925.5



   805   917.8



   814   924.0



   817-1   917.7



   817-2   916.1



   817-3   915.9



   817A   913.6



   817B   910.4



   819   913.2



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



18   319C   928.6



   824-1   913.7



   824-2   912.6



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



19   825   912.2



   826   911.5



   830   905.9



   832-1   907.3



   833   893.4



   833A   901.2



   833B   900.3



   843   908.3



   873   890.5



   873-1   892.5



   873-2   888.9



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



20   814   924.0



   817A   913.6



   817B   910.4



   818   910.3



   819   913.2



   820   904.9



   821A   903.6



   821A-1   906.0



   821B   902.5



   832-2   905.6



   876   912.5



   877   911.0



   885   927.1



   887   950.4



   901   908.1



   903-3   903.0



   904   893.3



   918   884.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



21   1   947.5



   2   966.1



   3   941.7



   4-3   949.6



   5   939.0



   8-2   1052.0



   10   1028.1



   14   1020.3



   16E   933.6



   16E-3   935.0



   17   1018.6



   812   928.6



   813   928.0



   879   948.5



   884   983.8



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



22   7-3   1057.0



   18   995.1



   21A-1   976.7



   49-1   1022.8



   52   987.7



   54   955.4



   57   965.9



   58   952.7



   59   947.0



   64   982.4



   65   981.0



   66   975.4



   70   944.2



   71   941.7



   75   941.8



   539   971.7



   541   994.7



   542   957.6



   545   999.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



23   84   995.3



   85   1001.0



   86B   975.7



   87   966.7



   94   1002.8



   501   979.3



   501-1   980.2



   502   1005.6



   504   938.5



   505   948.8



   506   931.1



   507-2   938.6



   508   919.3



   511   912.0



   512-1   911.8



   512-2   912.3



   512-3   916.7



   513   946.8



   514   920.6



   516   910.8



   517   911.0



   538   972.5



   538-1   981.8



   539   971.7



   540   967.9



   543   948.6



   544   936.1



   548   921.7



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



26   520B-2   891.6



   520B-3   897.2



   530   907.2



   531   903.8



   537   903.4



   548   921.7



   548C   930.2



   549B   921.8



   564   906.4



   567   897.0



   567-1   899.0



   579-1   898.4



   579-2   898.2



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



27   546   967.6



   564   906.4



   566   914.1



   567   897.0



   579   898.4



   586   1014.7



   589   958.1



   590   916.5



   592A   945.5



   592A-1   1005.0



   613A   916.5



   629   904.4



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



28   584   1051.0



   597A   1002.7



   597A-2   1003.3



   598   964.3



   598A-1   989.2



   598A-2   986.2



   599   980.5



   600   967.3



   602   980.1



   603   977.9



   605   1010.2



   635   1029.3



   638   988.6



   639   1028.6



   640   982.0



   643   973.5



   650   932.3



   657   939.2



   908   986.0



   908-1   1033.6



   909   997.9



   910   953.4



   911   953.0



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



29   657   939.2



   870   920.7



   904-1   892.0



   913   922.7



   915   935.6



   916   910.4



   917   908.4



   918   884.7



   918-1A   886.6



   918A   898.3



   920   915.3



   929   881.0



   931   901.7



   934   917.3



   938-1   910.7



   938A   877.9



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



30   835A   938.1



   835B   933.9



   836   932.8



   839   937.4



   840-3   932.6



   842   915.4



   843   908.3



   844   922.9



   845   962.4



   846   932.8



   846-2   964.9



   846-4   935.4



   847   912.2



   847A   921.3



   847B   921.2



   870   920.7



   871A   926.2



   873   890.5 (W)



      885.0 (E)



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



31   847   912.2 



   849   910.8 



   850   907.0 



   851   900.6 



   852   902.7 



   853   888.3 



   859   884.0 



   861   881.4 



   862   885.0 



   863   904.8 



   863-2   906.6 



   865   910.8 



   938-6   876.7 



   938A   877.9 



   938B   868.7 (N)



      866.9 (S)



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



32   868   887.6



   934   917.3



   937   896.2



   938-8   885.6



   938A   877.9 (N)



      871.3 (S)



   938A-1   875.0



   938B   865.4 (N)



      862.8 (S)



   940   874.0



   942   934.7



   946-2   882.5



   946-3   888.3



   947A   859.7



   947B   856.2



   948   906.3



   949   904.0



   949-1   905.2



   950   899.9



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



33   629   904.4



   665   940.3



   672B   970.4



   676-1   924.5



   681   935.4



   681-1   931.8



   691   951.1



   698   930.6



   700   939.7



   706   923.1



   708   925.9



   714B   901.6



   716   892.5



   716B   894.0



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



34   566   914.1



   573   914.8



   576A   918.7



   576B   916.2



   577   910.4



   579-1   898.4



   579-2   898.2



   579-3   900.6



   579-4   902.6



   617   908.5



   619-2   920.6



   623   908.3



   623A-1   946.8



   623A-6   943.2



   628   905.0



   629   904.4



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



35   520C   931.2



   534   912.8



   537   903.4



   579-1   898.4



   579-2   898.2



   581   898.1



   581B   889.2 (N)



      885.2 (S)



   581E   924.2



   581F   927.0



   582   898.6



   582-2   903.1



   582B   944.5



   583   907.3



      Wetland   Wetland
Section    Number   Elevation



36   520C   931.2



   582B   944.5



   582C   881.3



   582C-1   886.0



   582C-4   882.5



   582D-1   889.2



   582E   903.0



   582I-1   874.4



(Amended by Ord. 2008-10, adopted March 24, 2008; amended by Ord. #2004-28,
adopted August 23, 2004)



SECTION 300.24.  FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose, Authority.



a)   This ordinance regulates development in the flood hazard areas within
the City. The purpose of the floodplain district is to recognize, preserve,
and protect recreational and hydrological resources and functions of the
city's creeks and associated lakes and drainageways by regulating the use of
the creeks, associated lakes and adjacent properties in order to minimize
loss of life, property damage, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection, and the impairment of the tax base due to flooding, and
thereby promote the public health, safety, and welfare. The intent is to
apply the regulations and standards of this district as an overlay zone,
further regulating the use of land as allowed by



b)   the other use districts of this ordinance and to maintain a no net
loss of floodplain volume.



c)   This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or other private agreements. However, where
this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance
prevail.



d)   This ordinance does not imply that areas outside of the floodplain
districts, as defined by this ordinance, or lands uses permitted within such
districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance does
not create liability on the part of the City of Minnetonka or its officers or
employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance
or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



e)   This section is adopted pursuant to Minn. Stat. chapters 103F and 462
as amended.



f)   This section is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of
the national flood insurance program codified as 44 code of federal
regulations (CFR), parts 59 - 78, as amended, to maintain the community's
eligibility in that program.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



2.  Boundaries of Floodplain District.



a)    Districts. The boundaries of the floodplain district are comprised
of two areas: (1) areas designated by FEMA as floodplain ("FEMA floodplain");
and (2) areas located outside the FEMA floodplain ("Additional floodplain").



   1)   FEMA floodplain. The boundaries of the floodplain district
designated by FEMA are those areas designated as lying within the 100-year
flood boundary on the most recent flood insurance rate maps dated November 4,
2016, contained in the flood insurance study for the city of Minnetonka
titled Hennepin County, MN, All Jurisdictions Volume 1 and Volume 2 dated
November 4, 2016, and prepared by FEMA. These maps may also be amended by
other studies adopted by ordinance by the city and that are not less
restrictive than the 100-year flood elevation and the floodways as published
by FEMA. These maps constitute the official floodplain district map for the
city. All notations, references, and data shown on the maps are incorporated
by reference into this ordinance. The FEMA floodplain is comprised of the
following three separate districts:



      a.    Floodway district: the FEMA floodway district includes
these areas within Zone AE that have a floodway delineated as shown on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) adopted in this subdivision 2(a). For lakes,
wetlands and other basins within Zone AE that do not have a floodway
delineated, the FEMA floodway district also includes those areas that are at
or below the ordinary high water level (OWHL) as defined in the Minnesota
Statutes, Section 103G.005, Subd. 14.



      b.    Flood fringe district: the FEMA flood fringe district
includes areas within Zones AE that have a floodway delineated on the FIRM
adopted in this subdivision 2(a), but are located outside of the floodway.
For lakes, wetlands, and other basins within Zone AE that do not have a
floodway delineated, the FEMA flood fringe district also includes those areas
below the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood elevation but above the OHWL as
defined in Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.005, Subd. 14.



      c.   General floodplain district: the General Floodplain
district includes those areas within Zones A or AE that do not have a
delineated floodway as shown on the FIRM adopted in this subdivision 2(a).



   2)   Additional Floodplain. The Additional floodplain area consists
of:



      a.   those areas designated within the 100-year flood
elevation in the city's water resources management plan or a study conducted
by a government agency or other organization and accepted by the city;



      b   the 931.5-foot elevation for the area surrounding Lake
Minnetonka westward from the Gray's Bay dam based on the hydrological study
conducted by the Minnehaha Creek Watershed District until such time as this
study is amended;



      c.   the flood profiles and floodplain delineations in the
Riley Purgatory - Bluff Creek Watershed District's watershed management plan,
adopted in 1996 as amended; and



      d.   the flood profiles and floodplain delineations in the
Nine Mile Creek Watershed District's watershed management plan, adopted in
1996 as amended.



b)   Sub-districts. This ordinance establishes regulations and standards
based on two floodplain sub-districts each of which contains portions of the
FEMA floodplain and additional floodplain.



   1)    Floodway Sub-district. This sub-district consists of:



      a.    The FEMA floodway district as described in Subdivision
2(a)(1)(a) above; and



      b.   Those portions of the Additional floodplain as described
in subdivision 2(a)(2) above that are within channels having definable beds
and banks capable of conducting generally confined runoff from adjacent
lands, but not including roadside ditches created by excavation or human
construction activity.



   2)   Other Floodplain Sub-district. This sub-district consists of:



      a.    The FEMA flood fringe and FEMA general floodplain
districts as described in subdivision 2(a)(1)(b) and (2)(a)(1)(c) above; and



      b.    Those portions of the Additional floodplain as described
in Subdivision 2(a)(2) above that are outside of the Floodway sub-district.



c)   Protected wetland districts and "public waters" as classified by the
Minnesota department of natural resources are regulated by sections 300.23,
300.25, and 300.26 respectively, of this ordinance. The official floodplain
may contain type 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 wetlands. In such instances, the
more restrictive regulations apply.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



3.    Interpretation of Floodplain Boundaries.



The boundaries of the floodplain district will be determined by scaling
distances on the official floodplain district map and by the use of the water
surface profile of the 100-year flood as shown in the flood insurance study,
or by other approved studies. Where interpretation is needed regarding the
exact location of the boundary of the district as shown on the official
floodplain district map, or where there appears to be a conflict between the
location of the boundary shown on the official floodplain district map and
actual field conditions, all decisions will be based on the 100-year flood
elevations shown on the flood insurance study and maps, if available. When
evidence of fill exists the ground elevations that existed on the site as of
September 2, 1974 must be submitted and will be used in this determination.
If a 100-year flood elevation is not available on the flood insurance study
maps, the city engineer may establish the boundary at the 100-year flood
elevation as defined in the city's water resources management plan. The city
engineer may also require the submission of a registered survey of the
property and such other information as is necessary or convenient to reach a
determination. This may include items listed in subdivision 7 in this section.



Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission and
to submit technical evidence.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



4.  Permitted Uses.



a)    Land may be used in the FEMA floodplain and Additional floodplain,
only for one or more of the following uses, if it does not result in net fill
of the floodplain, does not involve placement of a structure in the floodway,
does not involve excavation or fill of an area greater than 1,000 square
feet, does not involve a volume of excavation, fill or other obstruction
greater than 20 cubic yards, and meets the requirements in subdivision 6 and
subdivision 8:



   1)   agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture and grazing;



   2)   residential lawns, gardens, landscaped ponds, and play areas
and swimming areas such as beaches, if any of the preceding uses is accessory
to a low-density residential use on the same site;



   3)   wildlife and nature preserves;



   4)   public and private parks, playfields, and picnic grounds; or



   5)   non-structural pervious hiking, skiing, and horseback riding
trails.



b)   Land may be used in the FEMA and Additional Floodplain but outside of
the floodway, only for one or more of the following uses, if it does not
result in net fill of the floodplain, does not involve excavation or fill of
an area greater than 1,000 square feet, does not involve a volume of
excavation, fill or other obstruction greater than 20 cubic yards, and meets
the requirements in subdivision 6. If no delineated Floodway exists refer to
subdivision 7(h):



   1)   fences and retaining walls;



   2)   detached decks and patios located 10 or more feet from the
principal use;



   3)   tennis courts and sport courts;



   4)   recreational trails and boardwalks;



   5)   environmental monitoring or control facilities, including those
related to water quality and wildlife regulation;



   6)   residential boat docks and boat ramps;



   7)   public ponding and drainage facilities, associated
appurtenances and approved flood control structures;



   8)   public utilities that are flood-proofed in accordance with the
state building code or elevated to a minimum of two feet above the 100-year
flood elevation;



   9)   overhead utility poles that are less than two feet in diameter,
underground utility lines and distribution equipment, light poles, traffic
signals, traffic regulatory signs, mailboxes, and other equipment that
provides an essential public service; or



   10)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section if they
have no greater impact on the floodplain, as determined by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



5.  Conditional Uses.



Land may be used within the FEMA and Additional floodplain, but outside of
the Floodway, for the following by first obtaining a conditional use permit
and conforming with the standards specified in subdivisions 6 and 8 of this
section. If no delineated Floodway exists, refer to subdivision 7(h):



a)   outdoor nurseries;



b)   public or private, nonresidential or commercial boat docks and boat
ramps, marinas, and boat slip rental;



c)   recreational uses including private and public golf courses, game
farms, shooting ranges, public and private swimming pools and spas, and
swimming areas such as beaches that are not a permitted use;



d)   a permitted use that involves excavation or fill of an area greater
than 1,000 square feet or a volume greater than 20 cubic yards;



e)   railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines;



f)   commercial extraction and storage of sand, gravel, equipment,
machinery and other materials;



g)   construction of additions to non-conforming homes built before
September 9, 1974, if the construction uses stilts, pilings, parallel walls,
above-grade enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck-under garages, or
other approved methods that do not obstruct the flow of floodwater;



h)   a use permitted by subdivision 4 that involves moving 1,000 cubic
yards of material per acre or more if in compliance with section 300.28
subdivisions 15-18;



i)   private ponding and drainage facilities, associated appurtenances,
and approved flood control structures;



j)   a structure placed on fill or flood proofed meeting the flood
protection standards of this code; or



k)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section if they have no
greater impact on the floodplain, as determined by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



6.  Performance Standards.



All applicable permits must be obtained before any of the following takes
place within the floodplain: erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation
(including normal maintenance and repair), or alteration of any part of a
building or structure; commencement of the use or change of use of a
building, structure, or land; construction of a dam, fence, or on-site septic
system; change or extension of a nonconforming use; repair of a structure
that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source; or
placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or
equipment. The necessary permits may not be granted until the applicant has
obtained all necessary state and federal permits. The activity allowed by the
permit must comply with the provisions of this section 300.24, including the
following:



a)   the use must have a low damage potential and must not obstruct flood
flows or increase flood elevations in the floodway, and must not result in
net fill within the subject floodplain;



b)   fill, dredge, spoil and other similar materials deposited or stored
in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover,
mulching, riprap or other acceptable method;



c)   if regulated trees, wetlands, existing wetland buffers, or public
easements exist in the location of the proposed excavation or fill activity,
administrative approval is not allowed;



d)   moving of 1,000 cubic yards of material per acre or more requires a
separate conditional use permit.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-28, adopted December 19, 2011)



7. Information to be Submitted.



An applicant for a permit under subdivisions 5 and 6 of this section may be
required to furnish the following information as deemed necessary by the city:



a)   a concept plan indicating ultimate utilization of the property;



b)   a survey of existing conditions prepared by a registered land
surveyor having, at a minimum, spot elevations or contours of the ground, any
existing structures, the 100-year flood elevation and the boundary of the
applicable FEMA flood zone (e.g. floodway, Zone A and Zone AE);



c)   a grading plan consistent with 300.28 prepared by a licensed engineer
or land surveyor showing existing and proposed spot elevations or contours of
the ground, erosion control measures, existing and proposed structures on the
site, fill or storage elevations, location and elevations of adjacent
streets, photographs showing existing land uses upstream and downstream, and
soil type;



d)   supporting drainage calculations for fill, existing storage volumes,
compensatory volumes, and flood elevations;



e)   a landscaping or re-vegetation plan;



f)   a legal document approved by the city attorney, filed against the
subject property, and recorded with the county, acknowledging that
construction in the floodplain or a  deviation from the standards under
subdivision 8 of this section will result in an increased risk of flooding to
the subject property or structures on the property;



g)   a review of the proposal by the Minnesota department of natural
resources, if applicable, and the appropriate watershed district;



h)   a hydrologic analysis and, if necessary, a hydraulic analysis, to
determine the 100-year flood elevation, the floodway and or the floodplain
boundary. The analysis must include existing channel cross sections, existing
and proposed stream profiles, must estimate the peak 100-year flood discharge
and designate the floodway without a flood stage increase of more than .1
foot if applicable:



   1.    The City Engineer, or their designee, will review the
submitted information and assess the technical evaluation and the recommended
Floodway and/or Flood Fringe district boundary. The assessment must include
the cumulative effects of pervious floodway encroachments. The City Planner
may seek technical assistance from a designated engineer or other expert
person or agency, including the Department of Natural Resources. Based on
this assessment, the City Planner may approve or deny the application.



   2.    Once the Floodway and Flood Fringe district boundaries have
been determined, the City Planner must process the permit application
consistent with the applicable provisions of subdivision 4 and 5 of this
ordinance.



i)   other information that may be required by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2012-07,
adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2011-28, adopted December 19, 2011)



8.  Standards for Floodplain Districts and Neighboring Lands.



The following standards apply to all land within the floodplain district and
to neighboring lands:



a)   except as modified or regulated by the standards of the floodplain
district, all requirements of the underlying zoning district and section
300.29 will apply;



b)   Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public
must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for
evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the
depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed
a product of 4 upon occurrence of the regional (1%) flood;



c)   The storage of materials or equipment must be elevated on fill to the
Regulatory Floodplain Elevation;



d)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in times of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal or
plant life is prohibited;



e)   no structure, fill, deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or
equipment, or other use that will cause an increase in the stage of the
100-year flood in the floodway or decrease in existing storage volume in the
floodplain is allowed;



f)   parking or driveway areas, except those accessory to single-family
dwellings, may not be located within 10 feet of the floodplain district and
must be a minimum of one foot above the designated 100-year flood elevation;



g)   driveways accessory to a single family dwelling must be a minimum of
one foot above the 100-year flood elevation;



h)   new principal structures, attached garages, or additions to existing
structures must be set back a minimum of 20 feet upland from the edge of the
floodplain district and have a minimum lowest floor elevation not less than
two feet above the designated 100-year flood elevation. Any addition above
the first floor will be exempt from this setback requirement. For purposes of
this section first floor will mean the portion of the principal structure
that is above grade. This does not apply to any structure or additions for
which a conditional use permit is required;



i)   attached decks and patios, outside stairways, cantilevered building
areas, porticos and similar architectural features, may extend a distance not
to exceed 10 feet into the required setback and must be 1.5 feet above the
100-year flood elevation and made of flood resistant materials;



j)   detached pools and their associated apron have no setback from
floodplain. For purposes of this section a pool is considered detached if no
part of it or its associated apron is within 10 feet of the principal
structure. A pool apron is the hard surface or decking material that is
contiguous to the water's edge of the pool. Detached pools must be anchored
and have all utilities designed or located to prevent water damage;



k)   attached pools may extend a distance not to exceed 10 feet into the
required setback as measured from the water's edge of the pool and must be
1.5 feet above the 100-year flood elevation as measured from the water's edge
of the pool. For purposes of this section a pool is considered attached if
any part of it or its associated apron is within 10 feet of the principal
structure. A pool apron is the hard surface or decking material that is
contiguous to the pool; 



l)   other accessory structures must:



   1)   not be designed for human habitation and must not contain
sanitary facilities;



   2)   must be setback a minimum of 10 feet upland from the edge of
the floodplain district except as otherwise indicated in this subdivision;



   3)   must have a minimum lowest floor elevation of not less than 1.5
feet above the designated 100-year flood elevation;



   4)   water-orientated accessory structures less than 120 square feet
may have a 0-foot setback from the Floodway, provided they are not located in
the Floodway, are not  designed for human habitation, do not contain
sanitary facilities, are constructed out of flood resistant materials and are
anchored; and



   5)   for purposes of this ordinance accessory structures in
subdivision 4(b) and 5(d) of this section have no setback from the floodplain
district if they are located outside of the floodplain district.



m)   principal structures must have areas within 15 feet of the structure
at least ½ foot above the designated 100-year flood elevation or have an
approved evacuation route from the structure directly to land above the
designated 100-year flood elevation;



n)   in the floodplain above-grade fully enclosed non-basement areas such
as crawl spaces or other uninhabitable spaces within a structure, that are
used to elevate a structure's lowest floor to two feet above the 100-year
elevation, must be constructed to flood internally and must meet the
following standards:



   1)   a minimum of two automatic openings must be included, having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;



   2)   openings must be on at least two sides of the structure;



   3)   when openings are placed in a structure's wall to provide for
entry of floodwater to equalize pressures, the bottom of all openings must be
no higher than one-foot above grade;



   4)   openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters without any form of human intervention; and



   5)   the enclosed area must be constructed of flood-resistant
materials in accordance with the state building code and be used solely for
building access or storage. The enclosed space cannot be finished;



o)   before issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the applicant will
be required to submit as-built drawings and certification by a licensed
professional engineer or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and
lowest floor elevation of all structures were accomplished in compliance with
the provisions of this ordinance;



p)   hard surface runoff must be treated in accordance with the
requirements of the city and appropriate watershed district. Treatment may
include site retention, skimmers, weirs, infiltration basins, or storm water
ponds of appropriate scale. Structures and ponds serving this purpose must be
properly maintained and serviced by the property owner;



q)   discharge into the floodplain must not occur at a rate greater than
allowed by the city engineer in accordance with the city's water resources
management plan and appropriate watershed district requirements;



r)   development proposals must be designed in compliance with the city's
water resources management plan and must incorporate the requirements of the
appropriate watershed district, the Minnesota department of natural resources
and other governmental agencies;



s)   in areas with land-locked basins that have no outlet, the minimum
lowest floor elevation of new principal structures or additions to existing
structures must be a minimum of two-feet above the flood elevation of two
back-to-back 100-year storm events as calculated by a licensed professional
engineer, or a minimum of two feet above the natural overflow elevation of
the basin, as directed and approved by the city engineer;



t)   the 100-year flood elevation will be based on the following criteria;
in floodplain areas where the 100-year flood elevation is not readily
available, the minimum lowest floor elevation of new principal structures or
additions to existing structures must be a minimum of three-feet above the
Minnesota department of natural resources' ordinary high water level or two
feet above the highest known water level, whichever is more restrictive and
is acceptable to the city engineer;



u)   no development may adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the
channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage
system where a floodplain or other encroachment limit has not been specified
on the official zoning map;



v)   all recreational vehicles that are not travel-ready must meet the
same standards as any other single family dwelling unit. For purposes of this
section "travel-ready" means that the unit must be ready to travel on a
roadway, including that it:



   1)   have a current, valid license to operate on public roads;



   2)   rest on inflated tires or an internal jacking system that can
quickly return the unit to its inflated tires;



   3)   be attached to the site by no more than the quick-disconnect
type of utilities commonly used in transitory campgrounds; and



   4)   have no permanent structures attached to it;



w)   all manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse, lateral
movement, and they must meet the same standards as any other single family
dwelling unit. Methods of anchoring may include use of over-the-top or frame
ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces;



x)   no land may be subdivided that is unsuitable because of flooding or
inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. Lots within
the floodplain district must be able to contain a building site outside of
the floodplain overlay district or above the 100-year flood elevation and
comply with the requirements of this code. Subdivisions must have water and
sewage treatment facilities that comply with city standards and have road
access to the subject property that complies with the requirements of this
code. For subdivisions in the floodplain district, all access roads must be
clearly labeled on all subdivision drawings and platting documents. An
applicant for a subdivision must provide the information required in section
300.24 (8) to determine the 100-year flood elevation and the floodplain
district boundaries for the subdivision site;



y)   public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and
water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be flood proofed in
accordance with the state building code or elevated to one foot above the
100-year flood elevation;



z)   railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the
floodplain must comply with section 300.24, subdivision 8.  Elevation to a
minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation must be provided where
failure or interruption of these transportation facilities would result in
danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential
to the orderly functioning of the area.  Minor or auxiliary roads or
railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or
interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health
or safety; and



aa)   where public utilities are not provided: 



   1)    on-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



   2)   new or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and they must not
be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding.  A
sewage treatment system designed in accordance with the state's current
statewide standards for on-site sewage treatment systems is deemed to be in
compliance with this provision.



bb)   the city will review all permit applications to ensure that all
proposed building sites in floodplain will be:



   1)   anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement;



   2)   use flood-resistant materials;



   3)   use construction methods and practices that minimize flood
damage; and



   4)   ensure that electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities are designed and/or
located to prevent water entry and accumulation.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



9.  Alteration of the Floodplain.



a)   Activities that constitute an alteration of the floodplain district
include the physical alteration of the size, depth and contour of the
floodplain. No alteration of the floodplain district is allowed without a
floodplain alteration permit, except that only a grading permit approved by
the city planner is required for permitted uses that do not involve
excavation or fill of an area greater than 1,000 square feet or a volume
greater than 20 cubic yards of land located outside of the floodway. 



b)   An alteration permit is subject to the recommendation of the planning
commission and approval of the city council.



c)   In reviewing alteration permits, the city will consider whether the
following general standards are met:



   1)   The magnitude of the alteration is appropriate relative to the
size of the floodplain district.



   2)   The amount of any increase in buildable area is appropriate in
comparison to the amount of buildable area before alteration.



   3)   The alteration will not negatively impact the hydrology of the
floodplain.



   4)   Floodplain mitigation areas will not negatively impact adjacent
properties.



   5)   The alteration will meet the intent of the city's water
resources management plan and the subdivision and zoning ordinances;



   6)   The alteration will not adversely impact governmental
facilities, utilities, services or existing or proposed public improvements;
and



   7)   The alteration will not have an undue adverse impact on the
public health, safety or welfare.



d)   Notwithstanding the general standards, no alteration permit will be
granted unless the following specific standards are met.



   1)   On all properties within the city:



      a.   Water storage must be maintained and provided in an
amount at least equal to that filled unless acceptable hydrologic engineering
data has been presented and approved by the city engineer indicating that
conditions have changed such that the floodplain characteristics will be
maintained even with proposed floodplain fill.



      b.   Floodplain fill area must be located no more than 20 feet
from any existing or proposed structure, except where required by the city
engineer to achieve a required evacuation route.



      c.   Where floodplain alteration is required for construction
of a driveway, the driveway must be no wider than 12 feet and must be located
to minimize impact to the floodplain.



      d.   Floodplain alteration, including the creation of
compensatory water storage, must not result in removal of regulated trees,
adversely impact wetlands or existing wetland buffers, or be located within
public easements. The city council may waive this condition if the proposed
alteration would improve existing site conditions.



e)   If the alteration will change the boundary of the floodplain
district, a zoning map amendment is also required under subdivision 10 below.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-28, adopted December 19, 2011)



10.  Removal of Lands from the Floodplain District.



This subsection applies to new principal structures or additions to existing
principal structures constructed in accordance with section 300.24,
subdivisions 5 and 8. It does not apply to accessory structures or other uses.



a)   The following applies to only the FEMA floodplain areas:



   1)   Changes in the official floodplain district map must meet FEMA
technical conditions and criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before
adoption by the city. The applicant must obtain a conditional letter of map
revision from FEMA before the city council considers the request, and a
subsequent letter of map revision from FEMA within 90 days after issuance of
the certificate of occupancy. The FEMA standards should be considered before
initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area
designation will be requested.



   2)   All amendments to this ordinance, including amendments to the
official floodplain district map as defined in section 300.24, subdivision
2,  must be submitted to and approved by the commissioner of the Minnesota
department of natural resources before adoption by the city. The commissioner
must be given 10-days written notice of the hearing to consider an amendment
to this ordinance, and the notice must include a draft of the ordinance
amendment or technical study under consideration.



b)   The following applies to the FEMA floodplain and the Additional
floodplain areas;



   1)   Land may be removed from the floodplain district only by a
zoning map amendment pursuant to the provisions of section 300.09 of this
ordinance. The floodplain designation on the official floodplain district map
will not be removed from a floodplain area unless it can be shown that the
designation is in error or that the area has been filled to one foot above
the elevation of the 100-year flood and stage increase, and is contiguous to
land outside of the floodplain per state standards.



   2)   When land is removed from the floodplain district, water
storage must be provided in an amount compensatory to that removed or
acceptable hydrologic engineering data must be presented which indicates how
conditions have changed so that the floodplain characteristics can be
maintained without compensation. Removal of land from the flood plain or
creation of compensatory water storage cannot be located where there are any
regulated trees, wetlands, existing wetland buffers, or public easements,
unless approved by the city council. In addition to other application
requirements, the city may require submission and approval of information
listed under subdivision 8(b) in this section.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



11.  Public Control of Floodplains.



The proponents of development on properties containing a floodplain district
may be required to dedicate all or a part of the floodplain or to convey an
easement over all or a part of the floodplain to the city if consistent with
the intent and procedures of this ordinance.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-28, adopted December 19, 2011)



12.  Administration.



a)   A person who has obtained a permit pursuant to section 300.24, must
submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered
architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building
elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this
section 300.24. Flood-proofing measures must be certified by a registered
professional engineer or registered architect.



b)   The city planner must maintain a record of the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or
additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The city planner must
also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures or alterations
and additions to structures are flood-proofed.



c)   The city planner must notify, in riverine situations, adjacent
communities and the commissioner of the department of natural resources
before the city authorizes an alteration or relocation of a watercourse.  If
the applicant has applied for a permit to work in the beds of public waters
pursuant to Minn. Stat. chapter 103G, this will suffice as adequate notice to
the commissioner of natural resources.  The city planner must also send a
copy of the notification to the Chicago regional office of FEMA.



d)   As soon as is practicable, but no later than six months after the
date the supporting information becomes available, the city planner must
notify the Chicago regional office of FEMA of the physical changes that
increase or decrease the 100-year flood elevation by submitting a copy of the
technical or scientific data.



e)   When granting variances to the provisions of section 300.24, the
following additional variance criteria of FEMA must be satisfied:



   1)   Variances may not be issued within a designated regulatory
floodplain if an increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood discharge
would result.



   2)   Variances may only be issued upon (a) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (b) a determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (c) a
determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.



   3)   Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   4)   A variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that
district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the Regulatory
Floodplain Elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than
those required by law.



f)   The city planner must notify the applicant for a variance that (1)
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood
elevation will result in significantly increased premium rates for flood
insurance, (2) construction below the 100-year flood elevation increases
risks to life and property.  This notification must be maintained with a
record of the variance action.  The city planner must maintain a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
the variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the
administrator of the national flood insurance program.



g)   Before the hearing on a conditional use permit or variance for a use
or activity in the floodplain, the city planner must mail a copy of the
application to the commissioner of natural resources sufficiently in advance
so that the commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the
hearing. The city planner must mail a copy of all decisions granting a
conditional use permit or a variance to the commissioner within ten days
after the action.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-14, adopted October 24, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2011-28,
adopted December 19, 2011)



13.   Non-Conforming Uses.



a)   This subdivision 13 applies to all legal non-conformities defined in
section 300.29, subdivision 2. Those legal non-conformities that are in the
floodplain are also subject to the provisions in section 300.29.



b)   A legal non-conformity in the floodplain may not be expanded,
changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its non-conformity. A
non-conforming use or structure in a floodplain may only be changed,
repaired, replaced, maintained, improved, or expanded to the extent that it
would qualify for eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and 
would not increase flood damage potential or increase the degree of
obstruction to flood flows in the floodway. No variance may be granted to
this requirement.



c)   A structural alteration or addition to a non-conforming structure or
non-conforming use that would result in increasing the flood damage potential
of that structure or use must be protected to the regulatory elevation in
accordance with the flood protection standards as defined in subdivisions 6
and 8 of this code or flood-proofing techniques (i.e., FP-1 thru FP-4
flood-proofing classifications) must be implemented as allowable in the state
building code, except as further restricted in (d) and (f) below.



d)   The cost of all structural alterations or additions to a
non-conforming structure over the life of the structure must not exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this
paragraph are satisfied.  The cost of all structural alterations and
additions constructed after the adoption of the city's initial floodplain
controls must be calculated into today's current cost, including all costs
such as construction materials and a reasonable amount for labor.  If the
current cost of all previous and proposed alterations and additions exceeds
50 percent of the current market value of the structure, then the structure
must meet the standards of this section 300.24 for new structures.



e)   If a non-conforming use or structure is substantially damaged, as
defined in section 300.02, it may be reconstructed only in conformity with
the provisions of this section 300.24 for new structures.



f)   If a substantial improvement occurs, as defined in section 300.02,
from any combination of an addition to the outside dimensions of the existing
building or a rehabilitation, reconstruction, alteration, or other
improvement to the inside dimensions of an existing non-conforming building,
then the building addition and the existing non-conforming building must meet
the requirements of this section 300.24 for new structures.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-28, adopted December 19, 2011)



14. Exception for Compensatory Flood Storage Provisions.



Activities undertaken by a government unit to eliminate or minimize the
flooding of existing roadways that are located in the floodplain district are
exempt from the provisions of section 300.24 as long as the work to eliminate
or minimize flooding does not occur in the floodway, cause an increase in the
flood stage by more than .1 foot, or cause flooding impacts on neighboring
properties.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-28, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord. 2008-24,
adopted March 24, 2008; amended by Ord. #2007-17, adopted May 7, 2007; Ord.
#2004-24, adopted August 23, 2004)



SECTION 300.25.  SHORELAND DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the shoreland district is to recognize, preserve, protect and
enhance the environmental, recreational and hydrologic resources and
functions of the city's lakes and tributary creeks by regulating the use of
both the public waters and adjacent land.  In order to promote the general
health, safety and welfare, certain protected waters in the city have been
given a shoreland management classification by the Minnesota department of
natural resources and the city of Minnetonka.  The intent of the shoreland
district is to apply the regulations and standards to public waters and
adjacent land as an overlay zone, further regulating the use of land as
allowed by other districts of this ordinance.



2.  Classifications of Protected Shoreland Areas.



The Minnesota department of natural resources has assigned a shoreland
management classification status to public water.  Public water
classifications as defined by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
and the city of Minnetonka include the following:



a)   Recreational Development. Recreational development lakes (RD) are
characterized by moderate levels of recreational use and existing
development. Many of these lakes have capacities for accommodating additional
development and recreational use.



b)   General Development. General development lakes (GD) have high levels
and mixes of existing development. These lakes are extensively used for
recreation and heavily developed around the shore.



c)   Tributary Creeks. Tributary creeks (TR) consist of all watercourses
mapped in the Minnesota department of natural resources public waters
inventory including the Minnehaha Creek, the Nine Mile Creek, the south fork
of the Nine Mile Creek, the Purgatory Creek including both branches, and the
public watercourse that flows out of Glen Lake. These creeks include those
defined as tributary rivers by the Minnesota department of natural resources.



d)   The following classifications of public waters have been assigned by
the Minnesota department of natural resources and the city of Minnetonka:



Lake Name         Classification      Lake
Name         Classification



Windsor (27-82P)      RD          Wing (27-91P)      RD



Libbs (27-85P)      GD          Rose
(27-92P)         RD



Shavers (27-86P)      RD         Glen
(27-93P)         RD



Mud (Minnetoga) (27-88P)   RD         Lone
(27-94P)         RD



Shady Oak (27-89P)      RD         Minnetonka (27-133P)   GD



Holiday (27-90P)      GD         Crane (27-734P)      GD



Gleason (27-95P)      RD



Tributary Creek             Classification



Minnehaha Creek (27-036a)         TR



Purgatory Creek (27-054a)         TR



Purgatory Creek, Eastern fork (27-055a)   TR



Purgatory Creek, Western fork (27-056a)   TR



Nine Mile Creek (27-050a)         TR



Nine Mile Creek, Southern fork (27-051a)   TR




Unnamed tributary flowing south





from Glen Lake (27-052a)         TR





e)   The following map illustrates the public waters to which the
shoreland ordinance applies:










3.  Description of Shoreland District.



The shoreland district consists of:



a)   land containing or abutting public waters and assigned a shoreland
management classification by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or
the city of Minnetonka; and



b)    land located within the following distances from public water:



   1)    1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level (OHWL) of a lake;



   2)    300 feet from OHWL (top of bank) of a tributary creek, or the
upland edge of the floodplain designated by ordinance, whichever is greater.



Properties or portions of properties may be exempt from the requirements of
the shoreland district if the drainage and runoff patterns from the
properties are directed outside of the drainage basin of the public water as
a result of a natural topographic divide. This exemption determination will
be made by the city engineer.



4.  Permitted uses at or Below the Ordinary High Water Level and within
Shore and Bluff Impact Zones.



At or below the ordinary high water level, and within shore and bluff impact
zones, no land may be used except for one or more of the following uses:



a)   residential yards;



b)   wildlife and nature preserves;



c)   public and private parks;



d)   pervious hiking and skiing trails;



e)   public utilities;



f)   public and approved flood control structure, ponding and drainage
facilities and associated accessory appurtenances;



g)   environmental monitoring or control facilities, including those
related to water quality and wildlife regulation;



h)   docks no wider than 8 feet unless a permit is obtained from the
Minnesota department of natural resources, boat lifts and mooring structures;



i)   foot bridges over a creek if it does not obstruct passage or block
navigation and is permitted by the Minnesota department of natural resources;



j)   beaches;



k)   public fishing piers;



l)   soil stabilization techniques permitted by the Minnesota department
of natural resources; and



m)   retaining walls if needed to control existing conditions of erosion
as field verified by staff, but only if there is absolutely no other
alternative to protect the integrity of the slope.



5.  Conditional Uses at or Below the Ordinary High Water Level and within
Shore and Bluff Impact Zones.



At or below the ordinary high water level and within shore and bluff impact
zones, land may be used for the following only by conditional use permit and
only in conformance with the standards specified in section 300.26 of this
code:



a)   private and public recreational uses, including golf courses,
ballfields, playfields, picnic grounds, boardwalks, impervious trails,
non-motorized public water craft landings, marinas, and boat ramps; or



b)   private ponding and drainage facilities.



6.  Uses on Lands Outside the Shore and Bluff Impact Zones.



Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on lands outside the shore and
bluff impact zones are those uses allowed and regulated by applicable
underlying zoning districts.



7.  Shoreland District Standards, Based on Classifications.



The following standards apply to all land within the shoreland district based
on proximity to the specified classifications:




            General      Recreational      Tributary





            Development       Development     
   (TR)




            (GD)         Creeks(RD)      




a)        Minimum lot area for    22,000          22,000
         22,000




   riparian lots:      square feet      square
feet      square feet




b)        Minimum lot area for





   non-riparian single family





   homes, R-1:      22,000          22,000
         22,000




            square feet      square feet      square
feet




c)        Minimum lot area for





   non-riparian single





   family homes, R-2:   15,000          15,000
         15,000




            square feet      square feet      square
feet




d)        Minimum lot area for





   non-riparian





   duplexes, R-2:      20,000          20,000
         20,000




            square feet      square feet      square
feet




e)        Minimum lot area for





   non-riparian





   triplexes, R-3:      10,890
         10,890         10,890




            square feet       square feet
      square feet




f)      Minimum lot area for





   non-riparian





   multi-family





   residential units,    30,000
         30,000         30,000




   R-3, R-4, and R-5:   square feet      square
feet      square feet




g)   Minimum water   





    frontage at lot line:   75          75          75




            feet         feet         feet   




h)    Elevation of the lowest





   floor above the




   OHWL:      2 feet         2 feet         2 feet




i)    Minimum setbacks from the





   OHWL for principal





   structures, and accessory





   structures, including decks,





   patios, tennis courts,





   sport courts, swimming pools





   (including the apron





   of the pool), walls, retaining





   walls (unless permitted





   due to existing conditions





   of erosion) and any





   fence that obstructs lake





   views such as picket




   or privacy fence:   50 feet         75
feet         50 feet



Fences that are 6 feet in height or less and do not obstruct views such as
chain link or wrought iron can extend up to the OHWL but not into any
adjacent wetland.




j)    Maximum height of




   structures:      35 feet         35
feet         35 feet




   If a variance is requested from this standard the city may consider, in
addition to other relevant factors, the following criteria in




   order to minimize the shoreland impact:



   1)   proximity to the public water;



   2)   screening of structures and vehicles as viewed from the water
in summer leaf-on conditions;



   3)   amount of open space;



   4)   amount and location of water quality treatment systems that are
beneficial to the receiving public water; and



   5)   methods that implement shoreland management strategies to
protect the public water, which may include vegetative protection and
enhancement, creation of wildlife habitat, or water quality enhancement
strategies.




k)    Maximum impervious





   surface coverage for the





   portion of land on a lot





   that is within 150 feet of




   OHWL:      30 percent      30 percent      30 percent




l)    Maximum impervious





   surface coverage for the





   portion of land on a lot





   that is beyond 150 feet of




   OHWL:      75 percent      75 percent      75 percent



   The city may allow credit for pervious hard surfaces such as pavers or
pervious concrete to the extent of the proven infiltration rate for the
pervious pavement area. For example if pervious pavers are installed in an
area totaling 100 square feet, and the pavers are proven to infiltrate 14
percent of the area, up to 14 square feet may be subtracted from the
impervious surface coverage.




m)    Minimum structure





   setback from top of bluff,





   when the grade of the





   bluff is at least 30 percent





   or greater,except





    for structures built on





    post footings,





   stairways and




   landings:      30 feet         30
feet         30 feet



(Amended by Ord. 2011-30, adopted December 19, 2011)



8.  Shoreland District Standards, General.




The following standards apply to all land in the shoreland district:





a)   Water oriented accessory structures:





   1)   must not exceed 120 square feet in size, or 10 feet in height,
exclusive of safety rails. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above
grade at any point;





   2)   must be setback from the OHWL 10 feet;





   3)   must meet the standards of sections 300.23 and 300.24;





   4)   must not exceed one per lot;





   5)   must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from the public
water and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks,
or color, assuming summer-leaf on conditions;





   6)   must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not
contain a water supply or sewage treatment facilities;





   7)   cannot be used principally for water craft storage; and





   8)   may use the roof as a deck with safety rails, but not with
enclosed walls or as a storage area.





b)   The person proposing any land altering activity on a riparian
property, such as building a structure, road or driveway, or grading
activity, that will impact a topographic area having an average slope of 12%
or more measured over a horizontal distance of 50 feet or more, must
demonstrate that the land altering activity will not impact the public water
regulated by this section and must;





   1)    demonstrate that soil erosion will not occur as a result of
the project activity;





   2)    demonstrate preservation of the existing vegetation to the
extent practical; and





   3)    provide screening of structures such as buildings and vehicles
as viewed from the water in summer leaf on conditions.





   In no instance is land altering activity on a riparian property allowed
on a slope averaging 20% or greater if it will have an adverse impact on the
public water regulated by this section, such as erosion, loss of vegetation,
or loss of screening as viewed from the lake. If the applicant can
demonstrate that the land altering activity will not have an adverse impact
on the public water then the activity must comply with the section 300.28
subsection 20, the steep slope ordinance. Stairways, landings and permitted
retaining walls are exempt from this requirement.





c)   All impervious surface runoff must be treated in accordance with the
requirements of the city and appropriate watershed district. Treatment may
include site retention, skimmers, weirs, infiltration basins, storm water
sedimentation ponds of appropriate scale, or other acceptable methods.
Facilities serving this purpose must be properly maintained and serviced by
the property owner.




d)   Discharge into the public waters must occur at a rate no greater than
the rate allowed by the city engineer in accordance with the city's water
resources management plan and appropriate watershed district requirements.



e)   All construction projects must provide erosion and sediment control
as required by the city.



f)   No building permit will be issued by the city for the construction or
alteration of any principal structure on property adjoining a lake or
tributary creek if that structure is not served by the city's sanitary sewer
system.



g)   No structure may be placed nearer than 50 feet from the boundary of
an unplatted cemetery or significant historic site protected under Minnesota
statute section 307.08 unless necessary approval is obtained from the
Minnesota state historic preservation office.



h)   Each lot wholly or partially within the shoreland district and
created through a subdivision must be suitable in its natural state for the
proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the city must
consider susceptibility to flooding, existing wetlands, soil and rock
formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential,
steep topography, near-shore aquatic conditions unstable for water-based
recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant
historic sites, or any feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to
the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed
subdivision or the community.



i)   Roadways, parking areas, driveways and trails must meet the following
standards:



   1)   Where feasible, all roadways, parking areas, driveway areas,
trails and any retaining wall if it is structurally integral to the
construction of these items must meet the setback requirements established
for principal structures. If no feasible placement alternative exists, they
must be designed to minimize adverse impacts to the public water and must not
be constructed in the shore or bluff impact zones except as allowed under
subdivision 5 of this section.



   2)   Roadways and drives may cross a public water. Footings for
bridges may be allowed in the shore or bluff impact zone if they are designed
to minimize adverse impacts to the public water.



   3)   Vehicles may not be parked in shore or bluff impact zones.



   4)   Vegetation must be used to screen parking areas when viewed
from the water.



j)   Stairways, lifts, and landings must meet the following standards:



   1)   Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major
topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep
slopes to shore areas.



   2)   Stairways and lifts must not exceed six feet in width on
residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties and
public open space recreational properties if approved as part of the site
plan.



   3)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not
exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be
used for commercial properties and public open space recreational properties
if approved as part of the site plan.



   4)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or
landings.



   5)   Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above
the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground, provided they are
designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion.



   6)   Facilities such as ramps or mobility paths for physically
handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas,
provided that the dimensional and performance standards in items 2) through
5) are met.



k)   Controlled access lots except those that existed prior to March 24,
2008, must meet the following standards:



   1)   Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters for use
by owners of non-riparian lots are permissible if they meet or exceed all of
the standards below.



   2)   They must meet the width and size requirements for single
family residential lots and be suitable for the intended uses of controlled
access lots.



   3)   They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in one
subdivision or by all purchasers of non-riparian lots in one subdivision who
are provided riparian access rights on the access lot.



   4)   The maximum number of watercraft docking or mooring at any
controlled access lot is limited to six unless the width of the lot (keeping
the same lot depth) is increased by one third of the required riparian
frontage for every additional dock or moored watercraft.



   5)   Covenants or other legal instruments must be executed,
specifying which owners have authority to use the access lot and what
activities are allowed. These activities cannot significantly conflict with
general public use of the public water.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-30, adopted December 19, 2011)



9.  Exceptions to Structure Setback and Impervious Surface Requirements.



The following are exceptions to the setback and impervious surface
requirements for structures:



a)   Setback requirements from the ordinary high water level do not apply
to piers, permitted docks, boat lifts, and mooring structures.  The location
of these structures is controlled by applicable state and local regulations.
or docks.  The location of piers and docks shall be controlled by applicable
state and local regulations.



b)   There is no setback from the ordinary high water level or from top of
bluff for overhead utility poles and lines that are less than two feet in
diameter, underground utility lines and distribution equipment, fences, light
poles, traffic signals, traffic regulatory signs, mailboxes, and other
equipment that is associated with an essential public service.



c)   There is no setback from the OHWL or from top of bluff for stairways
and landings no wider than 6 feet on residential lots and for stairways and
landings on commercial properties or public open space recreational
properties if approved as part of a site plan.



d)   Shoreland R-1 lots of record existing as of February 12, 1966 may
maintain the following reduced setbacks from the OHWL under the following
conditions but must comply with all other setbacks:



   1)    The setback for the principal structure and accessory
structures including tennis courts, sport courts, swimming pools (including
the apron of the pool), walls, retaining walls (unless permitted due to
existing conditions of erosion) and any fence that obstructs lake views such
as picket or privacy fence, may be determined by a line drawn from the
closest shoreward corners of the two immediately adjacent principal
structures, as long as there is a minimum setback of 35 feet for principal
structures and accessory structures.



   2)    The setback for an unenclosed or uncovered attached deck or
patio may be determined by a line drawn from the closest shoreward corners of
the two immediately adjacent principal structures or any attached deck or
patio to that principal structure, as long as there is a minimum setback of
25 feet.



If one of the adjacent lots is vacant, the closest shoreward corner of the
principal structure on the nearest developed lot past the vacant lot will be
substituted for the vacant lot.



Figure 25







e)   In order to qualify for one of the above setback  exceptions, the
applicant must provide documentation acceptable to  the city to verify
adjacent and average setbacks.



10.  Additional Standards for a Planned Unit Development.



The applicant for a planned unit development (PUD) that is wholly or
partially in the shoreland district must meet the following requirements in
addition to the requirements of section 300.22:



a)   If the property is already fully developed under its current zoning
status but is being redeveloped, the project must:



   1)   preserve the natural features on the site and comply with the
city's ordinances and standards designed to protect the natural environment,
including regulation pertaining to steep slopes, trees, wetlands, and
floodplains; and



   2)   provide open space that is at least twenty percent of the total
project area. Open space is defined as land in its undeveloped state except
that passive recreational uses such as trails or picnic areas may be included
in the open space calculation;



b)   If a property is undeveloped or could be further subdivided under its
current zoning status, then 50 percent of the natural area must be preserved
as designated by the city. This area must be protected by a conservation
easement or restrictive covenants;



c)   In the case of either (a) or (b), impervious cover within the PUD
cannot exceed 40 percent. All impervious cover must also comply with this
section.



11.  Alteration of Shoreland.



The removal of natural vegetation within shore and bluff impact zones must be
restricted to prevent erosion into public waters, to consume nutrients in the
soil and to preserve shoreland aesthetics.  Removal of natural vegetation,
grading and filling in the shoreland district is subject to the following
provisions:



a)   intensive clearing, as defined in this ordinance, of natural
vegetation within shore and bluff impact zones is  prohibited;



b)   in shore and bluff impact zones, limited clearing of trees and shrubs
and cutting, pruning and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to
the water from the principal structure, to control noxious or invasive
vegetation, or to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic
areas, access paths, beach and watercraft access areas, and permitted water -
oriented facilities, provided that:



   1)   structures, vehicles, or other facilities are screened as
viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



   2)   existing shading of water surfaces is preserved along tributary
creeks; and



   3)   natural vegetation must be restored during and after all
construction projects to retard surface runoff and soil erosion.



The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or
branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.



c)   any grading, filling or excavation in the shoreland district which
will change or diminish the course, current or cross-section of a public
water must be approved by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.



12.  Administration.



The city must notify and supply the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
with plans and information as follows:



a)   notices of public hearings for all variances, and conditional use
permits in shoreland districts must be submitted at least 10 days prior to
such hearings;



b)   a copy of the final decision regarding variances or conditional use
permits must be submitted within 10 days after a decision has been made;



c)   all preliminary plats within the shoreland district must be submitted
at least 10 days before the meeting;



d)   all approved final plats must be submitted within 10 days after a
decision has been made; and



e)   when a variance, CUP or preliminary plat in the shoreland district is
approved after the department of natural resources has formally recommended
denial in the hearing record, the notification to the department of natural
resources of the approval must also include the findings of the planning
commission or city council which supported the approval.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2008-08, adopted March
24, 2008; amended by Ord. #2004-27, adopted August 23, 2004; amended by Ord.
#2004-26, adopted August 23, 2004)



SECTION 300.26.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT STANDARDS FOR WETLANDS, FLOODPLAIN
AND SHORELAND DISTRICTS.



1.  Purpose.



It is the intent of the city in establishing general and specific criteria
for conditional uses that such uses be subject to careful evaluation to
ensure that their location, size and design are consistent with the
standards, purposes and procedures of this ordinance and the comprehensive
plan.  The planning commission may recommend and the city council may impose
conditions on such uses in order to effect the purpose of this ordinance.



2.  General Standards.



No conditional use permit may be granted for a conditional use in the
wetlands, floodplain, or shoreland districts unless the city council
determines that all of the following standards will be met:



a)   the use is consistent with the intent of this ordinance;



b)   the use is consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the
comprehensive plan;



c)   the use does not have an undue adverse impact on governmental
facilities, utilities, services or existing or proposed improvements;



d)   the use is consistent with the city's water resources management plan;



e)   the use does not have an undue adverse impact on the public health,
safety or welfare;



f)   water bodies receiving runoff entering wetlands, floodplain or
shoreland areas shall not be adversely impacted by the water quality of
runoff;



g)   no structure or fill may be placed which adversely affects the
minimum required water storage capacity as defined in the water resources
management plan of a property;



h)   no structure subject to periodic inundation shall be designed for
human habitation or shall the structure be serviced with public utilities;



i)   structures shall have a low flood damage potential and shall be
firmly anchored;



j)   service facilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, must be
located a minimum of two feet above the flood elevation defined in the water
resources management plan;



k)   there shall be no storage of materials which are flammable, explosive
or otherwise dangerous to human, animal or plant life;



l)   there shall be only minimal interference with wetland vegetation; and



m)   required approvals shall be secured from all appropriate
jurisdictions, including the United States army corps of engineers, Minnesota
department of natural resources, governing watershed district and the Lake
Minnetonka conservation district.  Any conditions imposed upon such
approvals shall be met.



3. Wetlands District Standards.



No conditional use permit will be granted in the wetlands district unless its
approval will not adversely impact wetlands, the wetland buffer area, and
surrounding properties, the intent of this ordinance or the goals and
policies of the comprehensive plan. If applicable, granting of a conditional
use permit will be conditioned upon review of the request by all other
appropriate regulatory governmental agencies, including the watershed
district or the Minnesota department of natural resources.



4. Floodplain District Standards.



No conditional use permit may be granted in the floodplain district except in
circumstances in which its approval will not have an adverse impact on the
intent of this ordinance or the precepts of the comprehensive plan. In
addition, no conditional use permit may be issued unless efforts have been
made to mitigate to the extent feasible adverse impacts on the subject
property and adjacent properties. Granting of a conditional use permit will
be conditioned upon review of the request by all other appropriate
governmental agencies, including watershed districts, the Minnesota
department of natural resources, and the United States federal emergency
management agency and army corps of engineers.



5. Shoreland District Standards.



No conditional use permit may be granted in the shoreland district unless the
city council determines that all of the following standards are met:



a)   The use is consistent with the intent of this ordinance;



b)   The applicant demonstrates how the use will minimize the adverse
impacts to the public water and to the shore and bluff impact zones such as;



   1)   soil erosion and other pollutants entering the public water
during and after construction;



   2)   visibility of structures and other facilities from the public
water, and;



   3)   overcrowding of watercraft on the public water based on the
types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate in
relation to the suitability of the public water to safely accommodate these
watercraft;



c)   The use is consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the
comprehensive plan;



d)   The use does not have an unreasonable adverse impact on governmental
facilities, utilities, services or existing or proposed improvements;



e)   The use does not have an unreasonable adverse impact on the public
health, safety or welfare;



f)   All other appropriate governmental agencies have reviewed the
request, including watershed districts, conservation districts, and the
Minnesota department of natural resources; and



g)   The use complies with the standards in sections 300.23 and 300.24 if
applicable.



6.  Additional Shoreland District Standards.



The applicant for a conditional use permit that is required by another zoning
district and that is wholly or partially in the shoreland district must meet
the following requirements in addition to the requirements of section 300.16
or 300.21:



a)   decrease the amount of impervious cover to at least twenty percent
less than the allowable amount as regulated in section 300.16 or 300.21. All
impervious cover must also comply with this section;



b)   double the setback from the OHWL; and



c)   screen all structures as viewed from the lake in summer-leaf on
conditions.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-09, adopted March 24, 2008; amended by Ord. #2004-27,
adopted August 23, 2004)



SECTION 300.27.  SITE AND BUILDING PLAN REVIEW.



1.  Purpose.



It is the intent of this section to serve the public interest by promoting a
high standard of development within the city.  Through a comprehensive
review of both functional and aesthetic aspects of new or intensified
development, the city seeks to accomplish the following:



a)   implement the comprehensive plan;



b)   maintain and improve the city's tax base to a reasonable extent;



c)   mitigate to the extent feasible adverse impacts of one land use upon
another;



d)   promote the orderly and safe flow of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic; and



e)   preserve and enhance the natural and built environment.



2.  Approval required.



Without first obtaining site and building plan approval it shall be unlawful
to do any of the following:



a)   construct a building;



b)   move a building to any lot within the city;



c)   expand or change the use of a building or parcel of land or modify a
building, accessory structure or site or land feature in any manner which
results in a different intensity of use, including the requirement for
additional parking;



d)   grade or take other actions to prepare a site for development, except
in conformance with a permit or an approved plan; or



e)   remove earth, soils, gravel or other natural material from or place
the same on a site, except in conformance with a permit or an approved plan.



3.  Exceptions.



Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision 2 of this section, the
following shall not require site or building plan approval:



a)   construction or alteration of a single family residential building or
accessory building;



b)   enlargement of a building by less than 10 percent of its gross floor
area, provided that there is no variance involved and also provided that the
city planner has conducted an administrative review pursuant to subdivision 9
of this section;



c)   changes in the leasable space of a multi-tenant building where the
change does not intensify the use, require additional parking, or result in
an inability to maintain required performance standards as specified in
section 300.28 of this ordinance; or



d)   construction or alteration of any use permitted within the R-2
district, unless required by the planning commission or city council at the
time of rezoning or plat approval.



4.  Application.



Application for a site and building plan review shall be made to the city
planner on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the
following:



a)   a plat or map of the property showing the proposed improvements;



b)   a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties
situated wholly or partially within 400 feet of the property as such appear
on the certified records of the Hennepin county auditor;



c)   evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



d)   the fee required by section 710 of the code of city ordinances;



e)   complete site and building elevations and footprint plans, signed by
a registered architect, civil engineer, landscape architect or other
appropriate design professional; and



f)   such other information as may be required by the city.



An application for a site and building plan review on a parcel for which the
zoning is contrary to the land use designation in the comprehensive plan must
be accompanied by an application for an amendment to the comprehensive plan.
If an environmental assessment worksheet is required, no site and building
plan approval shall be granted until the environmental assessment worksheet
has been received and a negative declaration for an environmental impact
statement has been made by the city council. If an environmental impact
statement is required, no site and building plan shall be approved until the
environmental impact statement has been prepared.



5.  Standards.



In evaluating a site and building plan, the planning commission and city
council shall consider its compliance with the following:



a)   consistency with the elements and objectives of the city's
development guides, including the comprehensive plan and water resources
management plan;



b)   consistency with this ordinance;



c)   preservation of the site in its natural state to the extent
practicable by minimizing tree and soil removal and designing grade changes
to be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed or
developing areas;



d)   creation of a harmonious relationship of buildings and open spaces
with natural site features and with existing and future buildings having a
visual relationship to the development;



e)   creation of a functional and harmonious design for structures and
site features, with special attention to the following:



   1)   an internal sense of order for the buildings and uses on the
site and provision of a desirable environment for occupants, visitors and the
general community;



   2)   the amount and location of open space and landscaping;



   3)   materials, textures, colors and details of construction as an
expression of the design concept and the compatibility of the same with the
adjacent and neighboring structures and uses; and



   4)   vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways,
interior drives and parking in terms of location and number of access points
to the public streets, width of interior drives and access points, general
interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic and
arrangement and amount of parking.



f)   promotion of energy conservation through design, location,
orientation and elevation of structures, the use and location of glass in
structures and the use of landscape materials and site grading; and



g)   protection of adjacent and neighboring properties through reasonable
provision for surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers, preservation
of views, light and air and those aspects of design not adequately covered by
other regulations which may have substantial effects on neighboring land uses.



6.  Public Hearing.



a)   After receipt of a completed application, a date must be set for a
public hearing before the planning commission.  Not less than 10 days before
the public hearing, the city must send notice to the owners of properties
located wholly or partially within 400 feet of the site. Following the
hearing or any continuance thereof which is not appealed by the applicant,
the planning commission must make a decision regarding the matter.  The
planning commission may approve a building or site plan review only upon the
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of its full membership.  The
planning commission action will be final action subject to the right of
appeal, except if the application is associated with, or is an integral part
of, another land use application which requires city council action.  In
that situation, the planning commission action will be a recommendation to
the city council, and require only a majority vote. City council action
requires a majority vote.



b)   The public hearing must be held before the city council instead of
the planning commission if the application is for a city-owned park, the
project has no variances, and a public hearing complying with the notice
provisions of this paragraph has been held at a neighborhood meeting or by
the Minnetonka park board.



7.  Appeals.



Any person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission may appeal to
the city council in accordance with the provisions of section 300.04 of this
ordinance.  Notice shall be given in the same manner as required for the
public hearing before the planning commission.  The city council shall make
a decision within 120 days of submission of a completed application or such
longer period not objected to by the appellant. If the city council fails to
make a timely decision, the appeal shall be deemed to have been approved. 
The city council may reverse or amend a decision of the planning commission
by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of its full membership.



8.  Multiple Applications.



Any site and building plan application which is accompanied by a request for
a conditional use permit or for a zoning map amendment to this ordinance
shall be considered by the planning commission concurrently with the
conditional use permit or rezoning application.



9.  Administrative Approvals.



Site and building plans which do not involve a variance and which are not
accompanied by other matters requiring consideration by the planning
commission or city council may be approved by the city planner.  If any
application is processed administratively, the city planner shall render a
decision within 30 days and shall serve a copy of the decision upon the
applicant by mail.



Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city planner may appeal the
decision to the planning commission in the manner specified in section 300.04
of this ordinance.



10.  Term of Approval.



Construction of the building or initiation of the use shall begin no later
than December 31 of the year following the year in which site and building
plan approval is granted.  After the expiration of such period the approval
shall be null and void unless the planning commission grants an extension of
time or a building permit has been issued and substantial work performed on
the project.  Upon request by the applicant, the planning commission may
grant a one-year extension of time for a site and building plan approval
following compliance with the notice and public hearing requirements of this
section. The city may decline to grant an extension if there has been a
change in circumstances affecting the property or if there are other reasons
to justify the denial. A change in circumstance may be an approved
modification to the comprehensive guide plan, substantial changes to the
surrounding development pattern or other items as determined by the city.
Three consecutive one-year extensions shall be conclusive proof that the
development has not made adequate progress toward completion, and no further
extensions shall be granted, except upon a variance from this provision.



11.  Conditions.



The planning commission, city council or city planner may impose conditions
in granting approval to site and building plans to promote the intent of this
section or to protect adjacent properties.



12.  Specific Project.



Site and building plans shall be valid only for the project for which
approval is granted.  Construction of all site elements shall be in
substantial compliance with the plans and specifications approved by the
planning commission, city council or city planner.



13.  Architectural Standards.



a)   It is not the intent of the city to restrict design freedom unduly
when reviewing project architecture in connection with a site and building
plan.  However, it is in the best interest of the city to promote high
standards of architectural design and compatibility with surrounding
structures and neighborhoods.  Architectural plans shall be prepared by an
architect or other qualified person acceptable to the city planner and shall
show the following:



   1)   elevations of all sides of the building;



   2)   type and color of exterior building materials;



   3)   a typical floor plan;



   4)   dimensions of all structures; and



   5)   the location of trash and recycling containers and of heating,
ventilation and air conditioning equipment.



b)   Unadorned prestressed concrete panels, concrete block and unfinished
metal shall not be permitted as exterior materials for residential or
non-residential buildings.  This restriction shall apply to all principal
structures and to all accessory buildings except those accessory buildings
not visible from any exterior property line.  The city may, at its
discretion, allow architecturally enhanced block or concrete panels.



c)   All rooftop or ground mounted mechanical equipment and exterior trash
and recycling storage areas shall be enclosed with materials compatible with
the principal structure. Low profile, self-contained mechanical units which
blend in with the building architecture are exempt from the screening
requirement.



d)   Underground utilities shall be provided for all new and substantially
renovated structures.



14.  Landscape Plan Requirements.



Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect or other qualified
person acceptable to the city planner, drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 50 feet and shall show the following:



a)   boundary lines of the property with accurate dimensions;



b)   locations of existing and proposed buildings, parking lots, roads and
other improvements;



c)   proposed grading plan with two foot contour intervals;



d)   location, approximate size and common name of existing trees and
shrubs;



e)   a planting schedule containing symbols, quantities, common and
botanical names, size of plant materials, root condition and special planting
instructions;



f)   planting details illustrating proposed locations of all new plant
material;



g)   locations and details of other landscape features including berms,
fences and planter boxes;



h)   details of restoration of disturbed areas including areas to be
sodded or seeded;



i)   location and details of irrigation systems; and



j)   details and cross sections of all required screening.



15.  Minimum Landscaping Requirements.



a)   All open areas of a lot which are not used or improved for required
parking areas, drives or storage shall be landscaped with a combination of
overstory trees, understory trees, shrubs, flowers and ground cover
materials.  The plan for landscaping shall include ground cover, bushes,
shrubbery, trees, sculpture, foundations, decorative walks or other similar
site design features or materials in a quantity having a minimum value in
conformance with the following table:



  Project Value, Including Building Construction,



  Site Preparation, and Site Improvements        Minimum Landscape
Value



   below $1,000,000         =   2%



   $1,000,001 - $2,000,000   =      $20,000 + 1% of project value
                     in excess of $1,000,000



   $2,000,001 - $3,000,000   =      $30,000 + 0.75% of project
value
                     in excess of $2,000,000



   $3,000,001 - $4,000,000   =      $37,500 + 0.25% of project
value
                     in excess of $3,000,000



   over $4,000,000      =      1%



   In instances where healthy plant materials of acceptable species exist
on a site prior to its development, the application of the standards in this
subdivision may be adjusted by the city to allow credit for such material,
provided that such adjustment is consistent with the intent of this
ordinance.  The city may permit the seeding of areas reserved for future
expansion of the development if consistent with the intent of this ordinance.



b)   A reasonable attempt shall be made to preserve as many existing trees
as is practicable and to incorporate them into the site plan.



c)   All new landscape trees and shrubs must meet the American Standard
for Nursery Stock and American National Standard relating to planting
guidelines, quality of stock and appropriate sizing of the root ball.
Landscape trees must be balled and burlapped or moved from the growing site
by tree spade. Deciduous trees will be not less than one and one quarter
inches but not more than three inches caliper for balled and burlapped trees,
and not less than three inches but not more than six inches caliper for
spade-moved trees. Coniferous trees will not be less than six feet in height
but no more than eight feet for balled and burlapped trees, and not less than
eight feet in height but not more than fourteen feet for spade-moved
coniferous trees.



   The city may allow larger balled and burlapped or spade moved trees if
these trees are accompanied with a three year guarantee.



d)   All site areas not covered by buildings, sidewalks, parking lots,
driveways, patios or similar hard surface materials shall be covered with sod
or an equivalent ground cover approved by the city.  This requirement shall
not apply to site areas retained in a natural state.



e)   In order to provide for adequate maintenance of landscaped areas, an
underground sprinkler system shall be provided as part of each new
development, except one and two-family dwellings and additions to existing
structures which do not at least equal the floor area of the existing
structure.  A sprinkler system shall be provided for all landscaped areas
except areas to be preserved in a natural state.



f)   Not more than 25 percent of the required number of trees shall be
composed of one species unless approved by the city.  No required tree shall
be any of the following:



   1)   a species of the genus ulmus (elm), except those elms bred to
be immune to dutch elm disease;



   2)   box elder;



   3)   ash,



   4)   female ginko; or



   5)   Colorado spruce.



16.  Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.



a)   All parking lots containing over 150 stalls shall be designed to
incorporate unpaved, landscaped islands in number and dimension as required
by the city.  All landscape islands shall contain a minimum of 180 square
feet.  Islands which are necessary to promote the safe and efficient flow of
traffic shall not be subject to the “150 stall” standard and shall be
required by the city when warranted.



b)   Parking lot landscape areas, including landscape islands, shall be
reasonably distributed throughout the parking lot area so as to break up
expanses of paved areas.  Parking lot landscape areas shall be provided with
deciduous shade trees, ornamental or evergreen trees, plus ground cover,
mulch and shrubbery as determined appropriate by the planning commission. 
Parking lot landscape trees shall be provided at the rate of one tree for
each 15 surface parking spaces provided, or major fraction thereof.  Parking
lot landscaping shall be contained in planting beds bordered by a raised
concrete curb or equivalent approved by the planning commission.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



17.  Maintenance of Landscaping.



The owner, tenant and their respective agents shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping in a condition presenting
a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and free from refuse and debris.
Plants and ground cover which are required by an approved site or landscape
plan and which have died, have severely declined or have been damaged, must
be replaced within three months of notification by the city. However, the
time for compliance may be extended up to nine months by the city planner in
order to allow for seasonal or weather conditions. Trees and shrubbery will
be considered to be severely declined if more than 25 percent of the crown
has died.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-30, adopted December 19, 2011)



18.  Retaining Walls.



Retaining walls exceeding five feet in height, including staged walls which
cumulatively exceed five feet in height, must be constructed in accordance
with plans prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect.



19.  Landscaping Security Required.



When screening, landscaping or other similar improvements to property are
required by this ordinance, a performance security must be supplied by the
owner in an amount equal to at least one and one-half times the value of such
screening, landscaping, or other improvements. The security amount must
include reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the city for engineering,
legal or other fees in connection with making or completing such
improvements. The security must be provided before the city issues any
building permit and must be valid for one full growing season after the date
of installation of the landscaping. The city may accept a letter of credit,
cash escrow or equivalent acceptable to the city attorney to satisfy this
security requirement.  In the event construction of the project is not
completed within the time prescribed by building permits and other approvals,
the city may, at its option, use the security to complete the work required
at the expense of the owner.



The city may allow an extended period of time for completion of all
landscaping if the delay is due to conditions which are reasonably beyond the
control of the developer.  Extensions which may not exceed nine months, may
be granted due to seasonal or weather conditions.  When an extension is
granted, the city may require such additional security as it deems
appropriate.



20.  Screening and Buffering.



a)   The following uses shall be screened or buffered in accordance with
the requirements of this subdivision.



   1)   Principal buildings and structures and any building or
structure accessory thereto located in any business, industrial or planned
unit development district containing non-residential uses shall be buffered
from lots used for any residential purpose.



   2)   Principal buildings and structures and any building or
structure accessory thereto located in any R-3, R-4, R-5 or planned unit
development district containing residential development at densities
exceeding 4 units per acre shall be buffered from lots located in any R-1 or
R-2 district.



   3)   Off-street parking facilities containing six or more spaces
shall be buffered from streets located within 50 feet, and from lots which
are used for any residential purpose.



   4)   Loading docks shall be screened from all lot lines and public
roads.



   5)   Trash storage facilities shall be screened from all lot lines
and public roads.



   6)   Outside storage in business and industrial districts which is
allowed by other provisions of this ordinance shall be screened from all
public views.



b)   Required screening or buffering may be achieved with fences, walls,
earth berms, hedges or other landscape materials.  All walls and fences
shall be architecturally harmonious with the principal building.  Earth
berms shall not exceed a slope of 3:1. The screen shall be designed to employ
materials which provide an effective visual barrier during all seasons.



c)   All required screening or buffering shall be located on the lot
occupied by the use, building, facility or structure to be screened.  No
screening or buffering shall be located on any public right of way or within
eight feet of the traveled portion of any street or highway.



d)   Screening or buffering required by this section shall be of a height
needed to accomplish the goals of this section.  Height of plantings
required under this section shall be measured at the time of installation.



21.  Public Nuisance.



Property that does not comply with a condition imposed in a building and site
plan approval or with a requirement in subdivisions 15 - 20 of section 300.27
is declared a public nuisance that may be abated in accordance with the
provisions of section 845.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-25, adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. #2004-37,
adopted December 20, 2004; amended by Ord. #2004-27, adopted August 23, 2004;
amended by Ord. #2004-01, adopted January 5, 2004; amended by Ord. #2003-25,
adopted October 27, 2003)



SECTION 300.28.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of performance standards is to establish specific and
quantifiable limitations on identified types of pollution and other
activities which have a high nuisance potential.  The performance standards
apply in all zoning districts unless specifically stated to the contrary.



2.  Performance Standards Regulating Exterior Lighting.



a)   Exterior lighting shall be designed and arranged to limit direct
illumination and glare upon or into any contiguous parcel.  Reflected glare
or spill light shall not exceed five-tenths footcandles as measured on the
property line when abutting any residential parcel and one footcandle on any
abutting commercial or industrial parcel.  Street lights installed in public
right-of-way shall be excepted from these standards.



b)   Mitigative measures shall be employed to limit glare and spill light
to protect neighboring parcels and to maintain traffic safety on public
roads.  These measures shall include lenses, shields, louvers, prismatic
control devices and limitations on the height and type of fixtures.  The
city may also limit the hours of operation of outdoor lighting if it is
deemed necessary to reduce impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.



c)   No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.



d)   Direct, off-site views of the light source shall not be permitted
except for globe and ornamental light fixtures approved in conjunction with a
site and building plan.  Globe and ornamental fixtures shall only be
approved when the developer can demonstrate that off-site impacts stemming
from direct views of the bulb are mitigated by the fixture design or location
or both.



e)   The city may require submission of a light distribution plan if
deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this ordinance.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-20, adopted Dec. 3, 2012; amended by Ord. 2012-07.
adopted June 25, 2012)



3.  Performance Standards Regulating Noise and Vibration.



a)   Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with and
regulated by the standards of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.  Any
use established or remodeled after the effective date of this ordinance shall
be so operated as to prevent vibration discernable at any point beyond the
lot line of the site on which such use is located. The city may also limit
the hours of operation of outdoor noise if it is deemed necessary to reduce
impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.



b)   Ground vibration and noise caused by motor vehicles, trains, aircraft
operations or temporary construction or demolition shall be exempt from these
regulations. However, if deemed appropriate, the city may establish limits on
the hours of operation of temporary construction or demolition operation to
limit off-site impacts



4.  Performance Standards Regulating Smoke and Particulate Matter.



No use shall produce or emit smoke, dust or particulate matter exceeding
applicable regulations established by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



5.  Performance Standards Regulating Odor.



No use shall produce unreasonable or disturbing odors beyond the property
line exceeding applicable regulations established by the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency.



6.  Performance Standards Regulating Toxic or Noxious Matter.



No use or operation shall emit a concentration of toxic or noxious matter
across the property line which exceeds applicable regulations of the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



7.  Performance Standards Regulating Radiation.



No operation shall be conducted which exceeds the standards established by
applicable regulations of the Minnesota Department of Health.



8.  Performance Standards Regulating Heat and Humidity.



No use shall produce any unreasonable, disturbing or unnecessary emissions of
heat or humidity beyond the property line which cause material distress,
discomfort or injury to persons of ordinary sensitivity.



9.  Performance Standards Regulating Electromagnetic Interference.



No use shall produce electromagnetic interference with normal radio or
television reception in any residential district, or exceed applicable
standards established by any applicable federal or state regulations.



10.  Performance Standards Regulating Fire and Explosive Hazards.



All uses shall be subject to the fire prevention code of the city.



11.  Performance Standards Regulating Liquid or Solid Waste.



All uses shall be subject to: (1) applicable regulations of the city and the
metropolitan waste control commission governing discharge into a public storm
or sanitary sewer, waterway or stream; and (2) the waste controls found in
city ordinance and water resources management plan.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-07, adopted March 2, 2015)



12.  Parking and Loading Requirements.



a)   Parking and loading shall be provided and maintained in accordance
with the following.



   1)   No change of use, tenancy or occupancy of a parcel of land or
building, including construction of a new building or an addition to a
building, which requires additional parking or loading spaces shall be
allowed until such additional parking or loading is approved and furnished. 
Review may be required under the site and building plan review procedures of
section 300.27 of this ordinance.



   2)   Required parking and loading areas and the driveways providing
access to them shall not be used for storage, display, sales, rental or
repair or motor vehicles or other goods or for the storage of inoperable
vehicles or snow.



   3)   Required parking and loading spaces shall be located on the
same development site as the use served.  The city may approve off-site
parking if the city council finds the following:



      a.   reasonable access shall be provided from the off-site
parking facilities to the use being served;



      b.   the parking shall be within 400 feet of a building
entrance of the use being served;



      c.   the parking area shall be under the same ownership as the
site served, under public ownership or the use of the parking facilities
shall be protected by a recorded instrument, acceptable to the city;



      d.   failure to provide on-site parking shall not encourage
parking on the public streets, other private property or in private driveways
or other areas not expressly set aside for such purposes; and



      e.   the  off-site parking shall be maintained until such
time as on-site parking is provided or an alternate off-site parking facility
is approved by the city as meeting the requirements of this ordinance.



   4)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision to the
contrary, a land use may provide the required off-street parking area for
additional land uses on the same development site if the following conditions
are met:



      a.   because of the hours of operation of the respective uses,
their sizes and their modes of operation there will be available to each use
during its primary hours of operation an amount of parking sufficient to meet
the needs of such use; and



      b.   the joint use of the parking facilities shall be
protected by a recorded instrument, acceptable to the city.



   5)   Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided in an amount and
design adequate to the demand generated by each use.



   6)   Parking areas shall not be used to meet stormwater holding
requirements as specified in the water resources management plan.



   7)   Parking areas and structures shall be designed and maintained
to avoid vehicles queued within the public right-of-way. Gates or other
access limiting devices may be installed only after a finding by the city
that no adverse impacts on public right-of-way will result.



b)   Parking areas shall be designed in conformance with the following:
(Figure 26)



Figure 26









   1)   Parking stalls shall have a minimum paved dimension of 8.5 feet
by 18 feet.  Stall and aisle dimensions shall be as noted below for the
given angle:



Angle      Curb Length   Stall
Length   Aisle      Low-Turnover
                        Parking Structure
                        Aisle Width***



45o      12.0'      18.0'      13.5'*      12'
60o      10.0'      18.0'      18.5'*      16'
75o      9.0'      19.0'      23'      18'
90o      8.5'      18.0'      26'**      24'
Parallel      20.0'      8.0'      22'      22'



  *   one way aisles only.



**   aisles serving one row of 90o angle parking spaces may be 22 feet
wide.



***   aisle widths within parking structures for low-turnover uses, such
as offices, industrial facilities, residential complexes and hospitals. 
Retail uses and other uses with similar traffic characteristics are
considered high-turnover uses.



   2)   Up to 25 percent of the total number of required spaces may be
for compact cars and have minimum paved dimensions as follows:




      angle        curb length      stall length





      45o         10.0'      16.0'





      60o         8.5'      17.5'





      75o         8.0'      16.5'





      90o         7.5'      16.0'




      parallel         16.0'      8.0'



   Compact car parking may be provided if the following conditions are met:



      a.   the parking area shall have a total size of at least 20
stalls;



      b.   compact car stalls shall be identified by appropriate
directional signs consistent with section 325 of the code of city ordinances;



      c.   compact car stalls shall be distributed throughout the
parking area so as to have reasonable proximity to the structure served but
shall not have generally preferential locations such that their use by
non-compact cars will be encouraged;



      d.   the design of compact car areas shall to the maximum
feasible extent be such as to discourage their use by non-compact cars; and



      e.   compact parking stalls shall not be permitted for high
turnover parking lots.



   3)   All parking areas except those serving one and two family
dwellings on local streets shall be designed so that cars shall not be
required to back into the street. If deemed necessary for traffic safety,
turn-around areas may be required.



   4)   Buffers and setbacks shall be provided as follows.



      a.   Access drives, driveways and aisles shall not be allowed
to intrude into a required parking setback except at the access point or
where a joint drive serving more than one property will provide better or
safer traffic circulation; and



      b.   Parking lots, driving aisles, loading spaces and
maneuvering areas shall have setbacks as indicated in the following table:









 




Required Parking Setbacks




land use designation of adjacent property

 

zoning classificationof subject property






 

R-1/R-2

 

R-3

 

R-4

 

R-5

 

B-1

 

B-2

 

B-3

 

I-1




R-1 with CUP for public buildings

 
20'
 
20'
 
20'
 
20'
 
20'
 
20'
 
20'
 
20'



low density

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

30'

 

30'




mid density

 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

30'

 

30'




high density

 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

30'

 

30'




commercial

 

20'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

20'




industrial

 

20'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'




office

 

20'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'




institutional

 

20'

 

10'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'




public open space

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'




right-of-way

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'

 

20'





 



      Land use of adjacent property is as designated in the
comprehensive plan.  Where a mix of land uses is indicated on the
comprehensive plan for adjacent property, the most restrictive applicable
buffering requirement shall be observed.  The requirements of this table may
be waived at points where shared access is utilized.



   5)   All parking and loading areas, aisles and driveways shall be
bordered with raised concrete curbs or equivalent approved by the city. 
Single family and two family dwelling developments shall be exempted from
this requirement.



   6)   All parking, loading and driveway areas shall be surfaced with
asphalt, concrete or equivalent material approved by the city except single
family homes which are subject to the driveway provisions of section 1105 of
the code of city ordinances.



   7)   Except in the R-1 and R-2 districts, all parking stalls shall
be marked with painted lines not less than four inches wide in accordance
with the approved site and building plan.



   8)   All parking lots shall provide islands for traffic control as
needed.



c)   The number of required parking spaces shall comply with the following.



   1)   Calculating the number of spaces shall be in accordance with
the following:



      a.   if the number of off-street parking spaces results in a
fraction, each fraction of one-half or more shall constitute another space;



      b.   in churches and other places of public assembly in which
patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other similar seating
facilities, each 24 inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for
the purpose of this subdivision;



      c.   except in shopping centers or where joint parking
arrangements have been approved, if a structure contains two or more uses,
each use shall be calculated separately in determining the total off-street
parking spaces required;



      d.   for mixed-use buildings, parking requirements shall be
determined by the city based on the existing and potential uses of the
building.  In cases where future potential uses of a building will generate
additional parking demand, the city may require a proof of parking plan for
the difference between minimum parking requirements and the anticipated
future demand; and



      e.   if warranted by unique characteristics, or documented
parking demand for similar developments, or both, the city may allow
reductions in the number of parking spaces actually constructed as long as
the applicant provides a proof of future parking plan.  The plan must show
the location for all minimum required parking spaces in conformance with
applicable setback requirements.  The city may require installation of the
additional parking spaces whenever the need arises.



   2)   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces of each use
shall be as follows:



      a.   single-family dwelling and two-family dwellings: two
parking spaces for each dwelling unit.  For single-family dwellings, a 
suitable location for a garage measuring at least 20 feet by 24 feet which
does not require a variance shall be provided for each dwelling unit. For
two-family dwellings, a suitable location for a garage measuring at least 13
feet by 24 feet, which does not require a variance, shall be provided for
each dwelling unit.  Such spaces must be shown on a survey or site plan to
be submitted when applying for a building permit to construct a new dwelling
or alter an existing space;



      b.   multiple family dwelling: two parking spaces for each
dwelling unit, of which one space per dwelling unit shall be completely
enclosed. The two required parking spaces may not include the space in front
of garage doors. Additional spaces for visitor parking shall be provided
based on the specific characteristics of a development and the anticipated
demand for visitor spaces as determined by the city. These characteristics
may include, but shall not be limited to, the project size, the number of
enclosed parking spaces, the accessibility of open parking spaces, access to
on-street parking, topographical characteristics, the preservation of
significant trees, the impact to surrounding property, and the site and
building design. Developments of 12 or fewer dwelling units, where each unit
has two enclosed parking stalls, must have a minimum visitor parking ratio of
0.75 spaces per dwelling unit. Visitor parking may include spaces in front of
garage doors for individual units;



      c.   senior citizen housing developments: one parking space
for each unit shall be required.  The city may require proof of parking of
two spaces per unit if conversion to general housing appears possible.  At
least 50 percent of the required parking spaces shall be within an enclosed
weather controlled structure connected to the principal structure. The
visitor parking requirements for multiple dwellings shall apply;



      d.   boarding or lodging house: one parking space for each two
persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided;



      e.   convalescent or nursing home: one parking space for each
four beds for which accommodations are offered, plus three spaces for each
four employees on the major shift.  If the city determines that the building
is convertible to market rate housing, two stalls may be required for each
potential dwelling unit under a proof-of-parking plan. Each facility must
provide a parking plan or agreement for special event parking, if there is
not adequate on-site parking for these events;



      f.   hospital: one parking space for each two hospital beds
plus one space for each employee on the major shift;



      g.   religious institutions and facilities, other buildings
that include public assembly space, such as community centers and buildings
of fraternal organizations, but excluding hotels, and related uses: one
parking space for each 2.5 seats based on the design capacity of the main
sanctuary or assembly space. The city may require additional spaces for
offices, classrooms, day care centers or other uses operated on the grounds;



      h.   senior high school: one parking space for each classroom
plus one space for each 10 students based upon design capacity;



      i.   elementary, junior high school or similar school: two
parking spaces for each classroom;



      j.   conditionally permitted schools which are not covered by
paragraphs h. and i.: one parking space for every three students, plus one
space for each instructor;



      k.   municipal administration building, public library,
museum, art gallery, post office or other municipal service building: 10
parking spaces plus one space for each 500 square feet of floor area plus one
space for each vehicle customarily kept on the premises;



      l.   golf course, golf clubhouse, country club, swimming club,
tennis club, racquetball club or handball club: 20 spaces plus one space for
each 500 square feet of floor area in the principal structure;



      m.   general office building, bank and savings and loan
association: one parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area with a
minimum of 10 spaces required. For class A office buildings exceeding 100,000
square feet of floor area, parking requirements may be reduced based on
parking studies of the anticipated parking demand of the specific building.
Parking studies are to be prepared by a registered traffic engineer or
certified planner;



      n.   medical and dental office: one parking space for each 175
square feet of floor area with a minimum of 20 spaces required;



      o.   shopping center:



         1.   regional - a minimum of 5.5 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross area;



         2.   neighborhood or community - a minimum of 4.5 spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross area.



         If a center contains substantial interior common space,
required parking spaces may be reduced based on an analysis of parking demand
or proof of parking to be installed if needed at the request of city. 
Parking demand for restaurants and theaters located within the center will be
added to the above figures based upon the requirements of this subdivision;



      p.   automobile service or gas station: four parking spaces
plus three parking spaces for each service stall, one parking space for each
250 square feet of building area used  for the sale of goods or services and
adequate parking for gas pump areas;



      q.   bowling alley: five parking spaces for each bowling lane;



      r.   hotel or motel: parking subject to the following:



         1.   with no other facilities than guest rooms - one
space per room plus one space per employee on the major shift;



         2.   with other facilities, including restaurants,
conference facilities or meeting rooms - one space per room plus one space
per each 4.5 persons of capacity in other facilities.



      s.   health or fitness center: one parking space for each 225
square feet of floor area;



      t.   miniature golf course: 1.5 parking spaces per golf hole;



      u.   archery or golf driving range: one parking space for each
target or driving tee;



      v.   assembly or exhibition hall, auditorium, sports arena,
banquet facility, conference facility: one parking space for each three seats
based upon design capacity;



      w.   theater: one parking space for each three seats for a
theater with 15 screens or less that does not share parking with a shopping
center and one parking space for each four seats for all other theaters;



      x.   restaurant, tavern or lounge:



         1.   sit down full service:



            a)   without on-sale intoxicating liquor or dance
hall license - one space per 60 square feet of gross floor area or one space
per 2.5 seats, whichever is greater;



            b)   with on-sale intoxicating liquor or dance
hall license - one space per 50 square feet of gross floor area or one space
per two seats, whichever is greater, except that in cases in which there is a
bar area separate from the food service area, a dance area larger than 100
square feet, or other public areas, additional parking will be required as
necessary.



         2.   fast food or self service: one space per 60 square
feet of gross floor area.



      y.   skating rink: one parking space for each 200 square feet
of floor area;



      z.   retail store or service establishment: one space for each
250 square feet of gross floor area within the building with a minimum of
five parking spaces;



      aa.   wholesale business, storage or warehouse establishment:
one space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for any building
used solely in a storage capacity.  For a mixed use building where storage
and warehousing is an incidental use to other activity, required parking
spaces shall be based upon the specific requirements for each use appearing
in this subdivision. Parking requirements for a mixed use building or a
building designed to contain mixed uses shall be calculated by allocating a
minimum of 50 percent of gross floor area to the most intense use;



      bb.   manufacturing, processing or assembly plant: one parking
space for each employee on the major shift or one parking space for each 350
square feet of gross floor area devoted to manufacturing plus one space per
250 square feet of gross floor area devoted to office use, whichever is
greater, plus one space for each motor vehicle customarily kept on the
premises;



      cc.   licensed day care facility: one parking space for each
six children based on the licensed capacity of the facility;



   3)   One handicapped parking stall shall be provided for each 50
stalls. Handicapped parking spaces shall be in compliance with the uniform
building code and state law.



   4)   The parking requirement for uses not listed in this subdivision
may be established by the city based on the characteristics of the use and
available information on parking demand for such use.



d)   Loading and unloading requirements shall be in compliance with the
following.



   1)   Any use which the city believes requires the provision of
designated spaces for the loading, unloading or parking of trucks or
semi-trailers shall provide such spaces and maneuvering area in the number
and configuration which shall be deemed necessary in order to prevent
interference with the use of the public right-of-way and with vehicles
entering onto or exiting from the public right-of-way.



   2)   Semi-trailer spaces shall be at least 55 feet in length, 10
feet in width and 14 feet in height plus necessary additional maneuvering
space.



   3)   Spaces shall not be located on a street side of any building,
or, if so located, shall be provided with screening deemed adequate by the
city.



   4)   Spaces and the associated maneuvering area shall be at least 50
feet from the property line of any property which is zoned for or designated
in the comprehensive plan as residential.



   5)   No trucks shall be parked in areas other than those designed
for such purpose on an approved site plan.



   6)   Delivery and service areas shall be sized in accordance with
Minnesota Department of Transportation WB-60 standards.



e)   Business establishments containing drive-up facilities, including
restaurants and financial institutions, shall provide a stacking area for
vehicles on the site.  A minimum of 6 vehicle spaces per lane shall be
provided.



   All such spaces shall be entirely on the site and shall be in addition
to parking spaces required for the principal use.  The vehicle stacking area
shall not extend beyond the street right-of-way line and shall be delineated
in such a manner that vehicles waiting in line will not interfere with nor
obstruct the primary driving, parking and pedestrian facilities on the site.



f)   All required parking spaces shall be accessed by adequate maneuvering
space.  All dead-end parking rows shall contain a turn around area at least
13 feet deep.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2012-07,
adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. #2004-37, adopted December 20, 2004)



13.  Receive-Only Satellite Dish Antennas and Other Antenna Devices.



a)   Receive-only satellite dish antennas and other antenna devices
subject to the following requirements:



   1)   shall be in compliance with all city building and electrical
code requirements;



   2)   verification that the structural design has been approved by a
professional engineer;



   3)   verification that the mounting system and installation have
been approved by a professional engineer;



   4)   one per building or, if more than one antenna is proposed, the
antennas shall be clustered in a single, screened location;



   5)   submission of written authorization from the property owner;



   6)   no advertising message shall be on the antenna structure;



   7)   shall comply with setback requirements for principal structures
and in no event shall be located between the principal structure and the
front lot line;



   8)   shall be screened to the greatest extent practicable to
minimize visual impacts on surrounding properties.  Screening shall include
landscape materials for ground mounted antennas and materials compatible with
those utilized on the exterior of the building for roof mounted antennas;



   9)   antennas located closer to a property line than the height of
the antenna shall be designed and engineered to collapse progressively within
the distance between the antenna and the property line;



   10)   shall be in compliance with all applicable federal
communications commission (FCC) requirements; and



   11)   antenna height shall be no more than 60 feet as measured from
the ground upon which it is located.



14.  Traffic Studies.



a)   The city may require a traffic analysis to be prepared by a
registered traffic engineer approved by the city to assess potential traffic
impacts on local streets and highways. If impacts on service levels of
roadways and intersections are anticipated, the project will be approved only
contingent upon a traffic management plan that adequately mitigates those
impacts.  The plan may include travel demand management strategies, use of
transit facilities or other appropriate measures to reduce traffic
generation, and necessary improvements to road systems.  The developer shall
have the responsibility to install all necessary road system improvements.



15.  Grading, Filling and Excavation.



a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require preparation and
implementation of grading and erosion control plans for land-disturbing
activity to:



   1)   prevent sediment deposits on roadways;



   2)   retain sediment on site;



   3)   prevent disruption or damage to water resources and public
stormwater systems;



   4)   prevent adverse impacts to neighboring property



   5)   reduce soil compaction and enhance infiltration and the
establishment of vegetation;



   6)   prevent damage to natural resources, such as trees, that are
intended to be preserved; and



   7)   maintain stable slopes.



b)   Grading Permit.



   1)   Except as provided below, a grading permit is required for the
following activities:



      a.   excavating, grading, filling or other land-disturbing
activity on a per project basis that exposes soil in an area or areas
encompassing at least 5,000 square feet or results in the movement of at
least 50 cubic yards of material;



      b.    excavating, grading, filling or any other
land-disturbing activity that exposes soil in or on any steep slope, wetland,
floodplain or shoreland; or



      c.   excavating, grading, filling or any other land-disturbing
activity that de-stabilizes the soil, involves the movement of contaminated
soils, involves work in the right-of-way that is approved by the city
engineer, or creates the potential of erosion onto property not in common
ownership with the location of the activity or creates the potential of
erosion into a water resource.



   2)   A separate grading permit is not required for land disturbing
activity that is undertaken in compliance with a grading and erosion control
plan approved in conjunction with a building permit if in conformance with
subdivisions 16 and 17 of this section.



c)   Grading and Erosion Control Plan. A grading and erosion control plan
is required to be submitted for city approval as part of an application for
any grading permit, preliminary plat, site plan review, lot division, and
wetland/floodplain alteration permit, and as part of an application for a
building permit that involves any amount of land-disturbing activity.



d)   Definition. For purpose of subdivisions 15, 16, 17, and 18, the term
"water resource or resources" means any lake, creek, pond, or wetland.



(Subdivision repealed and replaced by Ord. 2011-29, adopted December 19, 2011)



16.  Application for a Grading Permit or a Grading and Erosion Control Plan.



a)   An application for a grading permit must be made to the city planner
on forms provided by the city and be accompanied by the permit fee specified
in section 710 and a grading and erosion control plan that includes the
following information as required by the city:



   1)   existing and proposed final grades utilizing two foot contour
intervals and spot elevations;



   2)   a survey showing the site's property lines, location and
elevation of all existing and proposed roads, utilities and structures on and
adjacent to the site;



   3)   a development concept plan indicating how the re-contoured
parcel may be developed in a manner consistent with this section and the
comprehensive plan;



   4)   a survey showing all floodplain areas, water resources and
their required buffers on and adjacent to the site, and indicating the
receiving floodplain or water resource for drainage from the site;



   5)   the location of any water body that is identified as impaired
pursuant to section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act and meeting the specific
impaired waters criteria of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and that
is within one mile of the site;



   6)   a drainage plan that includes the existing and proposed
direction of drainage, stormwater conveyance systems to which the site
drains, any stormwater management practices that are required by the city's
water resources management plan and any engineering plans and specifications
that may be deemed necessary by the city engineer, along with supporting
calculations for all engineering work;



   7)   a tree survey and tree preservation plan that complies with the
requirements of city code 300.28 subdivision 19;



   8)   a landscaping and site restoration plan;



   9)   a grading and erosion control plan which indicates how the
control measures in subdivision 17 will be implemented;



   10)   a stormwater pollution prevention plan;



   11)   designated locations for cleaning concrete trucks if needed;



   12)   proposed locations of soil stock piles;



   13)   the location of where compaction is to be prevented and/or
mitigated;



   14)   an estimate of the amounts of material being moved within the
site, onto the site, and away from the site;



   15)   an earth work balance summary designating cut and fill
locations;



   16)   a soils engineering report and a geological report including
data obtained from the requested site investigation; a description of the
types, composition, permeability, stability, erodability and distribution of
existing soils on the site; a description of the site geology; and
conclusions and revisions to the proposed land-disturbing activity or erosion
control plan;



   17)   a construction management plan which includes a description of
grading and construction activities, a schedule that outlines these
activities, hours of activity, a traffic analysis showing how the material
will be removed from or delivered to the site, a site maintenance inspection
schedule and other items requested by the city. The site maintenance
inspection schedule must indicate the person responsible for implementing the
erosion control plan;



   18)   written permission from the owner of the property where
grading activity will take place, if the property is not owned by the
applicant;



   19)   a cash deposit or a letter of credit in a form acceptable to
the city attorney in an amount not to exceed 150% of the estimated cost of
the work, or 125% of an actual bid, to ensure proper implementation of a
grading and erosion control plan or site restoration if the applicant
defaults on his or her responsibilities;



   20)   status of all necessary permits from other governmental
agencies, including a watershed district, the state, and federal government,
site inspection logs, transfer of permit ownership as required by the MPCA,
or proof that a permit has been approved or is not required by these agencies.



   21)   a cash deposit in an amount not to exceed 150% of the
estimated cost, or 125% of an actual bid, for the city to hire a private
inspector to inspect the site for compliance during the work, if the area of
site disturbance encompasses one acre or more. The city may instead allow the
applicant to hire a private inspector if the inspector provides weekly
compliance updates to the city on a form acceptable to the city and if the
agreement with the inspector and the inspector's contact information are
provided to the city before issuance of the permit;



   22)   a cash deposit or a letter of credit in a form acceptable to
the city attorney in an amount not to exceed 150% of the estimated cost of
potential repairs to public streets from earth hauling activities as
reasonably determined by the city engineer;



   23)   an agreement signed by the applicant indicating that the city
may use the financial security to correct violations of the approved plan
within 48 hours of written notification by the city to the applicant; and



   24)   other information as may be required by the city.



b)   A grading permit and grading and erosion control plan will not be
approved until all erosion control, tree protection and construction limit
measures have been installed and inspected by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-06, adopted March 2, 2015; amended by Ord. 2012-07,
adopted June 25, 2012; Subdivision repealed and replaced by Ord. 2011-29,
adopted December 19, 2011)



17.  Standards for Grading and Erosion Control Plans.



a)   All plans must be consistent with the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency's construction general permit as applicable.



b)   Except as otherwise provided by the city planner, a grading and
erosion control plan and the work conducted under an approved plan must
comply with all of the following requirements as applicable:



   1)   The work must be scheduled so as to minimize the amount of soil
exposed at any one time. Land disturbance and removal of existing vegetation
must be minimized to avoid adverse impacts to adjacent properties and natural
resources. All exposed soil must be stabilized as soon as possible if the
exposed soil has not been worked for 14 days.



   2)   Structures must be designed to conform to the existing site
topography as much as reasonably possible.



   3)   Temporary rock construction driveways or other acceptable best
management practice must be installed and maintained as needed wherever
vehicles enter and exit a site.



   4)   Streets must be cleaned and swept whenever tracking of
sediments occurs and before sites are left idle for weekends and holidays. A
regular sweeping schedule must be established. A copy of the street-sweeping
service agreement and company contact information may be required before
issuance of the permit.



   5)   Silt fence or equivalent sediment control measures to be used
must conform to the city's standard.



   6)   Silt fences or equivalent sediment control measures must be
installed along the downslope and sideslope perimeters of the approved
grading and construction limits. Perimeter controls should be located to
maintain a buffer of existing vegetation during construction, as site
conditions allow, along the edges of any curbs, wetlands, channels or other
water resources that could receive sediment from the site.



   7)   Tree protection or construction fence must be installed to
minimize impacts to the critical root zones of adjacent trees or to prevent
impacts to adjacent properties.



   8)   The city may require heavy-duty fencing such as chain link or
wire mesh along the approved grading and construction limits. The city may
require signs to be posted that prohibit construction or grading activity
beyond the required fencing.



   9)   Sufficient silt fence or equivalent is required to hold all
sheet flow runoff generated at an individual site. Additional measures such
as check dams, diversion, temporary or permanent sedimentation basins are
required to handle channelized flow.



   10)   All erosion and sediment control and tree and wetland
protection measures must be inspected on a weekly basis and maintained.
Sediment must be removed from these measures when it accumulates to a depth
of 1/3 of the designed capacity.



   11)   All storm drain inlets must be protected during construction.



   12)   Newly installed and rehabilitated catch basins must be
provided with a sump area or grit chamber for collecting coarse-grained
material as required by the city engineer. Such basins must be cleaned when
they are half filled with material and at the time of project completion.



   13)    Pipe outlets must be provided with temporary or permanent
energy dissipation within 24 hours of connection to a surface water.



   14)      The normal wetted perimeter of any temporary or permanent
drainage ditch or swale that drains water from the site, or diverts water
around a site must be stabilized. Stabilization must be completed within 24
hours of connecting to a surface water. Portions of the ditch that are under
construction must be stabilized within 24 hours after the construction
activity in that portion has ceased. The normal wetted perimeter is defined
as the area that is in contact with water during annual flow events.



   15)   Sediment, construction debris, or other temporary impacts from
the activity must be removed from water resources, adjacent properties, or
other areas that were intended to be protected as part of the city's
approval. The removal must restore the sites to previous or improved
conditions. The city must be contacted before removing sediment from a water
resource, tree preservation area, or other protected area to ensure that the
removal does not result in additional damage. A restoration plan may be
required by the city.



   16)   Temporary soil stockpiles must have silt fence or other
sediment controls in place if not already contained by perimeter controls,
and must not be placed in any natural buffers, surface waters, drainage
patterns or storm water conveyances.



   17)   Soil stockpiles and slopes equal to or greater than 3:1 that
will not be worked for over 14 days must be stabilized with vegetation,
mulch, tarps or other means unless no run-off from them is directed toward a
watercourse, tree protection area, or the site perimeter. The city may
require that slopes steeper than 12% that will not be worked for 14 days must
be temporarily stabilized if directed toward a water resource, tree
protection area, adjacent property, roadway, or other sensitive area.



   18)   The work must avoid creating or altering topography in a
manner that appears artificial or out of place with adjacent property.



   19)   Slopes that are created may not be steeper than 3:1. The city
may allow temporary or permanent created slopes steeper than 3:1 in an area
where a retaining wall would pose a practical difficulty or in public
improvements that serve the greater public good if the final grades are
approved by the city engineer and the created slope:



      a.   is not steeper than 2:1 in any event;



      b.   is permanently stabilized with deep-rooted vegetation,
rip-rap, boulders, or other groundcover adequate to control erosion and does
not require mowing or other maintenance by equipment that would need to
traverse the slope;



      c.   contains no unbroken slope length greater than 30 feet in
order to maintain sheet flow and minimize rills and gullies;



      d.   is not directed toward a water resource;



      e.   does not inhibit snow storage or maintenance of a public
improvement and is not located within a public easement;



      f.   does not obstruct a traffic sightline or pose a safety
hazard; and



      g.   does not adversely impact drainage toward, or pose
potential erosion onto, adjacent property.



   20)    When one or more acres of disturbed soil drains to a common
location the site must be in compliance with the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency's construction general permit which includes the installation of a
temporary sediment basin to provide treatment to the runoff before it leaves
the site or enters surface waters. A temporary basin may be converted into a
permanent basin after construction is complete. The city engineer may also
require a temporary sediment basin for those sites that are less than one
acre based on site conditions. In both instances the basin must be designed
and constructed according to the city's water resources management plan.



   21)   Dewatering and draining activities must be discharged to
on-site temporary or permanent sediment basins whenever possible. Dewatering
and draining activities must not result in the release of sediment toward or
into water resources, the street, or other areas that were intended to be
protected as part of the city's approval. The dewatering rate and direction
must be controlled and must incorporate energy dissipation to prevent
flooding or other harm to water resources or adjacent property. The city must
be notified of the dewatering schedule prior to the start of work.



   22)    All waste and unused building materials such as garbage,
debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials or hazardous materials
must be properly disposed of and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a
surface water, receiving channel or storm sewer conveyances.



      a.   Solid waste: All unused building materials and waste such
as contaminated sediment, asphalt and concrete millings, floating debris,
paper, plastic, and fabric must be disposed of accordingly and comply with
disposal requirements set forth by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      b.   Hazardous/toxic waste: Paint, gasoline, oil and any
hazardous materials must be properly stored, including secondary containment,
to prevent spills, leaks or other discharges. Access to the storage areas
must be restricted to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal of hazardous or
toxic substance must be in compliance with the requirements set forth by the
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



      c.   Liquid waste: All other non-stormwater discharges such as
concrete truck washout, vehicle washing or maintenance spills produced during
the construction activity may not be discharged to any surface waters and
must be properly disposed of.



      d.   External washing of equipment and vehicles, including
concrete trucks: All external washing activities must be limited to a
designated area of the site as provided on the approved grading and erosion
control plan as applicable. All runoff must be contained and wastes from
external washing activities must not cause erosion, pollution or damage to
trees or other natural resources and must be disposed of properly. No engine
degreasing is allowed on the site.



      e.   Wastes generated by concrete and other washout operations
on sites that require a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency construction
general permit: All liquid and solid wastes generated by any concrete or
other washout operations must be contained in a leak proof facility or
impermeable liner. Concrete waste must not come into contact with the ground.
Concrete waste must be disposed of properly and in compliance with applicable
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency regulations.



   23)   Dust must be adequately controlled by site watering, temporary
stabilization, or other means approved by the city.



   24)   The burial of organic materials such as trees, lumber, and
yard waste that could decompose is prohibited. No rock, concrete, or other
construction material or debris may be buried unless approved by city staff.



   25)   All on-site construction debris must be contained. A regularly
scheduled trash removal service must be hired to remove this debris. A copy
of the service agreement and company contact information may be required
before issuance of the permit.



   26)   All temporary erosion and sediment control, tree protection
fencing, and other temporary protection measures must be removed within 30
days after permanent groundcover has been fully established, inspected, and
approved by the city. The city may grant an extension for frozen ground
conditions.



   27)   At a minimum, the work must conform to the city's water
resources management plan, the current version of the Minnesota Pollution
Control Agency's publication regarding protecting water quality in urban
areas, and the Metropolitan Council's publication about urban small sites
best management practices, or equivalent.



   28)   A site that drains to a water identified as impaired pursuant
to section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act and meeting the specific impaired
waters criteria of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency and that is within
a one-mile linear distance from that impaired water may be required to comply
with additional site-specific standards, including:



      a.   stabilizing all exposed soil areas as soon as possible to
limit soil erosion if the soil areas have not been worked for 7 days; and



      b.   using a temporary sediment basin for common drainage
locations that serve an area with five or more acres disturbed at one time.



   29)   The plan and work must comply with the performance standards
regulating trees and steep slopes under subdivisions 19 and 20 below.



   30)   During construction of an infiltration or biofiltration
system, sediment controls must be used to prevent the discharge of sediment
into the infiltration or biofiltration area. The area must not be compacted
while the site is under construction. Infiltration or biofiltration areas
must not be excavated to final grade until the contributing drainage areas
have been permanently stabilized.



   31)   As-built plans must be provided for ponding, infiltration
areas or other areas as required by the city engineer. The city may also
require as-built plans for final grades and structures such as retaining
walls, foundations, and catch basins.



   32)   Other measures may be required by the city if warranted at an
individual site, such as:



      a.   screening retaining walls;



      b.   planting or re-vegetating large slopes with vegetation
similar to that which was removed, except that turf grass must be
re-vegetated with native deep rooted species;



      c.   providing a site maintenance inspection log to be
maintained by the applicant or the applicant's contractor for compliance with
the grading and erosion control plan or the construction management plan as
required. The log must be a written record and include:



         1) the name of the person who conducted the inspection;



         2) the date of the inspection and any associated
maintenance activity;



         3) the findings of the inspection;



                 4) a description of corrective work completed,
if any;



         5) the date the corrective work was completed;



         6) the date and amount of rainfall events in excess of 0.5
inches in a 24-hour period.



      d.   decompacting soils, outside the intact critical root
zones of trees to be protected, to a depth of 18 inches;



      e.   spreading at least 6 inches of topsoil or other organic
material and incorporating it into the underlying soil during final site
treatment in order to increase infiltration or improve establishment of
vegetation; and



      f.   imposing additional conditions to protect the public
interest.



c)   All items listed in subdivision 17(a) must be maintained throughout
the course of construction and grading activity.



d)   If a grading and erosion control plan has been implemented but is
reasonably considered by the city planner to be inadequate in achieving the
policy objectives described in subdivision 15(a), the city may require the
permittee to modify and implement the plan to achieve those objectives.



e)   If a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency construction general permit
is required the applicant must obtain the permit, submit proof to the city
that the permit has been acquired, submit proof to the city that the permit
has been transferred if applicable, and comply with the regulation.



f)   Upon written notification from the applicant that all land-disturbing
activities are complete, the site has been permanently stabilized or
re-vegetated, and all temporary erosion and sediment controls, tree
protection fencing and construction limit fencing have been removed, the city
will inspect the site and release any security being held if the site is
deemed to be in compliance with the approved grading permit and the grading
and erosion control plan.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-06, adopted March 2, 2015; subdivision repealed and
replaced by Ord. 2011-29, adopted December 19, 2011)



18.  Grading and Erosion Control Enforcement.



a)   No person may undertake, authorize or permit any excavating, grading,
filling or any other land-disturbing activity that exposes soil:



   1)   if the person does not have a city-approved grading permit or
city-approved grading and erosion control plan; or



   2)   if the action violates or is not in compliance with a
city-approved grading and erosion control plan or a required grading permit
issued by the city, or a Minnesota Pollution Control Agency construction
general permit if required, including the approved plans and all terms and
conditions of the permit.



b)   The city may inspect any property subject to an approved grading and
erosion control plan or grading permit to ensure that erosion and sediment
control and tree protection measures are properly installed and maintained.
Upon request by the city the site maintenance inspection log must be made
available within 24 hours of the request.



c)   If the soil is not permanently stabilized through landscaping when a
certificate of occupancy is issued, the city may require a cash deposit or
letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city attorney not to exceed 150%
of the estimated cost, or 125% of an actual bid, to ensure compliance with
the approved grading and erosion control plan for the site.



d)   A public nuisance exists when there is any violation of the
provisions of subdivisions 15 through 18 or the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency construction general permit if required. A public nuisance also exists
when erosion or drainage from a property is causing, or has the likelihood of
causing, serious harm to neighboring property, the city's stormwater system,
or to natural resources such as significant trees, water resources, and
wetland buffers. Serious harm includes actual damage as well as interference
with reasonable use of the property.



e)   Whenever the city finds noncompliance with any provision of
subdivisions 15 through 18, or the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
construction general permit if required staff will attempt to communicate
with the permittee and the landowner to obtain immediate and voluntary
compliance. If that person is not readily available or refuses to comply
within reasonable deadlines, the city may take any or all of the following
actions, provided that written notice of the noncompliance has been sent to
the permittee and landowner or posted on the property:



   1)   implement the necessary corrective measures and pay for them
with financial security deposited with the city;



   2)   initiate proceedings to abate a public nuisance under section
845 of this code;



   3)   withhold inspections or any city approvals for the property in
question until compliance is achieved;



   4)   issue a stop work order for the project in question until
compliance is achieved;



   5)   revoke the permit; and



   6)   pursue criminal and civil penalties under section 1310 of this
code.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-06, adopted March 2, 2015; subdivision repealed and
replaced by Ord. 2011-29, adopted December 19, 2011)



19.   Tree Protection.



a)   Purpose. The goal of this subdivision is to preserve as much as
practical Minnetonka's highly valued tree natural resources, ecosystems and
viewsheds, while allowing reasonable development to take place and not
interfering with how existing homeowners use their property.  This
subdivision provides incentives for property owners who wish to subdivide
areas that include woodlands and high priority trees to use planned unit
development (PUD), which allows the flexibility to both protect woodlands and
property rights. Standards governing the preservation, protection, and
planting of trees are necessary to:



   1)   prevent tree loss by eliminating or reducing compaction,
filling or excavation near tree roots;



   2)   prevent or reduce soil erosion and sedimentation and stormwater
runoff;



   3)   improve air quality and reduce noise pollution;



   4)   enhance energy conservation through natural insulation and
shading;



   5)   control the urban heat island effect;



   6)   increase and maintain property values;



   7)   maintain buffers between similar land uses and establishing and
maintaining buffers between conflicting land uses; and



   8)   preserve as much as practical the diversity and extent of the
trees and woodlands that are an integral part of this city's identity, while
allowing reasonable development and allowing existing homeowners freedom to
use their land.



b)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this subdivision, certain terms
and words are defined as follows:



   1)   "Basic Tree Removal Area" - consists of the following:



      a.   within the areas improved for reasonably-sized driveways,
parking areas and structures without frost footings and within ten feet
around those improvements;



      b.   within the footprints of, and 20 feet around, buildings
with frost footings;



      c.   within the footprints of, and 10 feet around, structures
with post footings such as decks or porches, if the structure is located at
or outside of the area allowed by item 1)b; and



      d.   in areas where trees are being removed for ecological
restoration in accordance with a city-approved restoration plan.



   2)   "Canopy" - The uppermost layer of a forest, formed by tree
crowns.



   3)   "Critical root zone" - the minimum area around a tree that must
remain undisturbed. The critical root radius is calculated by measuring the
tree's diameter at breast height. For each inch of tree diameter, 1.5 feet of
root zone radius must be protected. For example, if a tree's dbh is 10
inches, then its critical root zone radius is 15 feet (10 x 1.5 = 15).



   4)   "Diameter breast height (dbh)" - the diameter of a tree
measured at 4.5 feet above the base of the tree. Multi-stem trees are
considered one individual tree and each stem must be measured 4.5 feet above
the base of the stem and added together to determine the diameter of the
multi-stem tree.



   5)   "Protected tree" - a tree that is in a woodland preservation
area, or is a high priority tree or significant tree.



   6)   "Redevelopment" --  reconstruction of the principal structure
if it includes the removal of the principal structure by more than 50% of the
square footage of the building footprint or an increase of the square footage
of the building footprint by more than 50%.



   7)   "Sapling" - A young tree.



   8)   "Understory" - The trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plants that
grow in the shade of the forest canopy, including trees that could
potentially grow to reach the canopy.



   9)   "Woodland preservation area" - a remnant woodland ecosystem
that is at least two acres in size regardless of property boundaries, is
generally mapped in the city's Minnesota Land Cover Classification System,
and although it may be degraded it generally meets the criteria for one of
the following types of ecosystems as reasonably determined by the city:



      a.   "floodplain forest" - an area populated by deciduous tree
species tolerant of seasonal flooding and deposition of silty or sandy soils.
The canopy cover is extremely variable, and mature trees are typically
greater than 70 feet tall. The dominant tree species in the canopy are silver
maple and eastern cottonwood. In floodplain areas with severe flooding, the
understory will be sparsely vegetated. Trees in the understory include
saplings from the canopy species, green ash, black willow, slippery elm,
American elm, boxelder, and hackberry;



      b.   "lowland hardwood forest" - an area with a flat terrain
populated by deciduous tree species tolerant of periodic soil saturation from
seasonally high water tables. The soils are moderately well to poorly
drained. The dominant tree species in the canopy are American elm, black ash,
basswood, bur oak, red oak, white oak, quaking aspen, paper birch, and red
maple. Trees in the understory include saplings from the canopy species,
slippery elm, green ash, butternut, sugar maple, quaking aspen, balsam
poplar, and American hornbeam. The large shrub or small tree layer of the
understory is typically dense and can include ironwood, pagoda dogwood,
prickly ash, American hazelnut, gray dogwood, and speckled alder;



      c.   "maple basswood forest" - an area with well drained soils
and populated by a variety of shade-tolerant, fire sensitive, deciduous tree
species. The mature trees are straight with narrow crowns greater than 60
feet tall. The dominant tree species in the canopy are basswood and sugar
maple but mesic species such as slippery elm, red oak, bur oak, green ash,
white ash and black ash may be found as well. Trees in the understory include
saplings from the canopy species, bitternut, black cherry, and ironwood. The
large shrub or small tree layer of the understory is composed of primarily
tree seedlings and herbaceous plants;



      d.   "mesic oak forest" - an area populated by tall, single
stemmed deciduous trees greater than 60 feet tall that lack spreading lower
branches. Mesic oak forests may have a moderately moist habitat, but can be
dry depending on the slope and aspect of the forest. The dominant tree
species in the canopy include red oak, white oak, and bur oak. Trees in the
understory include saplings from the canopy, and fire-sensitive species such
as basswood, green ash, bitternut hickory, big-toothed aspen, butternut,
northern pin oak, black cherry, paper birch, American elm, boxelder and red
maple. The large shrub or small tree layer in the understory tends to be
sparse with greater herbaceous plant diversity but can include ironwood,
chokecherry, prickly ash, American hazelnut, prickly gooseberry, red-berried
elder, nannyberry, juneberry/serviceberry, and pagoda dogwood;



      e.   "oak woodland brushland" - an area with a canopy more
open than a forest but less open than a savanna. It is characterized by
open-grown trees and a distinct shrub layer in well-drained sandy, gravelly
soils. The dominant tree species include red oak, northern pin oak, white
oak, bur oak, and aspen. When it exists, the trees in the understory include
saplings from the canopy, black cherry and red cedar. The large shrub or
small tree layer can include American hazelnut, ironwood, juneberry and
chokecherry;



      f.   "tamarack swamp" - an area that is a forested wetland
community dominated by patches of tamarack, a deciduous coniferous tree. The
dominant tree species in the canopy include tamarack, black spruce, paper
birch, and red maple. The trees in the understory include saplings from the
canopy and the large shrub or small tree layer can include speckled alder and
red osier dogwood; or



      g.   "willow swamp" - an area that is a forested wetland
community or an area with seasonally flooded soils and scattered-to-dense
shrub cover. The dominant tree species in the canopy include black willow and
speckled alder. The trees in the understory include saplings from the canopy
and the large shrub or small tree layer can include several species of willow
and dogwood.



   10)   "High priority tree" - a tree that is not in a woodland
preservation area but is still important to the site and the neighborhood
character, that is structurally sound and healthy, and that meets at least
one of the following standards:



      a.   a deciduous tree that is at least 15 inches dbh, except
ash, box elders, elm species, poplar species, willow, silver maple, black
locust, amur maple, fruit tree species, mulberry, and Norway maple.



      b.   a coniferous tree that is at least 20 feet in height,
except a Colorado spruce that is not in a buffer as described in subparagraph
(b)(10)(c); or



      c.   a tree that is in a group of deciduous trees that are at
least eight inches dbh or coniferous trees that are at least 15 feet in
height, that provide a buffer or screening along an adjacent public street,
and that are within 50 feet of an arterial road and 35 feet of a minor
collector, local, or private street and a trail. This distance will be
measured from the edge of the pavement or curb of the road, street or trail.



   11)   "Significant tree" - a tree that is structurally sound and
healthy and that is either a deciduous tree at least eight inches dbh or a
coniferous tree at least 15 feet in height.



c)   City authority.  To preserve protected trees, the city may:



   1)   require and enforce a tree preservation plan as described in
paragraph (d) below;



   2)   specify trees or groups of trees for preservation;



   3)   specify grading limits;



   4)   require the clustering of buildings or the relocation of roads,
drives, buildings, utilities or storm water facilities when this would
preserve protected trees;



   5)   grant variances;



   6)   specify time periods in which tree cutting, trimming or injury
may not occur in order to prevent the spread of disease; and



   7)   require conservation easements or other legal means to ensure
that woodland preservation areas or groups of high priority trees or
significant trees are not intentionally destroyed after the development has
been approved.



d)   Tree Preservation Plan. A tree preservation plan is required as part
of an application for a preliminary plat, lot division, conditional use
permit, variance, expansion permit, grading permit, site and building plan
review, wetland/floodplain alteration permit, or building permit. A tree
preservation plan is not required for a grading permit or building permit on
an R-1 zoned property containing a single-family home when tree mitigation is
not required under (e)(1) below.



   If a tree preservation plan is not required and if the property owner
retains a contractor to do the work, the contractor must submit a plan
showing the proposed construction limits on the property and must not remove
any trees outside the specified construction limits. A tree preservation plan
must include:



   1)   a tree inventory that meets the following criteria:



      a.   The species, sizes, and locations of high priority trees,
significant trees, and trees in woodland preservation areas must be shown,
regardless of health. Dead or structurally unsound trees should be noted as
such in the inventory.



      b.   Canopy species that exist in woodland preservation areas,
including those that are in the understory, must be inventoried if they are
four inches dbh or larger. Understory trees, excluding canopy species, and
large shrubs that exist in woodland preservation areas must be inventoried if
they are two inches dbh or larger.



      c.   The size of high priority trees and significant trees
must be inventoried regardless of location.



      d.   The size of coniferous trees must be recorded in dbh and
approximate height.



      e.   Invasive species such as buckthorn and honeysuckle should
not be inventoried.



   2)   a site plan that shows the dbh, location and size of the
critical root zone for each protected tree, the trees to be removed, the
trees to be preserved, the proposed construction limits, and the proposed
tree protection methods in addition to construction limit fencing. If grading
or construction limits are outside of a woodland preservation area, the trees
in that woodland preservation area may be grouped together.



e)   Tree Removal and Preservation. Removal of protected trees is
prohibited except as follows:



   1)   Existing Structures.



       a.   R-1 zoned properties containing a single-family home: On
property that is zoned R-1 and that has an existing principal structure in
use as a single-family dwelling, protected trees may be removed without any
mitigation if the principal structure has been in existence and not
externally expanded for at least two years after (1) a final building permit
inspection or a certificate of occupancy was issued and (2) all of its final
landscaping or ground cover was installed.



      b.   All other properties: On any property that has an
existing principal structure but does not meet the requirements of clause
19(e)(1)(a) above, protected trees may be removed subject to the same
standards applicable to R-1 property if no site improvements are undertaken
and the owner complies with the required tree preservation and landscape plan
for the property. In the event that a tree preservation or landscape plan is
not on file with the city, any tree removed without authorization from the
city will considered to be part of the approved tree preservation or
landscape plan.



   2)   Existing Vacant Parcels of Land, Redevelopment, Site
Improvements.



      a.   For the construction of a single-family home on a vacant
R-1 lot or for redevelopment of an existing R-1 lot by construction of a
single-family home or additions to a single-family home, protected trees may
be removed with no mitigation only within the "basic tree removal area."



      b.   Except as provided in clause 19(e)(2)(a) above, an
applicant may construct a principal structure on a vacant lot, redevelop an
existing lot, or make site improvement to an existing lot and remove
protected trees without mitigation only as follows:



         1.   within the basic tree removal area; and



         2.   within the width of required easements for public
and private streets and utilities, except that only significant trees may be
removed in areas of required surface water ponding. The removal of woodland
preservation area trees or high priority trees for surface water ponding must
be mitigated.



      c.   The removal of protected trees under this subsection 2
must also comply with the general removal requirements under subsection 4
below.



   3)   Subdivisions.



      a.   Significant trees may be removed for any construction in
a subdivision of land without mitigation only:



         1.   within the basic tree removal area; and



         2.   within the width of required easements for public
and private streets and utilities, including areas required for surface water
ponding.



      b.   If more than 35% of the site's high priority trees or
more than 25% of a woodland preservation area on the site are to be removed
for any construction in a subdivision of land, there can be no more than one
lot per developable acre of land. High priority trees and trees within a
woodland preservation area may be removed for any construction in a
subdivision of land without mitigation only:



         1.   for the basic tree removal area; and



         2.   for the width of required easements for public and
private streets and utilities, except in areas of required surface water
ponding. The removal of high priority trees or trees in woodland preservation
areas for surface water ponding must be mitigated.



      c.   A subdivision of land that proposes to remove more than
35% of the site's high priority trees or more than 25% of a woodland
preservation area on the site can be developed up to the full density
normally allowed under other development regulations in the applicable zoning
district if the property is developed under an approved planned unit
development (PUD). There is no minimum size required for a PUD in this
situation. In reviewing a PUD application, the city will consider the extent
to which steps are taken to preserve protected trees, such as:



         1.   using creative design, which may include the
clustering of homes, reducing lot sizes, reducing or expanding normal
setbacks, custom grading, retaining walls, buffers, and establishing the size
and location of building pads, roads, utilities and driveways;



         2.   preserving the continuity of woodland preservation
areas by developing at the edges of those areas rather than at the core;



         3.   exercising good faith stewardship of the land and
the trees both before subdivision and after, including the use of
conservation easements when appropriate; and



         4.   minimizing the impact to the character of the
existing landscape and neighborhood.



      d.   The removal of protected trees under this subsection 3
must also comply with the general removal requirements under subsection 4
below.



   4)   General removal requirements. The removal of protected trees
under subsections (2) and (3) must also comply with the following general
requirements:



      a.   Principal structures and associated facilities must be
located to maximize tree preservation. The city may specify the location of
the principal structures and associated facilities in order to ensure a
reasonable amount of tree preservation.



      b.   Any tree removed outside of the specified allowable tree
removal areas must be mitigated as specified below.



      c.   The applicant must comply with any approved tree
preservation or landscape plan.



      d.   Trees required to be saved as part of a subdivision
approval must remain on a lot for two years after the final building permit
inspection or certificate of occupancy is issued for the principal structure,
whichever is later. Any tree that dies solely of natural causes such as
disease or wind is exempt from this section.



      e.   Each protected tree that is removed in violation of
ordinance requirements is a separate violation of the city code.



   5)   Greater Public Good. The city council may allow the removal of
protected trees contrary to the provisions in subparagraphs (1) - (4) if it
determines that there is a greater public good such as:



      a.   providing reasonable use or access to the property;



      b.   providing affordable housing;



      c.   allowing for the creation or rehabilitation of a public
road or trail;



      d.   providing for a public utility service, such as a
transmission line, ponding or a water tower;



       e.   allowing for the creation or rehabilitation of a public
park; or



      f.   enabling redevelopment in a designated redevelopment area.



f)   Tree Mitigation.



   1)   When tree mitigation is required, the applicant must submit a
tree mitigation plan for staff review and approval. The plan must indicate
the number of inches or feet of mitigation trees, the species and quantity of
each species, and the caliper size or feet and location for each replacement
tree. The plan may not be comprised of more than 25 percent of the same
species or size unless approved by the city. The plan must comply with the
mitigation standards required below. The applicant must implement the tree
mitigation plan approved by city staff.



   2)   Specific mitigation standards.  Mitigation for tree removal of
trees in woodland preservation areas, high priority trees, and significant
trees must meet the following specific standards;



      a.   Mitigation rate.



         1.   A tree or large shrub that is in a woodland
preservation area or is a high priority tree must be replaced at the rate of
one inch for each inch in diameter of a deciduous tree that was removed and
at the rate of one foot for each foot in height of a coniferous tree that was
removed; and



         2.   A significant tree must be replaced with one
two-inch tree.



      b.   Mitigation species.



         1.   Trees and large shrubs in woodland preservation
areas must be replaced with species found in that eco-type as specified on
the list of acceptable replacement species on file with the city;



         2.   High priority trees must be replaced with species
of a similar type that are normally found growing in similar conditions and
that are included on the list of acceptable replacement species on file with
the city;



         3.   Significant trees may be replaced with any tree
species other than ash, box elder, silver maple, willow, Norway maple, amur
maple and Colorado spruce, as approved by city staff; and



      c.   Mitigation size.



         1.   Replacement sizes for woodland preservation areas
and high priority trees are:



            a)   not less than one and one quarter inches but
not more than three inches dbh for deciduous balled and burlapped trees, and
not less than three inches but not more than six inches dbh for spade-moved
deciduous trees;



            b)   not less than 7 gallon stock for understory
or small trees and not less than 3 gallon stock for shrubbery; and



            c)   not less than six feet but not more than
eight feet in height for balled and burlapped coniferous trees, and not less
than eight feet but not more than 14 feet in height for spade-moved
coniferous trees.



         2.   The city may allow larger balled and burlapped or
spade moved trees if these trees are accompanied with a three year guarantee.
Other size substitutions, based on site characteristics, may be allowed at
the reasonable discretion of the city,



         3.   Replacement size for a significant tree is not less
than a two-inches dbh.



   3)   General mitigation standards:



      a.   All replacement trees and shrubs must meet the American
Standard for Nursery Stock and the American National Standard relating to
planting guidelines, quality of stock and appropriate sizing of the root ball
for balled and burlapped, potted and spade-moved tree.



      b.   If the city determines in its reasonable discretion that
there is no appropriate location for some or all of the required replacement
trees, those trees may not be required.



      c.   Replacement trees must be planted on the same property or
development area from which the trees were removed.



      d.   A tree will be considered removed if girdled, if 30
percent or more of the trunk circumference is injured, if 30% or more of the
crown is trimmed, if an oak is trimmed between April 1st and July 15th, or if
the following percentage of the critical root zone is compacted, cut, filled
or paved: 30 percent of the critical root zone for all species, except 40
percent for ash, elm, poplar species, silver maple and boxelder.



      e.   Development that is subject to landscape requirements in
sections 300.27 and 300.31 must meet the minimum landscape requirements of
the applicable section. Trees planted as part of a required landscaping plan
may be counted as replacement trees under this section, at the city's
discretion.



      f.   The required mitigation trees must be replaced by the
current property owner if the trees have died, have severely declined or have
been damaged after the end of the second full growing season following
installation. A tree will be considered to be severely declined if more than
25 percent of the crown has died.



      g.   The city may require an escrow deposit to ensure the
required planting and continued existence of the mitigation trees. The city
will release the escrow deposit after the end of the second full growing
season following installation of the mitigation trees and any replacement
trees.



      h.   A tree or shrub that was required by the city to be saved
but was removed must be replaced at a rate of 2:1 based on dbh for deciduous
species and height for conifers. The city may also impose a financial penalty
equal to $500.00 for each inch of dbh or foot of height removed, not to
exceed $5000 for each tree or shrub. This provision also applies to a
conservation easement area that is disturbed during or after development.



g)   General tree protection standards.



   1)   Before construction, grading or land clearing begins, the
city-approved tree protection fencing or other method must be installed and
maintained at the critical root zones of the trees to be protected. The
location of the fencing must be in conformance with the approved tree
preservation plan. This fencing must be inspected by city staff before site
work begins.



   2)   No construction, compaction, construction access, stock piling
of earth, storage of equipment or building materials, or grading of any kind
may occur within the critical root zone areas of trees to be protected.



   3)   A healthy protected tree that was not a hazard to personal
safety or property damage and that was removed or otherwise destroyed by
unnatural causes within three years before a development application will be
regarded as if it were present at the time of construction or a development
application. Except that on properties zoned R-1 with an existing principal
structure in use as a single-family dwelling an owner may remove up to 5% of
the healthy protected trees within five years before construction or a
development application. In no case may healthy protected trees be removed
from properties required to have a tree preservation or landscape plan unless
first approved by the city.



   4)   An area of new or compensatory water storage may not be located
where there are woodland preservation areas, high priority trees or
significant trees, unless approved by the city. Mitigation will be required
for the loss of woodland preservation areas and high priority trees due to
ponding. The compensatory storage area must be created in a manner that
prevents erosion into any nearby water resource.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-05, adopted March 2, 2015; repealed and amended by
Ordinance No. 2008-24, adopted August 25, 2008)



20.  Performance Standards Regulating Steep Slopes.



a)   Purpose. The purposes of the standards governing the alteration of
steep slopes are to:



   1)   preserve steep slopes in essentially their natural state as
part of a comprehensive open- space plan;



   2)   encourage alternative approaches to conventional flatland
development practices in areas of steep slopes, including the planning of
development which fits the existing topography of the site;



   3)   minimize grading and cut-and-fill operations consistent with
the retention of the natural character of steep slopes;



   4)   minimize the short and long-term increase in stormwater
water-runoff and soil erosion problems incurred in the grading and
development of steep slopes;



   5)   preserve the predominant views, both from and of the steep
slopes; and



   6)   preserve the variety of topography which exists in the city and
is an integral part of this city’s identity.



b)   Standards.



   1)   The city may require that a property be rezoned and developed
as a planned unit development to utilize flexible development standards to
preserve steep slopes.



   2)   Construction, development, grading, filling, and any other
method of alteration may occur on a steep slope only if they meet the
standards of this ordinance and are approved by the city. City approval will
be by the city council, planning commission or city planner, depending on who
is authorized to approve the associated development application.



   3)   The city will approve steep slope development only if the city
can make the findings specified below.  In making these findings, the city
will evaluate the extent to which the development meets the design guidelines
included under each finding.  It is the intent to require compliance with as
many design guidelines as possible, but the city may choose to not require
compliance with every guideline, if the findings are still achieved.



   Finding 1.   The property is physically suitable for the design and
siting of the proposed development. The proposed development will preserve
significant natural features by minimizing disturbance to existing
topographical forms.



      a.   design developments into steep slopes, rather than making
significant alterations to the slope to fit the development:



         1.   avoid building pads that result in extensive
grading outside the building footprint and driveway areas;



         2.   use retaining walls as an alternative to banks of
cut-and-fill, and design and site such walls to avoid adverse visual impact;



         3.   allow for clustering with different lot shapes and
sizes, with the prime determinant being to maximize the preservation of the
natural terrain;



         4.   allow flag lots when appropriate to minimize
grading;



         5.   avoid cuts and fills greater than 25 feet in depth;
and



         6.   design grading to preserve the crest of prominent
ridges. Buildings may be located on the prominent ridges, as long as the
requirements of this subdivision are met.



      b.   design streets and driveways that generally follow
existing contours, except where necessary for public safety or to minimize
the adverse impacts from traffic:



         1.   use cul-de-sacs and common drives where practical
and desirable to preserve slopes; and



         2.   avoid individual long driveways, unless necessary
to locate the principal structure on a less sensitive area of the site.



      c.   concentrate development on the least sensitive portion of
the site to maximize the preservation of significant trees and natural
features:



         1.   preserve sensitive areas by clustering buildings or
using other innovative approaches; and



         2.   maintain sufficient vegetation and design the scale
of development so that it does not overwhelm the natural character of the
steep slope.



      d.   preserve steep slopes that buffer residences from
non-residential sources of light and noise.



   Finding 2.   The development will not result in soil erosion,
flooding, severe scarring, reduced water quality, inadequate drainage
control, or other problems.



      a.   wherever practical, minimize the impervious surface area
and maximize the use of the natural drainage systems:



         1.   design any new drainage systems away from
neighboring properties, away from cut faces or sloping surfaces of a fill,
and toward appropriate drainage facilities, whether artificial or natural.
Drainage systems must comply with the city’s water resources management
plan; and



         2.   use the existing natural drainage system as much as
possible in its unimproved state, if the natural system adequately controls
erosion.



      b.   avoid building on or creating steep slopes with an
average grade of 30 percent or more. The city may prohibit building on or
creating such slopes in the following situations:



         1.   where the city determines that reasonable
development can occur on the site without building on or creating such
slopes; or



         2.   development on such slopes would create real or
potentially detrimental drainage or erosion problems.



      c.   design slopes to be in character with the surrounding
natural terrain;



      d.   use benching, terracing, or other slope-stabilizing
techniques for fill, as determined appropriate by the city engineer;



      e.   install and maintain erosion control measures during
construction in accordance with the current Minnesota pollution control
agency best management practices; and



      f.   revegetate disturbed slopes as soon as practical after
grading to stabilize steep slopes and prevent erosion, as required by the
city.



   Finding 3.   The proposed development provides adequate measures to
protect public safety.



      a.   limit the slopes of private driveways to not more than 10
percent, unless necessary to minimize excessive grading. Where the grade
exceeds 10 percent, the driveway should have sufficient flat areas at the top
and toe to provide vehicles a landing area and to avoid vehicles slipping
onto the adjacent street during icy conditions. The city may require a
driveway turn-around; and



      b.   provide sufficient access for emergency vehicles to reach
the proposed buildings.



   4)   The city may require that the applicant provide engineering
certification, acceptable to the city, that no excavation or fill will cause
any steep slope to become unstable; impose loads that may affect the safety
of structures or steep slopes; interfere with adequate drainage for the site
area and the area that drains directly to the site; obstruct, damage, or
adversely affect existing sewerage or drainage; adversely affect the quality
of stormwater runoff; adversely affect downstream properties, wetlands or
bodies of water; or cause adverse erosion or sedimentation.



   5)   The city may require that the applicant provide certification
from a registered engineer that the final grading was completed in compliance
with the approved grading plan.



   6)   The city may require the applicant to prepare and record a
declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, in a form acceptable
to the city attorney, providing for property owner maintenance of
manufactured slope areas, acceptance of all risks and liability associated
with those areas, and release of the city from all associated claims.



c)   Applicability.



   1)   This subdivision does not apply to the expansion or
reconstruction of an existing structure, where the footprint of the completed
building does not exceed 150 percent of the structure footprint existing on
June 23, 1997.  The person wishing to qualify for this exception must:



      a.   show that the structure existed on June 23, 1997; and



      b.   undertake the construction pursuant to plans that are
approved by the city planner and that provide adequate surface water
drainage, appropriate erosion control, and safe driveway access to adjacent
streets.



   2)   Lots existing on June 23, 1997, are subject to all of the
standards in this subdivision, except:



      a.   the standards may not be applied to lot divisions or
subdivisions preliminarily approved within one year, and finally approved
within two years, before June 23, 1997, to the extent that this is prohibited
by Minn. Stat. § 462.358, subd. 3(c); and



      b.   the standards may not be used to prohibit development of
undeveloped lots finally approved between December 31, 1991 and June 23,
1997, but the standards may be applied to regulate that development.



21.  Conservation Easements.



The city may require conservation easements to accomplish one or more of the
following: to ensure that selected areas of significant trees are not
destroyed after development has been approved, to prevent development of
selected steep slopes areas, and to preserve areas not intended for further
development.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



22.  Sight and Vision Clearance Standards.



Visibility from any access point to a public street shall be unobstructed
above the height of 2½ feet for a distance determined by the city to be
adequate for the operating speed on the street. This applies to any wall,
fence, structure, sign, vegetation or other obstruction which is determined
to pose a danger to traffic by limiting views of on-coming vehicles.



23.  Violations.



Any person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits
the violation of the terms or conditions of an approved site and building
plan, landscape plan or grading plan is guilty of a misdemeanor. A violation
is a violation of the approved site and building plan, landscape plan or
grading plan and renders the approval or plan null and void. A violation also
constitutes a public nuisance that may be abated in accordance with the
provisions of section 845.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-25, adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. #2003-25,
adopted October 27, 2003; amended by Ord. #2003-11, adopted April 14, 2003;
amended by Ord. #2002-20, adopted August 12, 2002; amended by Ord. #99-21,
adopted August 30, 1999)



SECTION 300.29.  NON-CONFORMING USES.



1. Purpose.



It is the purpose of this section to accomplish the following:



a)   recognize the existence of uses which were lawful when established
but which no longer meet all ordinance requirements;



b)   discourage the enlargement, expansion, intensification or extension
of any non-conforming  use or any increase in the impact of a non-conforming
use on adjacent properties;



c)   regulate the repair, replacement, restoration, and improvement of
non-conforming uses to prevent and abate nuisances and to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare; and



d)   encourage the elimination of non-conforming uses or reduce their
impact on adjacent properties.



2. Definitions.



For the purposes of this section, the following terms and phrases have the
meanings given to them.



a)   "Non-conformity" or "non-conforming use" means any land use,
structure, physical form of land development, lot of record or sign that is
not in full compliance with the regulations of this ordinance and either (1)
was legally established before the effective date of the ordinance provision
with which it does not comply, or (2) became non-conforming because of other
governmental action, such as a court order or a taking by a governmental body
under eminent domain or negotiated sale. A non-conformity or non-conforming
use does not include a land use, structure, physical form of land
development, lot of record, or sign that was allowed to deviate from this
ordinance by an approved variance.  A non-conformity or non-conforming use
is one of two types of physical land development: a  non-conforming land use
or a non-conforming development.



b)   "Non-conforming land use" means an activity using land, buildings,
structures, or any combination of these, for a purpose that is not currently
allowed as a use in the zoning district in which it is located.



c)   "Non-conforming development" means a non-conformity other than a
non-conforming land use that does not currently conform to an ordinance
standard such as height, setback, or size.



d)   "Expansion," "enlargement," or "intensification" means any increase
in a dimension, size, area, volume, or height, any increase in the area of
use, any placement of a structure or part thereof where none existed before,
any addition of a site feature such as a deck, patio, fence, driveway,
parking area, or swimming pool, any improvement that would allow the land to
be more intensely developed, any move of operations to a new location on the
property, or any increase in intensity of use based on a review of the
original nature, function or purpose of the non-conforming use, the hours of
operation, traffic, parking, noise, exterior storage, signs, exterior
lighting, types of operations, types of goods or services offered, odors,
area of operation, number of employees, and other factors deemed relevant by
the city.



e)   "Improvement" means making the non-conforming use better, more
efficient, or more aesthetically pleasing, including any change that does not
replicate what pre-existed, but does not include an expansion, enlargement,
or intensification.



f)   "Replacement," "reconstruction," or "restoration" means construction
that exactly matches pre-existing conditions.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2010-11, adopted August
16, 2010)



3. General Standards.



A nonconforming use may be used and continued, including through repair,
replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, but not including
expansion, only in compliance with the provisions of this section. The use
must have been in compliance with all land use regulations at the time the
non-conformity was created in order to be eligible for the benefits of being
a non-conforming use.



a)   There may be no expansion, enlargement, or intensification, of any
use or any site element of any non-conforming use except to make it a
permitted use or except as otherwise provided in this subdivision.  Normal
building maintenance and repair are allowed. Expansion, enlargement or
intensification of conforming aspects of a non-conforming development are
excepted from this requirement. For example, if a structure has a
non-conforming front setback, it may be expanded on the sides that do meet
setback requirements as long as the expansion itself meets ordinance
requirements.



b)   No non-conforming use may be resumed if normal operation of the use
has been discontinued, or if a non-conforming building has been removed and
not replaced, for a period of 12 or more months.  Time will be calculated as
beginning on the day following the last day in which the use was in normal
operation and will run continuously thereafter.  Following the expiration of
12 months, only uses that are permitted by this ordinance are allowed to be
established.



c)   Full use of a non-conforming use may not be resumed if the amount of
land or floor area dedicated to the use is lessened or if the intensity of
the use is in any manner diminished for a period of 12 or more months.  Time
will be calculated as beginning on the day following the last day in which
the non-conforming use was in full operation and will run continuously
thereafter.  Following the expiration of 12 months, the non-conforming use
may be used only in the manner or to the extent used during the preceding 12
months.  For the purposes of this section, intensity of use will be
determined by a review of the original nature, function or purpose of the
non-conforming use, the hours of operation, traffic, parking, noise, exterior
storage, signs, exterior lighting, types of operations, types of goods or
services offered, odors, area of operation, number of employees, and other
factors deemed relevant by the city.



d)   Removal or destruction of a non-conforming use to the extent of more
than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of
the county assessor at the time of damage, by fire or other peril, excluding
land value and as determined by the city assessor, terminates the right to
continue or replace any non-conforming use, except if a valid and complete
building permit application has been submitted to the city within 180 days
after the property was damaged.



e)   If replacement, reconstruction, or restoration of a legal
non-conforming land use is allowed, it may occur without any land use
approval from the city if the resulting use does not create any new adverse
impacts on adjacent property and matches exactly the conditions that existed
before the work was undertaken or before the use was damaged or destroyed.
Work that would not meet this requirement and any work that would be an
improvement to a non-conforming land use may not be undertaken unless a
conditional use permit has been issued for the property. The city may impose
conditions in a conditional use permit to protect the public health, safety,
or welfare, and to mitigate any newly created impacts on adjacent property or
water body.



f)   If replacement, reconstruction, or restoration of a legal
non-conforming development is allowed, it may occur without any land use
approval from the city if the resulting use does not create any new adverse
impacts on adjacent property and matches exactly the conditions that existed
before the work was undertaken or before the use was damaged or destroyed,
except for internal improvements and improved materials used to replace roof
surfaces, siding, windows, doors, and similar components. Work that would not
meet this requirement or any other improvement to a non-conforming
development may not be undertaken unless the appropriate approval required
below has been granted for the property. The city may impose conditions in
its approval to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, and to
mitigate any newly created impacts on adjacent property or water body.



   1)   Work that brings a structure into compliance with building code
requirements requires approval from the city planner. The city planner may
choose, in his or her sole discretion, to require site plan approval instead
of administrative approval.



   2)   All other improvements require site plan approval
notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary.



g)   Work that constitutes an expansion of any non-conforming use may not
be done without first obtaining a variance pursuant to section 300.07 or an
expansion permit pursuant to subdivision 7 of this section.



   1)   A variance is required if the expansion will intrude into one
or more setback areas beyond the distance of the existing structure or will
exceed the height or size limitations in this section 300 by a distance or
amount greater than the existing structure. Otherwise, an expansion permit is
required. For example, if the building currently has a front setback of 25
feet when 30 feet is required, and the expansion would reduce the setback to
24 feet, then a variance is required. In contrast, if only a portion of the
building has a front setback of 25 feet when 30 is required, and the
expansion brings the rest of the building to the same setback of 25 feet,
then an expansion permit is required rather than a variance.



   2)   An expansion permit is also required if:



        a.   the use occupies any space within a non-conforming
area that was previously not occupied both vertically and horizontally. For
example, an expansion permit  would be required if a second floor area is
expanded into the non-conforming setback over an existing non-conforming
first floor even though the non-conformity of the first floor setback
dimension stays the same or is reduced; or



      b.   the non-conforming aspect of a use is reduced but still
does not comply with current ordinance standards.



h)   Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in the foregoing
paragraphs of this subdivision, if approved by the city council a
non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming land use of less
intensity if it is in the public interest.  In all instances the applicant
has the burden of proving that the proposed land use is less intense than the
existing nonconforming land use



i)   If a non-conforming use is superseded or replaced by a permitted use,
the non-conforming status of the premises and any rights which arise under
the provisions of this section terminate.



j)   Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraphs of this subdivision, all
non-conforming sexually-oriented businesses and sexually-oriented uses, as
defined in section 300.33, subd. 3, which were made non-conforming by the
zoning ordinance or an amendment to it must be discontinued no later than
three years after the adoption of the provision creating the non-conformity.



k)   Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraphs, a non-conforming use or
structure in a floodplain area may only be repaired, replaced, maintained,
improved, or expanded to the extent that it would qualify for eligibility in
the National Flood Insurance Program,  would not increase flood damage
potential or increase the degree of obstruction to flood flows in the
floodway, and would comply with the provisions in section 300.24, subd. 14.



(Amended by Ord. 2010-11, adopted August 16, 2010; amended by Ord. 2009-12,
adopted September 14, 2009)



4. Non-Conforming Sign.



A non-conforming sign that is an imminent danger to life or property or that
may not be replaced under this ordinance must be removed immediately at the
expense of the owner.



5. Non-Conforming Utility Pole.



For a non-conforming utility pole that exists on the effective date of the
ordinance, the pole and wires may be replaced in the event that it is damaged
as the result of circumstances beyond the owner's control, but only if the
height of the pre-existing pole and its lines are not exceeded and the
voltage of the pre- existing wires is not increased. The height and voltage
may be exceeded only if this is required by other governmental agencies or by
applicable safety codes.  In addition, the height may be exceeded
temporarily if the owner does not have a conforming pole available, but only
on the condition that a permanent replacement which does not exceed the
pre-existing height is installed as soon as practical.



6. Non-Conforming Lot.



A lot or parcel of land that is non-conforming and that is not improved with
a principal use is not entitled to be developed with a principal use if it
has been in common ownership with adjacent land, including land that is
across a street, or if it has been part of a larger parcel of land, at any
time after adoption of the standard that causes the lot or land to be
non-conforming.



7.   Non-conforming Use Expansion Permit.



a)    Application.



Application for a non-conforming use expansion permit must be made to the
zoning administrator.  The application must be on forms provided by the city
and must be accompanied by the following:



   1)   a plat or map of the property which shows, at a minimum, all
lot lines, existing and proposed structures, driveways and parking areas,
significant topographical features and mature trees;



   2)   evidence of ownership or an interest in the property;



   3)   the fee required by section 710 of the code of city ordinances;
and



   4)   such other information as may be required by the city.



b)     Public Hearing.



Upon receipt of a completed application, a date will be set for a public
hearing before the planning commission.  The public hearing will be held
only after notice has been sent by mail to the owners of all properties
situated wholly or partially within 400 feet, as reflected in the certified
records of the Hennepin county auditor.



c)     Decisions.



   1)   An expansion permit for a non-conforming use may be granted,
but is not mandated, when the applicant meets the burden of proving that:



      a.   the proposed expansion is a reasonable use of the
property, considering such things as:



         1.   functional and aesthetic justifications for the
expansion;



         2.   adequacy of off-street parking for the expansion;



         3.   absence of adverse off-site impacts from such
things as traffic, noise, dust, odors, and parking; and



         4.   improvement to the appearance and stability of the
property and neighborhood.



      b.   the circumstances justifying the expansion are unique to
the property, are not caused by the landowner, are not solely for the
landowner's convenience, and are not solely because of economic
considerations; and



      c.   the expansion would not adversely affect or alter the
essential character of the neighborhood.



   2)   The planning commission may grant an expansion permit only upon
an affirmative vote of at least a majority of its full membership.  The
planning commission may impose conditions in granting an expansion permit to
effect the intent of this ordinance and to protect adjacent properties.  The
planning commission must accompany its decision to deny an expansion permit
with a statement of its findings and must serve a copy of its decision upon
the applicant by mail. The planning commission action will be final action
subject to the right of appeal, except if the expansion permit is an integral
part of another land use application that requires city council action. In
those circumstances, the planning commission action will be a recommendation
to the city council, which may approve an expansion permit by an affirmative
vote of at least a majority of the city council's full membership.



d)     Term of Expansion Permit.



An expansion permit granted by the city will run with the land and will be
perpetual unless no building permit has been issued or substantial work
performed on the project prior to December 31 of the year following the year
of approval, in which case the permit will be null and void. The planning
commission may extend the period for construction upon finding that the
interest of the owners of neighboring properties will not be adversely
affected by such extension.  If the expansion permit is part of an approved
site and building plan, extension of the time period for construction will be
contingent upon a similar extension of the time period for the site and
building plan by the planning commission as required by section 300.27 of
this ordinance.  Once the project is completed as approved, the expansion
permit becomes perpetual.



e)     Specific Project.



An expansion permit is valid only for the project for which it was granted. 
Construction of any project must be in substantial compliance with the
building plans and specifications reviewed and approved by the planning
commission or city council.



f)     Appeals.



A person aggrieved by a decision of the planning commission regarding an
expansion permit may appeal to the city council pursuant to section 300.04,
subd. 6(a).



g)     Recording.



A certified copy of the expansion permit must be filed by the applicant with
the Hennepin county recorder or the Hennepin county registrar of titles. 
The expansion permit must contain a legal description of the property
affected.



h)     Violations.



A person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits
the violation of the terms or conditions of an expansion permit is guilty of
a misdemeanor.  A violation is a violation of the expansion permit and
renders the permit null and void.  A violation also constitutes a public
nuisance that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of section 845.



(Amended by Ord. 2010-11, adopted August 16, 2010)



8. Burden of Proof.



A person who wishes to take advantage of the rights granted to a legal
non-conformity has the burden of proving the status as a legal non-conformity
by clear and convincing evidence.



(Amended by Ord. 2007-27, adopted August 20, 2007; amended by Ord. #2007-17,
adopted May 7, 2007; Ord. #2004-34, adopted November 8, 2004)



9. Non-conforming Uses in Shoreland District.



a)   When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district with less
than 50 percent of the required setback from the water is destroyed by fire
or other peril to greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as
indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the
city may require the structure setback to be increased, if practicable and
reasonable conditions are placed upon a zoning or building permit to mitigate
created impacts on the adjacent property or water body.



b)   The following applies to lots in the shoreland district that were of
record in the office of the county recorder on the date of adoption of
applicable shoreland controls and that do not meet the requirements for lot
size or lot width:



   1)    A nonconforming single lot of record located within the
shoreland district may be allowed as a building site without variances from
lot size requirements, if:



      a.    all structure setback distance requirements can be met;



      b.    the lot is connected to a public sewer; and



      c.    the impervious surface coverage does not exceed 25
percent of the lot.



   2)    In a group of two or more contiguous lots of record under
common ownership, an individual lot must be considered as a separate parcel
of land for the purpose of sale or development, if:



      a.    the lot is at least 66 percent of the dimensional
standard for lot width and lot size for the shoreland classification
consistent with Minnesota Rules, chapter 6120;



      b.    the lot is connected to a public sewer;



      c.   the  impervious surface coverage does not exceed 25
percent of each lot; and



      d.    development of the lot is consistent with the
comprehensive plan.



   3)    A lot subject to paragraph (2) that does not meet the
requirements of paragraph (2) must be combined with the one or more
contiguous lots so they equal one or more conforming lots as much as possible.



   4)    Notwithstanding paragraph (2), contiguous nonconforming lots
of record in the shoreland district under common ownership must be able to be
sold or purchased individually if each lot contained a habitable residential
dwelling at the time the lots came under common ownership and the lots are
connected to a public sewer.



   5)    In evaluating all variances, conditional use permits, other
zoning permits, and building permit applications, the city must require the
property owner to address, when appropriate, storm water runoff management,
reducing impervious surfaces, increasing setback, restoration of wetlands,
vegetative buffers, sewage treatment and water supply capabilities, and other
conservation-designed actions.



   6)    A portion of a conforming lot may be separated from an
existing parcel as long as the remainder of the existing parcel meets the lot
size requirements of the zoning district for a new lot and the newly created
parcel is combined with an adjacent parcel.



(Added by Ord. 2009-12, adopted September 14, 2009)



SECTION 300.30.  [REPEALED].



(Repealed by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016)



SECTION 300.31.  PLANNED I-394 DISTRICT.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of the planned I-394 district is to establish a comprehensive,
planned framework for development within the I-394 corridor. The city has
determined that it is in the best interest of the city and the region to
responsibly manage corridor growth. Specific development goals within the
I-394 corridor include the following:



a)   limitation of development to ensure reasonable traffic operations
because population and employment distribution and traffic generation
resulting from existing and future corridor development has the potential to
overload the capacity of regional and local road systems.  Development will
be limited to ensure reasonable traffic operations on corridor road systems
including I-394 interchanges;



b)   encouragement of a high quality development standard for structures
within the corridor because properties fronting I-394 are among the most
visible in the city.  It is in the best interest of the city and individual
properties within the corridor to encourage a high-quality development
standard for structures within the corridor;



c)   protection of the natural environment, including areas of steep
slopes, mature trees, floodplain/wetlands, open space and drainage;



d)   promotion of neighborhood stability and protection of property values
through the use of buffers between land uses of different intensity;



e)   promotion of flexibility in land development and redevelopment in
order to utilize new techniques of building design, construction and land
development.  Also, flexibility in locating specific land uses will allow
development options which do not overburden the capacity of the planned road
system;



f)   more efficient and effective use of land, open space and public
facilities through mixes of land use and assembly and development of land in
larger parcels;



g)   provision of alternative housing types in a range of affordability;



h)   energy conservation through the use of more efficient building
designs and sitings, and the clustering of buildings and land uses; and



i)   development which is consistent with the comprehensive guide plan
(1981), as amended by the I-394 corridor study (1987).



2.  Definitions.



For the purpose of this section and section 300.32, I-394 redevelopment
overlay districts, definitions contained in section 300.02 and the following
shall apply.



a)   All references to types of parcels or areas by use, such as
“residential areas” means the type and intensity of use as designated on
the comprehensive guide plan.  These references do not mean the existing use
or zoned use of the property.



b)   “Gross floor area” - for trip generation calculation purposes
means the sum of the area at all floor levels of a building, including
cellars, basements, mezzanines, penthouses, corridors, lobbies, stores, and
offices, that are included within the principal outside faces of exterior
walls, not including architectural setbacks or projections. Included are all
stories or areas that have floor surfaces with clear standing head room (6
feet, 6 inches minimum) regardless of their use.  Where a ground level area,
or part thereof, within the principal outside faces of the exterior walls is
left unenclosed, the gross area of the unenclosed portion is to be considered
as a part of the overall square footage of the building.  All unroofed areas
and unenclosed roofed-over spaces, except as defined above, are to be
excluded from the area calculations.



   For purposes of trip generation calculation, the gross area of any
parking garages within the building shall not be included within the gross
area of the entire building.



c)   “Gross leasable area” - for trip generation calculation purposes
means the total building floor area designed for tenant occupancy and
exclusive use, including any basements, mezzanines, or upper floors,
expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions
and from outside wall faces.



d)   “p.m. peak hour trips” - means the total number of inbound and
outbound motor vehicle trips generated during a continuous 60 minute period
of the highest volume of traffic between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m.



e)   “Substantial compliance” - means that the limits shall be an
absolute maximum, except that a greater number of trips or larger building
square footage will be allowed if the adverse impact on the road system
caused by the particular use would be less than expected as determined by a
traffic impact study approved by the city.  A lower adverse impact could
result from a category of use which generates more favorable turning
movements than assumed in the traffic projections or from a lower actual p.m.
peak rate.



f)   “Comprehensive plan” or “comprehensive guide plan” or
“guide plan” - means the comprehensive guide plan (1981) as amended by
the I-394 corridor study (1987) and other amendments.



3.  Master Development Plan Required.



a)   A master development plan which complies with the standards of this
section and which has been approved by the city shall be required for all
property in the planned I-394 district for which development is proposed.
Property which is the subject of a master development plan shall be under
unified ownership or control and be made subject to such legal restrictions
or covenants as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the approved
master development plan and final site and building plans.



b)   Exceptions for existing developments: for developments existing on
the effective date of this section, no master development plan is required
until any development is proposed which needs a variance from the provisions
of this section, a conditional use permit as specified in subdivision 4(b),
or which is an expansion exceeding 10 percent of gross floor area, 10 percent
of site area or 10 percent of I-394 right-of-way frontage.



4.  Uses.



a)   Permitted uses:



   1)   Within the planned I-394 district, permitted uses shall be only
those uses at the permitted densities and intensities specified for each
property in the comprehensive guide plan. Uses which may be available
depending upon the specific guide plan map designations include the following:



      a.   office: office used for administrative, executive,
professional and like activity;



      b.   service commercial: business uses primarily engaged in
commercial activities other than the sale of goods or merchandise;



      c.   retail commercial: uses which primarily involve the sale
of goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption.  Office and service commercial uses as noted above are also
permitted;



      d.   mid-density residential: residential development at
densities ranging from 4 to12 units per acre; and



      e.   high-density residential: residential development at
densities exceeding 12 units per acre.



   2)   A use which is generally referenced as a conditionally
permitted use but which does not meet the definition or criteria for the
conditionally permitted use is not a permitted use.  For example, any
restaurant which does not meet the requirements for the various categories of
restaurants under conditionally permitted uses is not permitted.



   3)   Exterior display, sales or storage: within the planned I-394
district, exterior display, sales or storage of merchandise, consumer goods
or business related items is not permitted.  Exceptions to this requirement
are limited to the following:



      a.   development existing on May 18, 1988: properties which
contain exterior display, sales or storage of merchandise, consumer goods or
business related items may continue this activity. Except as provided below
in section 300.31, subd. 4(a)(3)(b) and (c), the entire property is subject
to all applicable performance requirements of this ordinance when site
changes, exterior improvements or expansions to the property are proposed;



      b.   expansion of development existing on May 18, 1988:
properties which contain exterior display, sales or storage of merchandise,
consumer goods or business related items may expand the exterior display,
sales or storage in existence on May 18, 1988 by no more than 20 percent of
the entire property area.  In no case, however, can the expansion extend
along I-394 by more than an additional 10 percent of the property's I-394
right-of-way frontage existing on the effective date of this section.  This
10 percent limitation is measured as follows:



         1.   the existing display area means any display in the
area between the property line generally parallel to I-394 and the front
faces of the principal structure, with the front face of the structure at
each side extended to the side property lines;



         2.   the length of the front property line (generally
parallel to I-394) of the property is multiplied by 10 percent; and



         3.   the limits of the existing display area may be
extended in one or both directions parallel with I-394 no greater than a
total of the number of feet determined in subparagraph 2.



         Variances to permit expansion of exterior display, sales or
storage greater than 10 percent of the property frontage will be considered,
but not necessarily granted, only upon evidence that appropriate screening
such as landscaping, berming, structure location, or other amenities not
otherwise required by this ordinance compensates for the visual impact of the
additional expansion.



         This expansion may extend to adjacent property not being
used for that use on the effective date of this section. Property area shall
include all contiguous property under common ownership which is being used
for one principal use, including exterior display, sales or storage, on the
effective date of this section, regardless of political boundaries, but shall
not include area within wetlands or floodplain districts.  Expansion will be
approved only upon the entire development being subject to compliance with
all applicable landscape, lighting, noise, buffering and setback requirements
of this ordinance.



      c.   exterior display, sales, or storage of motor vehicles on
property within the I-394 redevelopment overlay districts No. 6 and No. 7:
properties may be developed consistent with a conditional use permit issued
pursuant to section 300.31, Subd. 4(b)(2)(i).



   4)    Also permitted in the planned I-394 district are cabinets no
larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment and for which a
landscape plan has been approved by the city planner; overhead utility poles
and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum height of 60 feet as
measured from the ground upon which it is located, except that utility poles
and lines for a distribution line may be taller than 60 feet, but not taller
than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major roadway such as a freeway.



b)   Conditionally permitted uses:



   1)   Notwithstanding the above, the city may issue a conditional use
permit to allow a maximum of 25 percent of the gross floor area of all
buildings within one development to be used for land uses not designated by
the comprehensive guide plan. Review standards for this conditional use
permit shall include the following:



      a.   shall be in compliance with standards applicable to
similar uses as specified in paragraph (2) below;



      b.   shall be permitted only when it is demonstrated that the
use will meet traffic requirements contained in subdivision 6 and that the
use will not significantly lower the level of service as defined by the
institute of traffic engineers on the roadway system;



      c.   shall be permitted only as part of a unified development
project;



      d.   shall be permitted only upon a determination by the city
that the use is compatible with a unified development project and is
consistent with the policies specified in the comprehensive plan; and



      e.   shall be further limited in size if needed to ensure
compliance with the intent of this ordinance and the comprehensive plan.



   2)   Because of impacts associated with certain specific uses, the
city has determined that a conditional use permit is required for the
following uses.  A permit will be issued only if the city finds that the
standards specified below for each use are met, that the use is in the best
interest of the city, that the use is compatible with other nearby uses, and
that the use is consistent with other requirements of this ordinance.



      a.   Business service uses normally associated with office
developments on properties designated for office use and containing limited
retail activity:



         1.   shall not result in any exterior building
modifications, including truck docks, separate entrances, freestanding signs
or overnight truck parking; and



         2.   shall not exceed more than 25 percent of the gross
floor area of the building(s) in which it is located.



      b.   Storage, assembly or servicing incidental to the
principal use on properties designated for office, retail, or service
commercial uses:



         1.   shall not have outside storage of materials or
trucks;



         2.   shall not require any exterior modifications to the
structure; and



         3.   shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the
building.



      c.   Minor manufacturing or assembly incidental to the
principal use on property designated for office, retail or service commercial
uses:



         1.   shall not have outside storage of materials or
trucks;



         2.   shall not have truck deliveries unless it is
demonstrated by the applicant that the deliveries will not cause adverse
impacts to the site or adjoining residential areas; and



         3.   shall not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area
of the building in which it is located.



      d.   Hospitals and medical clinics on property designated for
office, retail or service commercial uses:



         1.   shall not be adjacent to low density residential
areas;



         2.   shall have direct access from the site to a
collector or arterial street as defined in the comprehensive plan;



         3.   shall not have emergency vehicle access adjacent to
or located across a street from any residential use; and



         4.   may be required to submit a detailed parking
analysis for uses exceeding 10,000 square feet.  Additional parking may be
required based on this analysis.



      e.   Heliports on property designated for office use:



         1.   shall conform to all applicable federal aviation
administration and Minnesota department of transportation regulations;



         2.   shall establish and utilize approach and departure
routes over non-residential areas to the maximum extent possible;



         3.   shall have hours of operation limited to 7:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m., inclusive, excluding emergencies;



         4.   shall not be located within 500 feet of residential
areas;



         5.   shall be provided with a dust free landing pad; and



         6.   shall be fenced or otherwise secured to prevent
unauthorized access.



      f.   Hotels and motels including accessory uses within the
building such as restaurants, convention facilities and limited retail areas
on property designated for service commercial use:



         1.   shall not be located adjacent to residential
parcels unless the following criteria are met:



            a)   parking and loading facilities are screened
from residential views; and



            b)   lighting and sign plans are unobtrusive to
residential uses.



         2.   shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated
that operation will not significantly lower the existing level of service as
defined by the institute of traffic engineers on the roadway system; and



         3.   are required to submit a detailed parking demand
analysis. Additional parking may be required based on this analysis.



      g.   Licensed day care facilities on property designated for
office, retail or service commercial use:



         1.   shall have loading and drop-off points designed to
avoid interfering with traffic and pedestrian movements;



         2.   shall have outdoor play areas located and designed
in a manner which mitigates visual and noise impacts on adjoining residential
areas;



         3.   shall have one parking space for each six children
based on the licensed capacity of the center; and



         4.   shall obtain all applicable state, county and city
licenses.



      h.   Public buildings or facilities, and cabinets larger than
150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment, on property designated for any
use:



         1.   are subject to site and building plan review
pursuant to section 300.27 of this ordinance.



      i.   service stations and other automobile related uses having
service bays on property designated for retail use:



         1.   must have no unlicensed and inoperable vehicles
stored on premises except in storage areas where the contents are completely
screened from the view from nearby properties;



         2.   must conduct all repair, assembly, disassembly and
maintenance of vehicles within closed buildings except minor maintenance,
such as inflating tires, adding oil and replacing wipers;



         3.   must have no public address system audible from any
residential parcel;



         4.   must provide stacking for gas pumps for at least
one car beyond the pump island in each direction in which access can be
gained to the pump.  The required stacking shall not interfere with internal
circulation patterns or with designated parking areas and shall not be
permitted in any public right-of-way, private access easement or within the
required parking setback;



         5.   must have no sales, storage or display of motor
vehicles, unless the following criteria are met:



            a)   the parcel is located within the I-394
redevelopment overlay district No. 6 or No. 7;



            b)   all inventory and display vehicles located
outside of a building or structure, must be at finish grade level. No jack
stands, risers, or other mechanisms may be used to elevate any vehicle for
display purpose;



            c)   class II motor vehicle sales (used car sales)
are allowed only as an accessory part of the new car sales;



            d)   the sale of vehicles may occur during the
times and days allowed by state law;



            e)   vehicles must not be displayed in any yard
area, drive aisle, or fire lane;



            f)   the overall hardsurface coverages must not
exceed 70% and floor area ratios must not exceed 0.6 except that the
hardsurface coverage may extend to 80% with innovative stormwater management
methods and treatment measures subject to approval by the city engineer;



            g)   the architectural and site standards must
comply with section 300.31(7)(a);



            h)   the landscaping must comply with  Section
300.31(7)(b) and must contain a wall, berm or other feature that is
constructed for long term durability when adjacent to residentially zoned
property to minimize to the greatest extent reasonably possible, noise and
visual impacts;



            i)   parking lot and site security lighting must
comply with section 300.31(7)(c) and in addition, the following requirements:



               1)    Maximum of 450 watts per fixture.



               2)    Maximum height of light standards is
30 feet in outdoor display areas as defined in 300.31 Subd. (4)(a)(3)(b) and
25 feet in all other outdoor areas.



               3)    Maximum of 1 watt per square foot
surface parking area.



               4)    The lighting plan shall be designed to
have 0.0 foot-candles at residential property lines with the understanding
that ambient light from other sources may spill on the property and influence
actual on site measurements.



            j)   Parking requirements must comply with one of
the following:



               1)    fifty percent of the total on-site
parking spaces must be in a structured parking ramp, or



               2)    if the city deems appropriate, surface
parking without a ramp under the following conditions:



                  (a)    total on-site parking must not
exceed one parking space for every 200 square feet of building area, and



                  (b)    submittal of a plan that
adequately screens 50% of the total parking spaces from public view.



            k)   vehicles parked within a parking structure
must be screened from view from surrounding residential uses;



             l)   the customer parking spaces must be clearly
signed and may not be used at any time for inventory vehicle parking;



            m)   all pickups and drop offs of vehicles must
occur on site and off public streets;



            n)   all loading and unloading of vehicles must
occur on site and off public streets;



            o)   customer testing of vehicles may occur only
on non-residential streets and only with a store employee;



            p)   no loudspeaker paging system may be used;



            q)   all rooftop equipment must be fully screened
from ground level view of adjacent properties;



            r)   all signs must be consistent with this code;



            s)   poured-in-place concrete curbs must be
constructed and maintained on the perimeter of parking lots and traffic
islands; and



            t)   all trash and recyclable materials must be
screened from public view.



         6.   must not be located within 100 feet of any low
density residential parcel or adjacent to medium or high density residential
parcels. The city may reduce separation requirements if the following are
provided:



            a)   landscaping and berming to shield the auto
service use;



            b)   parking lots not located in proximity to
residential uses; and



            c)   lighting plans which are unobtrusive to
surrounding residential uses;



      j.   Retail facilities having gasoline pumps on property
designated for retail use:



         1.   shall have no vehicles which are unlicensed and
inoperable stored on premises;



         2.   shall conduct no repair, assembly or disassembly of
vehicles;



         3.   shall not locate gasoline pumps, stacking lanes or
access pumps adjacent to low density residential properties unless separated
from the low density property by the principal structure or from mid or high
density residential parcels by screening sufficient to block the view of
those items from those parcels;



         4.   shall have no public address system audible from
any residential parcel;



         5.   shall provide stacking for gas pumps at least one
car beyond the pump island in each direction in which access can be gained to
the pump.  The required stacking shall not interfere with internal
circulation patterns or with designated parking areas and shall not be
permitted in any public right-of-way, private access easement or within the
required parking setback; (Figure 31-1)



Figure 31-1







         6.   shall have no sales, storage or display of
automobiles; and



         7.   shall be screened from adjacent residential areas.



      k.   Uses having a drive-up window on property designated for
office, service commercial or retail use:



         1.   shall not have drive-up windows and stacking areas
located adjacent to any residential parcel;



         2.   shall be provided with a suitable visual screen
from adjacent properties;



         3.   shall provide stacking areas with a minimum of six
cars per aisle on the property in areas not within applicable setback
requirements; and



         4.   shall not have public address system audible from
any residential parcel.



      l.   Theaters on property designated for service commercial or
retail use:



         1.   theaters located within shopping centers or
otherwise utilizing joint parking arrangement  shall submit an analysis of
parking demand versus availability for review and approval by the city.
Additional parking may be required based on this analysis if available
parking does not meeting the expected demand;



         2.   theaters located within existing structures may be
required to install appropriate building modifications to provide adequate
pedestrian and vehicle access; and



         3.   interior and free standing theaters shall only be
permitted when it can be demonstrated that vehicular ingress and egress may
be accomplished without inducing undue traffic problems on area roadways.



      m.   Restaurants and cafeterias on property designated for
office, retail or service commercial use incorporated within a portion of a
principal structure and oriented predominantly towards serving the needs of
employees of the surrounding area but excluding drive-up and exterior walk-up
facilities:



         1.   shall be permitted only wall mounted signs, subject
to the limitations of section 325 of this code;



         2.   shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area
of the building in which it is located;



         3.   shall have parking and vehicular circulation in
compliance with the requirements of section 300.28 of this code and which
items must be adequate to accommodate the restaurant; and



         4.   shall only be permitted when it can be demonstrated
that operation will not significantly lower the existing level of service as
defined by the Institute of traffic engineers on the roadway system.



      n.   Freestanding restaurants on property designated for
retail or service commercial use:



         1.   shall have minimum seating capacity of 150;



         2.   shall be part of an overall master development plan
consisting of more than one structure;



         3.   shall be architecturally consistent and compatible
with other structures in the master development plan;



         4.   shall have parking in compliance with the
requirements of section 300.28 of this code;



         5.   shall be permitted only when it can be demonstrated
that operation will not lower significantly the existing level of service as
defined by the institute of traffic engineers on the roadway system;



         6.   shall not include a drive-up window; and



         7.   shall not be located within 100 feet of any low
density residential parcel or adjacent to medium or high density residential
parcels.  The city may reduce separation requirements if the following are
provided:



            a)   landscaping and berming to shield the
restaurant use;



            b)   parking lots not located in proximity to
residential uses; and



            c)   lighting plans which are unobtrusive to
surrounding uses.



      o.   Restaurants other than those included in paragraph m. and
n. and fast food restaurants on property designated for retail use:



         1.   must be in retail multiple tenant centers only and
conform to the architecture of a specific center;



         2.   will not be permitted when traffic studies indicate
significant impacts on the levels of service as defined by the Institute of
Traffic Engineers on the roadway system;



         3.   outdoor seating areas will be approved only subject
to the following:



            a)   must be located in a controlled or cordoned
area with at least one opening to an acceptable pedestrian walk. When a
liquor license is involved, an enclosure is required and the enclosure shall
not be interrupted; access must be only through the principal building;



            b)   must be set back at least 200 feet and
screened from any adjacent property designated in the comprehensive plan for
residential use;



            c)   must be located and designed so as not to
interfere with pedestrian and vehicular circulation;



            d)   must be located next to an entrance to the
main use;



            e)   must be equipped with refuse containers and
periodically patrolled for litter pick-up;



            f)   must not have speakers or audio equipment
that is audible from adjacent residential parcels; and



            g)   must meet building setback requirements.



         4.   drive-up windows and related stacking spaces will
be approved only subject to the following:



            a)   public address systems must not be audible
from any residential parcel; and



            b)   stacking for a minimum of six cars per aisle
must be provided subject to applicable parking lot setbacks.



            c)   must be set back at least 100 feet and
screened from any adjacent property designated in the comprehensive plan for
residential use.



         5.   restaurants or fast-food restaurants with less than
1,200 square feet gross floor area, designed seating capacity not exceeding
25, having no drive-up window and located in retail multiple tenant centers
are exempt from the requirements of this section and are considered to be a
standard retail use. For tenants with accessory fast-food restaurants, the
1,200-square-foot calculation will include the total gross area of all
restaurants and fast-food restaurants within the tenant space.



      p.   Health clubs and accessory uses within the building on
property designated for service commercial use:



         1.   shall have any active outdoor use areas screened
from residential views;



         2.   shall submit a detailed parking demand analysis. 
Additional parking may be required based on this analysis; and



         3.   shall not be permitted when traffic studies
indicate significant impacts on the levels of service as defined by the
institute of traffic engineers on the roadway system.



      q.   Exterior display, sales or storage consistent with the
provisions of section 300.31, subd. 4(a)(3):



         1.   all merchandise, consumer goods and business
related items shall be kept in a neat and orderly fashion at locations
indicated on approved plans;



         2.   a combination of landscaping and berming to screen
views of the exterior sales, display or storage area from adjacent properties
shall be provided;



         3.   all service or maintenance activity shall occur
within the principal building;



         4.   all applicable provisions of section 300 shall be
met;



         5.   public address systems shall not be audible on
residential property.  If continued complaints regarding audible public
address systems are received, the city retains the right to require removal
of the system; and



         6.   detailed lighting plans shall be provided which
show that there will be no direct residential views of the light source. 
Decorative light fixtures shall be provided.  Stringer type lighting is not
permitted.



      r.   Telecommunication facilities, subject to the provisions
of Section 300.34.



      s.   Microbreweries: the same standards as specified in
subdivision 4(s)(1) through (3), inclusive, of this section shall apply.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2014-07,
adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord.
2008-21, adopted July 28, 2008)



5.  Development Standards.



Within the planned I-394 district all development shall be in compliance with
the following.



a)   Minimum lot area: except for parcels included in designated I-394
redevelopment overlay districts, parcels for which any development including
expansion of existing development is proposed shall have a minimum area of
three acres.  Designated wetlands, floodplains, shorelands or public
right-of-way shall not be included when calculating the minimum area.  The
minimum lot area shall not apply to the following:



   1)   a property directly adjacent to or across a right-of-way from
property which has been developed previously as a planned unit development;
where land uses and architecture similar to the earlier planned unit
development are proposed and the development will be perceived as and will
function as an extension of that previously approved development;



   2)   situations where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
city that there is no reasonable future possibility of assembling land
parcels into an aggregate of three acres; or



   3)   minor architectural improvements, building additions not
exceeding 10 percent of gross floor area and minor site improvements if
determined by the city to comply with the provisions of this ordinance.



b)   Where the site of a proposed development is designated for more than
one land use in the comprehensive plan, the city may require that the
development include a combination of the designated uses in order to achieve
traffic management objectives contained in subdivision 6 of this section.



c)   Developments approved under the planned unit development district in
effect prior to the effective date of this section shall remain subject to
all requirements of the approved planned unit development and associated
P.U.D. agreement.



d)   Overall hardsurface coverages and floor area ratios for a planned
I-394 district project shall be limited as follows:



   comprehensive plan            hardsurface      floor
area
       designation                  coverage
(%)        ratio



   mid-density residential         50           0.50



   high-density residential         60           0.75



   office                  70           0.75



   service commercial            70           0.60



   retail commercial            80           0.30



   Individual parcels within a proposed development may exceed these
standards as long as the total average does not.



e)   Internal lot lines may be located to allow individual ownership of
specific buildings.



f)   Each residential development shall provide a minimum of 10 percent of
the gross project area in private recreational uses for project residents. 
This area shall be for active or passive recreational uses suited to the
needs of the residents of the project including, but not limited to, swimming
pools, trails, nature areas, picnic areas, tot lots and saunas.



g)   Except for internal project lot lines to allow individual ownership
of specific buildings, no subdivision of land shall be approved unless
accompanied by a master development plan in conformance with the provisions
of this section.



h)   The city may utilize incentives to encourage the construction of
projects which are consistent with the city's housing goals.  Incentives may
include modification of development standards for developments providing low
and moderate cost housing.  Incentives may be approved by the city only
after the developer and city have entered into an agreement to ensure that
the low and moderate cost units remain available to persons of low and
moderate income for a specific period of time.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-04, adopted April 18, 2011)



6.  Traffic.



The city has determined that future growth within the planned I-394 district
must be responsibly managed under a planned framework of development
parameters. A crucial element of planned growth management involves the
maintenance of acceptable levels of traffic operation on regional and local
road systems.  In order to maintain the functional capacity of area road
systems, a development limitation based on p.m. peak hour trip generation is
established for new development.  Further, the I-394 system design is based
on a commitment to transit alternatives including high occupancy vehicle
lanes, park and ride lots and timed transfer transit stations.  A commitment
from development projects within the I-394 corridor to manage traffic and to
utilize transit alternatives is necessary to maintain the design capacity of
the road system.  All parcels within the planned I-394 district are subject
to the following traffic requirements.



a)   Traffic impact studies: a traffic impact study prepared by a
registered traffic engineer to assess potential traffic impacts on local and
regional road systems is required for any of the following:



   1)   any development which exceeds 25,000 square feet of gross floor
area;



   2)   expansion of existing development which exceeds 10 percent of
gross floor area and the total gross floor area is 25,000 square feet or
greater; or



   3)   any development for which the p.m. peak hour trip generation
rate, as defined by the institute of traffic engineers, is expected to exceed
two p.m. peak hour trips per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.



b)   Trip generation: to avoid exceeding acceptable levels of service at
area intersections and thus overburdening the capacity of the road system,
development limitations based on p.m. peak hour trip generation are
established in subdivision 13 for each parcel of land in the I-394
corridor.  These have been developed using recognized methods of traffic
forecasting.  All property in the I-394 corridor was divided into traffic
analysis zones.  Traffic generation and distribution were analyzed based
upon reasonable development on all parcels.  A maximum number of p.m. peak
hour trips per traffic analysis zone were calculated based upon the approved
traffic levels at interchanges as specified in the I-394 corridor plan.  The
total number of trips were allocated on the basis of square footage of
buildable property in each zone, regardless of present or future use.



   The trip generation number specified in subdivision 13 is the maximum
number of p.m. peak hour trips that may be generated by any permitted use of
property.  To determine the maximum square footage of building space which
is allowed for each parcel, the trip limitation number is divided by the p.m.
peak hour rate for that use. The applicable rates are defined by the traffic
analysis included with the I-394 corridor study.  Substantial compliance
with the trip generation number and resultant maximum square footage of
buildable space is required. In determining trip generation and building
square footage allowable, gross floor area of a building shall be used.  In
cases where there is a substantial amount of common area within a building
and when institute of traffic engineers data is based on gross leasable area,
gross leasable area may be used.



   Uses existing on the effective date of this section which generate p.m.
peak hour trips or which have a building area greater than the number
assigned may continue to exist as non-conforming developments. These uses
shall be subject to the restrictions contained in section 300.29; however,
each of these uses shall be allowed to expand by no more than 10 percent of
existing building area if measures are taken to keep the traffic generation
at the rate existing on the effective date of this section. An expansion
beyond that amount or a change of use shall be permitted only if there is
substantial compliance with the trip generation limit.



   Unused trips allocated to a parcel are not a property right which may
be transferred at will to another property.  Unused trips may be
transferred, but only to another parcel in the same zone and only after city
council approval.  The council may decline to permit a transfer if it would
threaten to overload the capacity of the roadway system or would otherwise
not be in the public interest.



c)   Appeal of p.m. peak hour trips: appeals to the p.m. peak hour trips
and rates may be made by any person to the planning commission and city
council.  Appeals shall be written and accompanied by a report prepared by a
registered traffic engineer and deemed adequate by the city planner which
shall provide evidence indicating potential errors in a p.m. peak trip
limitation in subdivision 13, reasons why the property or development is
presently or will in the future generate less p.m. peak hour trips, or both.



   The appeal shall be reviewed by the planning commission. Notices of a
public meeting before the planning commission regarding the appeal shall be
mailed to owners of property located wholly or partially within 400 feet of
the subject property, as reflected in the certified records of the Hennepin
county auditor. The planning commission shall make a decision within 60 days
following the date of submission of a completed application for appeal unless
a continuance is not objected to by the applicant.



   After receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the
city council shall consider the matter and may hold whatever hearing it deems
advisable.  The city council shall act upon the appeal within 120 days of
submission to the city of a completed application or such longer period not
objected to by the applicant and, shall serve a copy of its decision upon the
applicant by mail. If the council fails to make a timely decision, the appeal
shall be deemed to have been denied. The city council may approve an appeal
to Subdivision 13 only upon an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of its
full membership.



d)   Road system improvements: development that would exceed trip
generation guidelines in subdivision 13 below may only be constructed if
concurrent road system improvements to accommodate additional trip generation
are installed and paid for by the developer.  The road system improvements
must achieve a level of service operation at area intersections consistent
with level of service that would have existed without the excess trip
generation.  Further, the comprehensive plan has identified a series of
geometric road system and traffic control improvements which are needed to
accommodate trip levels specified in subdivision 13. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to eliminate developer responsibility for stated
improvements if improvements are found to be needed by a traffic impact study
as a result of development.  If a traffic impact study finds that road
system improvements are required as a result of the proposed development, no
construction of the development shall commence until arrangements, including
financing, for permanent improvements are made and approved by the city. If
qualifying warrants are not met for such improvements, interim improvements
shall be installed by the developer.



e)   Access and traffic orientation: access to public road systems shall
be limited and spaced to promote effective and safe access as determined by
the city and other appropriate review jurisdictions.  Public or private
streets within redevelopment areas shall be designed to channel traffic to
the regional road system and not to nearby single family neighborhood road
systems.



f)   Phased occupancy: the city may require phased construction or
occupancy of a building or portions of a development/redevelopment project. 
Such phasing may be tied to completion of I-394 construction segments or
other road system improvement found to be needed by the traffic impact study.



g)   Traffic management: all approved development projects of 25,000
square feet or greater shall submit and operate under a traffic management
plan approved by the city. Specific plan elements will vary depending on the
scale, location and type of a project. Traffic management items which may be
required include, but are not limited to, the following:



   1)   staggered work hours or flextime;



   2)   use of mass transit and car pools along with preferential
location of car pool and van pool parking spaces within parking lots and
ramps;



   3)   use of alternative traffic routes away from intersections
operating in excess of targeted service levels;



   4)   possible restrictions on certain turn movements during peak
traffic periods;



   5)   a program for the use of the timed transfer station located at
the Plymouth Road/I-394 interchange;



   6)   partial funding of a Minnesota rideshare position or
designation of an employee to work with Minnesota rideshare to arrange and
assist in providing rideshare services and transit information;



   7)   project design to accommodate bus service when routes allow and
the provision of climate controlled bus shelters;



   8)   private van shuttle services between a development and transit
locations or other appropriate destinations within the corridor;



   9)   provision of a cab stand and information about available
taxicab services; or



   10)   provision of visible and convenient areas for marketing
rideshare and transit services.



h)   Pedestrian circulation: all development/redevelopment projects shall
install pedestrian improvements in accordance with the Ridgedale
sidewalk/trail plan approved by the city. Other pedestrian sidewalks and
trails may be required if deemed appropriate by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



7.  Design Standards.



The city has determined that development located in the planned I-394
district requires a high degree of design quality.  The high visibility of
properties from the interstate frontage and the proximity of development
sites to single family residential neighborhoods dictate sensitive design
considerations.  This section is intended to serve the public interest,
maintain and enhance property values and mitigate the impacts between
adjacent land uses of different intensity through appropriate design
standards.



a)   Architectural and site standards:



   1)   Building setbacks: the setback for all buildings within the
planned I-394 district from any bordering or abutting street shall be 35 feet
for local and neighborhood collector streets and 50 feet from all other
street classifications except that in no case shall the setback be less than
the height of a building up to a maximum of 100 feet.  Building setbacks
from internal public or private streets shall be determined by the city based
on the characteristics of a specific planned I-394 district master
development plan.



      Building setbacks from lot lines on the exterior of a proposed
development and not abutting a public street or low density residential
property shall be the height of a building up to a maximum of 100 feet, but
not less than 50 feet.  Building setbacks from lot lines on the exterior of
a proposed development and abutting lands designated for low density
residential development in the comprehensive plan shall be a minimum of two
times the building height unless unique circumstances are found which may
allow the city to reduce the setback requirement.  Unique circumstances
include substantial differences in site elevation, separation by natural
features such as wetlands or large stands of mature trees, or substantial
visual screening of a development by berms with landscaping. In no case shall
the setback be less than 50 feet.



   2)   Building height: building height within the planned I-394
district is regulated by the combination of building setback, floor area
ratio and hardsurface coverage requirements established in paragraph 1 above
and in subdivision 4 of this section. Additionally, the city may establish
stricter height restrictions based on the characteristics of a specific
planned I-394 district project.  Stricter height restrictions may be
established if the following criteria are not met:



      a.   use of compact building footprints to de-emphasize height;



      b.   use of stepped building heights to provide a visual
transition towards areas dominated by low buildings.  This applies to both
multiple building projects and individual buildings;



      c.   clustering of taller buildings at areas in proximity to
interchanges; or



      d.   location of taller buildings on natural lower base
elevations.



   3)   Building height studies: for all structures exceeding three
stories in height, the city may require the following:



      a.   view-shed analysis: site sections and building views from
all sides of a project and from the directions most likely to impact nearby
properties. This includes elevational representation of building heights and
topographic elevations within 1,000 feet of a development; and



      b.   sun-shadow studies: shadow cast studies which project
hourly shadows of a proposed structure between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. on December 21st.  Buildings which adversely impact light
availability to nearby properties will not be permitted.



   4)   Building materials: The Interstate-394 corridor is a highly
visible regional corridor with high levels of property investments and
evolving redevelopment opportunities. Building materials in the planned I-394
district must reflect this property investment and be generally consistent
and compatible with the architectural character of the district, which is
defined by structures which incorporate façade materials of brick, dimension
natural or man-made stone, glass, and architectural-grade metal panels and a
limited use of stucco and exterior insulated finishing systems.



   5)   Parking: parking requirements contained in section 300.28,
subd. 12, shall apply to all development within the planned I-394 district.
Additionally, the following shall apply:



      a.   structured parking required: all office or service
commercial projects exceeding 100,000 square feet gross floor area shall
include deck or ramp parking.  The percentage of required parking spaces to
be included in structured parking shall be determined by the city based on
specific characteristics of the master development plan.  The city may
require structured parking for retail development exceeding 200,000 square
feet based on specific characteristics of a master development plan;



      b.   surface parking lot setbacks: 20 feet from public streets
and exterior project lot lines, 50 feet from exterior lot lines abutting an
area designated as low density residential in the comprehensive plan unless
unique circumstances are found which may allow the city to reduce the setback
requirement. Unique circumstances include substantial differences in site
elevation, separation by natural features such as wetlands or large stands of
mature trees, or substantial visual screening the parking by berms and
landscaping.  In no case shall the setback be less than 20 feet;



      c.   parking structure setbacks: the setback for parking
structures including decks and ramps shall be 35 feet from local streets and
50 feet from all other street classifications except that in no case shall
the setback be less than the height of the structure. Parking structure
setbacks from external lot lines shall be 50 feet or the height of the
structure, whichever is greater when adjacent to residential properties; 35
feet when adjacent to non-residential properties.  Parking structure
setbacks from internal public or private streets shall be determined by the
city based on specific characteristics of a planned I-394 district master
development plan;



      d.   location of parking facilities: surface parking lots and
parking structures shall be located so that views from residential
neighborhoods are screened.  Parking structures shall be located away from
service road frontages unless they are given architectural treatment equal to
the building served by the parking structure and are buffered from public
views; and



      e.   parking structure exterior materials: exterior facades of
parking structures shall be of materials compatible with exterior materials
of the principal building served by the parking structure.



   6)   Signs: for development with approved master development plans,
signs shall be restricted to those which are permitted in a sign plan
approved by the city, shall be regulated by permanent covenants which can be
enforced by the city, and shall be subject to city review and permit.  For
existing properties without approved master development plans, signs shall be
regulated according to section 325 of this code by using the zoning
designation of the property in effect on the day prior to the effective date
of this section.



   7)   Accessory equipment: all mechanical and heating, ventilation,
air conditioning equipment shall be incorporated into the architecture of a
building so as not to be visible from public views or audible from
residential neighborhoods.



   8)   Refuse storage and recycling: all master development plans
shall designate refuse storage sites.  Exterior refuse locations shall be
screened with a masonry enclosure of materials compatible with the principal
building.  All buildings shall be designed to accommodate a refuse recycling
program and operated under a refuse recycling program as approved by the city.



b)   Landscaping: in addition to the landscape plan requirements contained
in section 300.27, subd. 14, the following requirements shall be met:



   1)   Master development plans shall undertake all efforts to
preserve existing natural features including wetlands/floodplain, trees and
areas of steep slope conditions.



   2)   All development other than single family residential
development shall be buffered from nearby single family neighborhoods. 
Buffering may be accomplished through the preservation of existing slopes and
trees.  In cases where natural buffers are absent, earthen berms with new
landscape materials shall be installed.



   3)   Landscape berms and buffers intended to screen development
projects from single family residential areas shall be installed with the
commencement of construction activity if determined appropriate by the city.



   4)   A minimum landscape plan investment of 2 percent of total
project value is required.



   5)   All new landscape trees and shrubs must meet the American
Standard for Nursery Stock and American National Standard relating to
planting guidelines, quality of stock and appropriate sizing of the root
ball. Landscape trees must be balled and burlapped or moved from the growing
site by tree spade. Deciduous trees will be not less than two inches but not
more than four inches caliper for balled and burlapped trees, and not less
than four inches but not more than eight inches caliper for spade-moved
trees. Coniferous trees will not be less than six feet in height but no more
than eight feet for balled and burlapped trees, and not less than eight feet
in height but not more than fourteen feet for spade-moved coniferous trees.



      The city may allow larger balled and burlapped or spade moved
trees if these trees are accompanied with a three year guarantee.



   6)   Surface parking lots shall be buffered with surrounding berms
and coniferous tree plantings.



   7)   Enhancement of the I-394 frontage shall be achieved by a
mixture of a variety of species and sizes of boulevard plantings.



c)   Environmental protection: protection and enhancement of environmental
elements is determined to have a direct benefit on the quality of life and
image of the I-394 corridor.  All master development plans shall include the
following:



   1)   Lighting plans: in addition to the requirements contained in
section 300.28, subd. 2 of this code, lighting plans shall include the
following:



      a.   Building lighting plans.  Accent lighting of buildings
may be permitted subject to lighting plan review by the city.  Floodlighting
of buildings shall be limited to building facades which are not in direct
view from residential areas.



      b.   Site lighting plans. Luminaires are to be located in
recessed or boxed fixtures to eliminate off-site direct views of the
luminaire.



   2)   Wetlands/floodplain: wetlands and floodplain areas as
identified on official city maps shall be protected by the dedication of
permanent conservation easements. Alternatively, the protected lands may be
dedicated to the city.



   3)   Drainage: drainage studies and calculations shall be required
for review and approval by the city and other appropriate review
jurisdictions. Drainage plans shall comply with the city water resources
management plan.



   4)   Utility lines: master development plans shall include
provisions for underground utility lines wherever physically and economically
feasible.



   5)   Noise: noise levels originating in the I-394 system require
design sensitivity and mitigative measures.  Master development plans shall
be designed with attention to the following:



      a.   preservation of natural sound buffers;



      b.   installation of new sound buffers created by berming and
landscaping, particularly when residential development is included;



      c.   siting of non-residential buildings to function as sound
barriers; and



      d.   exterior public address or speaker systems are not
permitted, unless specifically allowed for certain uses by this section.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2009-04;
adopted April 6, 2009)



8.  Review of Application.



a)   In order to receive guidance in the design of a planned I-394
district project prior to submission of a formal application, an applicant
may submit a concept plan for review and comment by the planning commission
and city council.  Submission of a concept plan is optional but is highly
recommended for large projects.  In order for the review to be of most help
to the applicant, the concept plan should contain such specific information
as is suggested by the city.  Generally, this information should include the
following:



   1)   approximate building and road locations;



   2)   height, bulk and square footage of buildings;



   3)   type and square footage of specific land uses;



   4)   number of dwelling units;



   5)   generalized grading plan showing areas to be cut, filled and
preserved;



   6)   staging and timing of the development.



   7)   traffic impact study; and



   8)   other information determined to be appropriate by the city.



   The comments of the planning commission and city council shall address
the consistency of the concept plan with this section.  The comments of the
planning commission and city council shall be for guidance only and, if
positive, shall not be considered binding upon the planning commission or
city council regarding approval of the formal application when submitted. 
If a development is of a scale where an environmental assessment worksheet
(EAW) is to be prepared, final approval of a master development plan shall
not be granted until the EAW receives approval from the city and other
appropriate agencies.



b)   Approval of a rezoning to planned I-394 district and required master
development plan shall be subject to the procedures outlined in section
300.09 of this code for a zoning map amendment.  The master development plan
shall comply with the standards in this section and other applicable sections
of the zoning ordinance. It shall contain the following:



   1)   building location, height, bulk and square footage;



   2)   type and square footage of specific land uses;



   3)   number of dwelling units;



   4)   detailed street and utility locations and sizes;



   5)   drainage plan, including location and size of pipes and water
storage areas;



   6)   grading plan;



   7)   generalized landscape plan;



   8)   generalized plan for uniform signs and lighting;



   9)   plan for timing and phasing of the development;



   10)   covenants or other restrictions proposed for the regulation of
the development;



   11)   renderings or elevations of the entrance side of buildings to
be constructed in the first phase of the development.



   12)   traffic impact study when required; and



   13)   other appropriate information as required by the city.



   Approval of the master development plan shall indicate approval of the
previously listed items and for properties not then zoned as planned I-394
district shall occur in conjunction with any proposed rezoning of the
property to planned I-394 district. After approval, nothing shall be
constructed on the site except in conformance with the approved plans and
this section.  The procedure for notification of and public hearing on the
master development plan shall be the same as required for a zoning map
amendment by section 300.09 of this code.



c)   Approval of a final site and building plan shall be subject to the
procedures outlined in section 300.27 of this code.  The final site and
building plan shall contain information as required by the city, including
the following:



   1)   detailed utility, street, grading and drainage plans;



   2)   detailed building elevations, architectural renderings and
floor plans; and



   3)   detailed landscaping, sign and lighting plans.



d)   The final site and building plan shall be in substantial compliance
with the approved master development plan.  Substantial compliance shall
mean:



   1)   buildings, parking areas and roads are in substantially the
same location as previously approved;



   2)   the number of residential living units has not increased or
decreased by more than five percent from that approved in the master
development plan;



   3)   the floor area of non-residential uses has not been increased
by more than five percent nor has the gross floor area of any individual
building been increased by more than 10 percent from that approved in the
master development plan;



   4)   there has been no increase in the number of stories in any
building;



   5)   open space has not been decreased or altered to change its
original design or intended use; and



   6)   all special conditions required on the master development plan
by the city have been incorporated into the final site and building plan.



   Approval of a final site and building plan shall signify approval of
all plans necessary prior to application for a building permit, subject to
compliance with any conditions on the approval and subject to other necessary
approvals by the city.



e)   Applicants may combine the final site and building plan review with
the master development plan review by submitting all information required for
both stages simultaneously.



f)   The planning commission and city council shall base their
recommendations and actions regarding approval of a master development plan
on a consideration of the following:



   1)   compatibility of the proposed plan with this section and the
goals, policies and proposals of the comprehensive plan;



   2)   effect of the proposed plan on the neighborhood in which it is
to be located;



   3)   internal organization and adequacy of various uses or
densities, circulation and parking facilities, public facilities, recreation
areas, open spaces, screening and landscaping;



   4)   consistency with the standards of section 300.27 pertaining to
site and building plan review;



   5)   accommodation of the traffic associated with a proposed
development on the public road system within service level goals as stated in
this section and in the comprehensive guide plan; and



   6)   such other factors as the planning commission or city council
deem relevant.



The planning commission and city council may attach such conditions to their
actions as they shall determine necessary or convenient to better accomplish
the purposes of this section.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



9.  Term of Approval.



Application for a final site and building plan approval must be made by
December 31 of the year following the date on which the city approved an
application for a rezoning to P.I.D., a master development plan, or a major
amendment to a master development plan, whichever was latest. If no
application has been made nor extension of time been granted during that time
period, the city council may rezone the property to the original zoning
classification at the time of the application or to a zoning classification
consistent with the comprehensive plan designation for the property.  In the
absence of a rezoning, the approved master development plan shall remain the
legal control governing development of the property.



If construction on the property included within an approved final site and
building plan has not started by December 31 of the year following the date
on which the final site and building plan was approved, if building
construction in a phase of a planned I-394 district approved to be built in
phases has not started within that same period, or if within that period no
extension of the time has been granted, the city council may rezone the
property to the original zoning classification at the time of the application
or to a zoning classification consistent with the comprehensive plan
designation for the property.  In the absence of rezoning, the approved
master development plan and final site and building plan shall remain the
legal control governing development of the property.



10.  Amendments.



A major amendment to an approved master development plan may be approved by
the city council after review by the planning commission.  The notification
and public hearing procedure for the amendment shall be the same as for
approval of the original master development plan.  A major amendment is any
amendment which:



a)   substantially alters the location of buildings, parking areas or
roads;



b)   increases or decreases the number of residential dwelling units by
more than 5 percent;



c)   increases the gross floor area of non-residential buildings by more
than 5 percent or increases the gross floor area of any individual building
by more than 10 percent;



d)   increases the number of stories of any building;



e)   decreases the amount of open space by more than 5 percent or alters
it in such a way as to change its original design or intended use;



f)   creates non-compliance with any special condition attached to the
approval of the master development plan; or



g)   increases traffic generation beyond either the limit specified in
subdivision 13 of this section or that associated with an approved master
development plan.



Any other amendment may be made through review and approval by a simple
majority vote of the planning commission.



11.  Applicability.



a)   This section shall not apply to any P.U.D. or planned unit
residential development which has received preliminary or final approval by
the city council prior to the effective date of this section unless
applicability is requested by the property owner and approved by the city
council or unless there is a major amendment to the approved master
development plan.



b)   The planned I-394 district has been uniquely developed for properties
located in the I-394 corridor.  This section has been developed to regulate
corridor growth within the capacity of public facilities. No property in the
traffic analysis districts identified in Subdivision 13 which is designated
for a use other than low density residential in the guide plan may be rezoned
to a zoning classification other than planned I-394 district.  A contrary
rezoning will be permitted only if it is demonstrated that the planned I-394
district incorrectly applies to a specific property.



12.  Separate Districts.



There shall be separate planned I-394 districts for each traffic analysis
district identified in subdivision 13. All property which is zoned planned
I-394 district shall be included within the separate zoning district
associated with a particular traffic analysis district.  All property in a
traffic analysis district area which is not yet zoned planned I-394 district
shall become part of the associated separate zoning district upon rezoning.



13.  P.M. Peak Hour Trip Generation Limits.



Traffic Analysis District No. 1 (Figure 31-2)



Parcel Number     Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 1



    1   202   251



    2   98   190



    3   0   783



    4   0   69



    5   47   110



    6a   45   285



    6b   152   218



    6c   13   99



    7   20   56



    8   13   35



    9   11   33



   10   13   35



other:
multi family parcels (total)   80
mid density
single family parcels (total)    84



                           total:      2328



Traffic Analysis District No. 2 (Figure 31-2)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 2



   1   0   226



   2   0   27



   3  multi family parcels
            mid density (total)   67



   high density (total)   187



                                total:      507









Traffic Analysis District No. 3 (Figure 31-2)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 3



   1   0   1997



Traffic Analysis District No. 4 (Figure 31-2)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 4



   1   0   562



   2   118   80



   3   8   114



   4   65   121



   5   305   170



   6   199   191



   7   197   332



   8   0   855



other:
single family parcels (total)    141



                                    total:      2566



Traffic Analysis District No. 5 (Figure 31-3)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 5



   1   96   113



   2   75   99



   3   49   32



   4   40   32



   5   0   40



   6   1   30



   7   0   615



other:



8 (high density residential)   21   92



Single family parcels (total)    65



                                    total:      1138





Traffic Analysis District No. 6 (Figure 31-3)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 6



   1   20   185



   2   12   94



   3   19   136



   4   179   370



   5   129   177



   6   121   194



   7    90   731



   8 (high density   489   489



     residential 815 units)
other:



single family parcels (total)    71



 



                                  total:      2447



Traffic Analysis District No. 7 (Figure 31-3)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 7



   1   98   328



   2   0   168



other:



   3   36   1156



single family parcels (total)    63



                                    total:      1715









Traffic Analysis District No. 8 (Figure 31-3)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 8



   1a   44   702



   2   85   212



   3   43   69



   4   15   19



other:



   1b   64   246



   5   7   128



single family parcels (total)    51



                                    total:      1427



Traffic Analysis District No. 10 (Figure 31-4)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 10



   1   0   2



other:



   2   6   7



single family parcels (total)   147



multi family parcels (total)      3



                                    total:      159



Traffic Analysis District No. 11 (Figure 31-4)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 11



   1   183   133



   2   148   101



   3   59   60



   4   77   92



   5   182   205



   6   59   119



other:



single family parcels (total)    85



                                    total:      795





Traffic Analysis District No. 12 (Figure 31-4)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 12



   1   224   143



   2   887   783



   3   27   43



   4   57   68



   5   59   48



   6   305   338



   7   157   173



   8   72   192



other:



9 (high density residential)   1   25



multi family parcels (total)   226



single family parcels (total)     58



                                    total:      2097



Traffic Analysis District No. 14 (Figure 31-5)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 14



   1   2760   2770



   2   212   213



   3   28   41



   4   92   69



   5   22       34



                                    total:      3127









Traffic Analysis District No. 15 (Figure 31-5)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 15



   1   74   27



   2   15   106



other:



   3   472   210



   4   74   250



5 (high density residential   107



    179 units)



6 (mid density residential   55



    69 units)



7 (mid density residential   38



    48 units)



single family parcels (total)    22



                                    total:      815



Traffic Analysis District No. 16 (Figure 31-5)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 16



   1   27   27



   2   230   230



   3   0   102



other:



   4   0   212



single family parcels (total)    26



                                    total:      597



Traffic Analysis District No. 19 (Figure 31-5)



Parcel Number   Existing P.M. Peak Hour Trips   P.M. Peak Hour Trips



P.I.D. District No. 19



    1   90   63



    2   9   20



    3a   27   24



    3b   24   34



    4   40   48



    5   81   81



    6   62   68



    7   20   20



    8   40   24



    9   78   88



   10   64   84



   11   83   63



   12 (medium density   36



            residential 45 units)



other:



   13   20   246



single family parcels (total)   209



                                    total:      1108






Figure 31-2










Figure 31-3










Figure 31-4










Figure 31-5







(Amended by Ord. 2014-07, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2008-25,
adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. #2004-07, adopted March 15, 2004;
amended by Ord. #2004-02, adopted January 5, 2004; amended by Ord. #2002-04,
adopted February 11, 2002; amended by Ord. #2002-03, adopted January 7, 2002;
amended by Ord. #2000-19, adopted October 16, 2000; amended by Ord. #99-25,
adopted October 11, 1999)



SECTION 300.32.  I-394 REDEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



1.  Purpose.



The city has determined that certain lands lying adjacent and in proximity to
I-394 may be desirable for redevelopment. These lands shall be subject to
I-394 redevelopment overlay districts.  The boundaries of these districts
are shown on Figures 32-1 through 32-4, which shall be a part of the official
zoning map established by section 300.01, subd. 5.



2.  Definitions.



Definitions of terms applicable to this section are contained in section
300.31, subd. 2.



3.  Interim Development.



Properties zoned R-1, low density residential district on and after the
effective date of this ordinance will remain R-1 for development and
subdivision purposes.  Section 300.10 (R-1, low density residential
district) shall apply until parcels are rezoned to planned I-394 district.



4.  Redevelopment Requirements.



In order to promote planned, responsible growth in accordance with the
comprehensive plan, lands within I-394 redevelopment overlay districts will
be considered for development, redevelopment or master development plan
approval only upon compliance with all provisions of the zoning ordinance,
the comprehensive guide plan and the following specific items:



a)   I-394 redevelopment overlay district #1, northeast quadrant of County
Road 73/I-394.



   1)   Lands lying within I-394 redevelopment overlay district #1 as
shown on Figure 32-1 and located east of Westwood Road must be assembled into
one unified redevelopment area.



   2)   In order to maintain acceptable levels of service on the public
road system, a development cap for new development/redevelopment is
established for redevelopment overlay district #1.  No additional
development will be approved unless it is shown that vehicle trip generation
is in substantial compliance with limitations established for traffic
analysis district no. 8 as stated in section 300.31, subd. 13.



b)   I-394 redevelopment overlay district #2, northeast quadrant of County
Road 73/I-394.



   1)   Lands lying within I-394 redevelopment overlay district #2 as
shown on Figure 32-1 and located east of County Road 73 and west of the
wetlands/woodside planned unit development are eligible for redevelopment
only in any of the following circumstances:



      a.   All parcels south of Fairfield Road are assembled into
one unified redevelopment site, but no redevelopment is proposed for all
parcels north of Fairfield Road.  Redevelopment and rezoning of this area
under these circumstances will be considered only if a buffer area is
provided between the development south of Fairfield Road and the homes that
will remain north of Fairfield Road. The size and type of buffer area shall
be at the discretion of the city council.



      b.   All parcels south of Fairfield Road are assembled into
one unified redevelopment site and all parcels north of Fairfield Road are
concurrently assembled to form a second unified redevelopment site.



      c.   All parcels south and north of Fairfield Road are
assembled into one unified redevelopment site.



   2)   No additional development/redevelopment will be approved unless
it is shown that vehicle trip generation is in substantial compliance with
limitations established for traffic analysis district no. 8 as stated in
section 300.31, subd. 13.



Figure 32-1







c)   I-394 redevelopment overlay district #3, northwest quadrant of County
Road 73/I-394.



   1)   All properties south of Oberlin Park, as shown on Figure 32-2,
must be assembled into one unified development site.



   2)   No additional development/redevelopment will be approved unless
it is shown that vehicle trip generation is in substantial compliance with
limitations established for traffic analysis district no. 7 as stated in
section 300.31, subd. 13.



Figure 32-2







d)   I-394 redevelopment overlay district #4, east of Plymouth Road.



   Area 1: lands lying between the North Highway 12 redevelopment district
to the east and the Westpark planned unit development district to the west as
shown on Figure 32-3 are eligible for redevelopment only if all parcels are
assembled into one unified development site. No development/redevelopment for
this portion of I-394 redevelopment overlay district #4 will be approved
unless it is shown that vehicle trip generation is in substantial compliance
with limitations established for traffic analysis district no. 5 as stated in
section 300.31, subd. 13.



   Area 2: lands lying between Fairfield Road and the westpark planned
unit development district as shown on Figure 32-3 are eligible for
redevelopment only as part of an enlarged westpark planned unit development
district and all residential parcels are included in the enlarged district.
No additional development/redevelopment for this portion of I-394
redevelopment overlay district #4 will be approved unless it is shown that
vehicle trip generation is in substantial compliance with limitations
established for traffic analysis district no. 5 as stated in section 300.31,
subd. 13.



Figure 32-3







e)   I-394 redevelopment overlay district #5, southeast quadrant of County
Road 73/I-394:



   1)   All parcels as shown on Figure 32-4 must be assembled into one
unified development site.



   2)   No building heights greater than three stories will be
permitted in order to minimize the impact on nearby residential property.



   3)   No additional development/redevelopment will be approved unless
it is shown that vehicle trip generation is in substantial compliance with
limitations established for traffic analysis district no. 19 as stated in
section 300.31, subd. 13.



Figure 32-4











f.   I-394 redevelopment overlay district no. 6, including lands lying to
the north of I-394, west of Carlson Parkway and south and east of Gleason
Lake Road as shown on Figure 32-5.







 



g.   I-394 redevelopment overlay district no. 7, including lands lying to
the north of I-394, east of I-494 and west of Plymouth Road as shown in
Figure 32-6.







(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2008-21, adopted July
28, 2008)



SECTION 300.33.  ANTI-BLIGHT REGULATIONS.



1.  Purpose.



The purpose of this section is to control, through zoning regulations,
certain land uses that have a direct and detrimental effect on the character
of the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods.  The city council
specifically recognizes the sanctity and fundamental nature of free speech
and does not intend to regulate or ban speech based on content.



2.  Findings.



The Minnetonka city council makes the following findings regarding the effect
sexually-oriented businesses have on the character of the city’s
neighborhoods.  In making these findings, the city council accepts the
recommendations of a task force including staff from Minnetonka and two other
cities, that has studied the experiences of other urban areas where
sexually-oriented businesses have located.



a)   Sexually-oriented businesses have an impact on the neighborhoods
surrounding them which is distinct from the impact caused by other uses.



b)   Residential and commercial neighborhoods located within close
proximity to sexually- oriented businesses experience the following negative
impacts:



   1)   increased crime rates, particularly in sex-related crimes such
as rapes, prostitution, indecent exposure and other lewd and lascivious
behavior;



   2)   property values which are either diminished or fail to
appreciate at the rate of other comparable properties not located in
proximity to sexually-oriented businesses;



   3)   increased transiency and decreased stability of ownership;



   4)   deteriorated neighborhood appearance from litter and graffiti;



   5)   sex-related harassment of residents and customers by motorists
and pedestrians;



   6)   a perception that the area is “unsafe;” and



   7)   difficulty in attracting and retaining customers, employees,
and desirable tenants.



c)   The adverse impacts which sexually-oriented businesses have on
surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the sexually-oriented
business increases.



d)   The adverse impacts of sexually-oriented businesses are exacerbated
when the uses are located near each other.



e)   The presence of liquor establishments in the immediate vicinity of
sexually-oriented businesses also compounds the adverse impacts on the
neighborhood.



f)   Sexually-oriented businesses can exert a dehumanizing influence on
persons attending places of worship, children attending day care centers or
schools, and people using public parks and libraries.



g)   Sexually-oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the
deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can impair the character and
quality of the residential housing in the area where they are located,
thereby exacerbating the shortage of affordable and habitable housing for
city residents.



h)   The concentration of sexually-oriented businesses in one area can
have a substantially detrimental effect on that area and on the overall
quality of urban life.  A cycle of decay can result from the influx and
concentration of sexually-oriented businesses.  The presence of such
businesses is perceived by others as an indication that the area is
deteriorating and the result can be devastating: other businesses move out of
the vicinity and residents flee from the area.  The resulting decline in
real estate values erodes the city’s tax base and contributes to overall
urban blight.



i)   Land-use regulations are appropriate to minimize the detrimental
effects that sexually- oriented businesses have on adjacent land uses.



3.  Definitions.



The following words and terms shall have the following meanings when used in
this section, except as provided otherwise in subdivision 4 below:



a)   “Sexually-oriented business” - means



   1)   a business that meets any of the following criteria, measured
on a daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly basis:



      a.   has more than 25% of its inventory, stock in trade, or
publicly displayed merchandise in sexually-oriented materials,



      b.   devotes more than 25% of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business
not open to the public) to sexually-oriented materials, or



      c.   derives more than 25% of its gross revenues from
sexually-oriented materials; or



   2)   a business that engages for any length of time in a
sexually-oriented use as defined in subdivision c below or any other use that
has an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



b)   "Sexually-oriented materials" - means visual, printed, or aural
materials, and other objects or devices, which:



   1)   contain, depict, simulate, or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas;



   2)   are marketed for use in conjunction with, or are primarily used
only with or during, specified sexual activities; or



   3)   are designed for sexual stimulation.



c)   "Sexually-oriented use" means any of the following activities and
businesses, even if the activity exists for only a short-time:



   1)   "Adult body painting studio" means an establishment or business
that provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is
nude.



   2)   "Adult bookstore" means an establishment or business used for
the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures,
slides, records, audio tape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if it
meets the criteria established in paragraph (a)(1) above.



   3)   "Adult cabaret" means a business or establishment that provides
dancing or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on: (1) the depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or (2) the presentation, display, or depiction of
matter that seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or
desire.



   4)   "Adult companionship establishment" means a business or
establishment that provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   5)   "Adult conversation/rap parlor" means a business or
establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   6)   "Adult health/sport club" means a health/sport club that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   7)   "Adult hotel or motel" means a hotel or motel that presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   8)   "Adult massage parlor/health club" means a massage parlor or
health club that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   9)   "Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater" means a business or
establishment with a capacity of less than 50 persons that as a prevailing
practice presents on-premises viewing of movies, motion pictures, or other
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   10)   "Adult Modeling Studio" means a business or establishment that
provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display
specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.



   11)   "Adult Motion Picture Arcade" means any place to which the
public is permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



   12)   "Adult Motion Picture Theater" means a motion picture theater
with a capacity of 50 or more persons that as a prevailing practice presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.



   13)   "Adult Novelty Business" means an establishment or business
that has a variety of items for sale if it meets the criteria established in
paragraph (1)(a) above.



   14)   "Adult Sauna" means a sauna that excludes minors by reason of
age, and that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose
of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   15)   "Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility" means a building or
portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the
building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if
the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



d)   "Specified anatomical areas"- means:



   1)   less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
area, buttock, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and



   2)   human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether or
not completely and opaquely covered.



e)   "Specified sexual activities" - means:



   1)   Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal
intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship; anilingus; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio;
necrophilia; pedophilia; piquerism; or zooerastia;



   2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal, or tumescence;



   3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus, or masturbation;



   4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, or female breasts, except touching the buttocks of a person
receiving a massage if done upon the person's request and only for medical
purposes such as relieving pain or muscle soreness;



   5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
who are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged
in the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other physical restraint
of any person;



   6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or



   7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal
irrigation.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011)



4.  Exceptions.



This section does not regulate the following:



a)   any material with significant literary content or social commentary;



b)   a business where sexually-oriented materials are sold, bartered,
distributed, leased, furnished, or otherwise provided for off-site use or
entertainment, if (1) the sexually- oriented material on each item is blocked
from view by an opaque cover as required under Minn. Stat. § 617.293, and
(2) each item is in an area accessible only by an employee of the business;



c)   any person or organization exempted under Minn. Stat. § 617.295;



d)   any activity regulated under Minn. Stat. § 617.251;



e)   displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long
as no sexually- oriented materials are for sale, and the business does not
have a liquor license; and



f)   movies rated G, PG, PG13, NC-17, or R.



5.  Location of a Sexually-Oriented Business.



a)   A sexually-oriented business may locate only in the B-1, B-2, B-3,
and I-1 zones, and in PUD and PID zones on land that is designated in the
master development plan for a non- residential use.



b)   No person may operate a sexually-oriented business on property, any
part of which is within the area circumscribed by a circle that has a radius
of 250 feet from any of the uses listed below.  Distances must be measured
by following a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, between the closest points on the boundary lines of the property
parcels where the two uses are located.  This distance requirement applies
to the following uses:



   1)   property used or zoned for residential uses;



   2)   a day care facility, school, library, park, playground, state
or federal wildlife area or preserve, religious institution, or other public
recreational facility;



   3)   premises licensed under city code chapter 600, relating to
liquor, beer and wine licensing; and



   4)   another sexually-oriented business.



6.  Sign Restrictions for Sexually-Oriented Businesses.



In order to protect children from exposure to lurid signs and materials, to
avoid the appearance that the windows are boarded-up and that the property is
deteriorating, and to preserve the value of property surrounding
sexually-oriented businesses, the following sign regulations apply to all
sexually-oriented businesses, in addition to the provisions of section 325. 
To the extent that the following provisions are inconsistent with section
325, the following provisions apply.



a)   All signs must be flat wall signs.  No signs may be freestanding,
located on the roof, or contain any flashing lights, moving elements, or
electronically or mechanically changing messages.



b)   No merchandise, photos, or pictures of the products or entertainment
on the premises may be displayed in, or immediately behind, window areas or
any other area, if they can be viewed from outside the portion of the
building in which the business is located.



c)   Window areas must not be covered or made opaque in any way.  No
signs may be placed in a window.  A sign no larger than one-square-foot must
be placed on the main entrance door and must state, “adults only.”  The
letters of this message must be a minimum of 2 inches high.  The only other
information on this sign may be the hours of operation.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-08, effective May 23, 2016)



7.  Penalty.



A violation of this section is a misdemeanor under Minnesota law and is
subject to the penalties and provisions of chapter 13 of the city code.



(Section amended by Ord. 2002-14, adopted May 20, 2002)



SECTION 300.34.  [REPEALED]



(Amended by Ord. 2018-03, effective March 19, 2018)



SECTION 300.35.    OPUS OVERLAY DISTRICT.



1.   Preamble.



The city has determined that future growth within the general area of the
Opus II business park must be responsibly managed to maintain acceptable
levels of traffic operation on regional and local road systems.  The city
has also determined that the highway interchange at Bren Road and Highway 169
is nearly at full capacity and that the interchange is the primary limiting
factor for growth in the majority of the Opus II business park area. 
Limitations must be placed on this area in addition to the underlying zoning
requirements in order to prevent unacceptable levels of traffic at the Bren
Road interchange. Therefore, the Opus overlay district is established, and
properties in that district are subject to the provisions in this section.



2.   Boundaries of Opus Overlay District.



The Opus overlay district covers the area bounded by County Road No. 62 on
the south, Highway 169 on the east, Smetana Road on the north, and Shady Oak
Road/County Road No. 61 on the west. The Opus overlay district is further
divided into four traffic analysis districts that reflect the different
levels of expected distribution of traffic to the Bren Road interchange. The
boundaries of each traffic analysis district are shown in subdivision 4.



3.   Traffic Requirements.



In order to avoid overloading the Bren Road interchange, all non-residential
parcels within the Opus overlay district are subject to the following traffic
requirements. If an application is submitted to increase the density of a
residential parcel, that application will be subject to the following
requirements except for the trip generation limit. If an application is
submitted to change the use of a residential parcel, that parcel will be
subject to all of the following requirements, and the city will establish an
appropriate trip generation limit for that parcel.



a)   Traffic impact studies: a traffic impact study prepared by a
registered traffic engineer to assess potential traffic impacts on local and
regional road systems is required for any of the following:



   1)   any development that exceeds 25,000 square feet of gross floor
area;



   2)   expansion of existing development that exceeds 10 percent of
gross floor area and the total gross floor area is 25,000 square feet or
greater; or



   3)   any development for which the p.m. peak hour trip generation
rate, as defined by the institute of traffic engineers, is expected to exceed
two p.m. peak hour trips per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.



b)   Trip generation:



   1)   Development limitations based on p.m. peak hour trip generation
are established in subdivision 4 for each parcel of non-residential land in
the Opus area district that contributes traffic to the Bren Road interchange.
These development limitations have been developed by determining the maximum
number of p.m. peak hour trips that can be accommodated at the interchange.
That number of trips was then allocated proportionately on the basis of the
maximum development that would be allowed under current zoning standards and
the rate of trip distribution to the interchange for each traffic analysis
district. The properties in traffic analysis district no. 4 were determined
to have no trips to the interchange, so no trip generation limits are imposed
for that district.



   2)   The trip generation numbers specified in subdivision 4 are the
maximum numbers of p.m. peak hour trips that may be generated by
non-residential properties in traffic analysis districts no. 1, 2, and 3. 
To determine the maximum square footage of building space that is allowed for
each parcel, the trip limitation number is divided by the p.m. peak hour rate
for that use. The applicable rates are those specified in the Opus II area
trip generation analysis, dated August 1, 2009, on file in the community
development department.  Substantial compliance with the trip generation
number and resultant maximum square footage of buildable space is required.
In determining trip generation and allowable building square footage, gross
floor area of a building must be used, except that gross leasable area may be
used when there is a substantial amount of common area within a building and
when institute of traffic engineers data is based on gross leasable area.



   3)   Uses existing on December 7, 2009 that generate greater p.m.
peak hour trips or that have a greater building area than would be allowed by
the trip generation number may continue to exist as non-conforming
developments. These uses are subject to the restrictions contained in section
300.29; however, each of these uses is allowed to expand by no more than 10
percent of existing building area if measures are taken to keep the traffic
generation at the rate existing on December 7, 2009. An expansion beyond that
amount or a change of use is permitted only if there is substantial
compliance with the trip generation limit.



   4)   Unused trips allocated by this ordinance to a parcel under
subdivision 4 are not a property right that may be transferred at will to
another property.  Allocated trips may be transferred to another property in
the overlay district only with the approval of the city council, which may
deny the transfer if it is likely to have a negative impact on the public
health, safety, or welfare.



c)   Appeal of p.m. peak hour trips:



   1)   The owner of any property subject to a trip generation limit
may appeal that limit to the planning commission and city council.  No
appeal may be taken unless the affected property owner files a written appeal
with the city clerk within 90 days after the adoption of this section. The
failure to file a timely appeal eliminates all right to challenge a trip
generation limit. The appeal must be accompanied by a report prepared by a
registered traffic engineer. The report must provide evidence indicating
potential errors in a p.m. peak trip or rate, reasons why the property or
development is presently generating, or will in the future generate, less
p.m. peak hour trips, or both.



   2)   The appeal will be reviewed by the planning commission. Notices
of a public meeting before the planning commission regarding the appeal will
be mailed to owners of property located wholly or partially within 400 feet
of the subject property, as reflected in the certified records of the
Hennepin county auditor.



   3)   After receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission,
the city council will consider the matter and may hold whatever hearing it
deems advisable.  The city council must serve a copy of its decision upon
the applicant by mail. The city council may approve an appeal only upon an
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of its full membership.



d)   Road system improvements:



   1)   Development that would exceed the established trip generation
limitations may only be constructed if concurrent road system improvements to
accommodate the additional trip generation are paid for by the property
owner.  The road system improvements must achieve a level of service
operation at the Bren Road interchange consistent with the level of service
that would have existed without the excess trip generation.  The adequacy
and necessity of the road system improvements will be reviewed and approved
by the city council as part of the development approvals.



   2)   If the city constructs, or participates in financing, road
system improvements that create additional capacity at the Bren Road
interchange after December 7, 2009, development beyond the allocated trip
generation number is allowed only if the developer helps to reimburse the
city for its costs by purchasing additional trips from the city. The city
will determine the value of each additional trip by dividing the city's share
of the total construction cost by the number of p.m. peak hour trips that can
be added to the interchange because of the construction. That value will be
adjusted each year by the rate established in the engineering news record or
a similar standard for determining the inflationary or deflationary rate of
construction costs per year.



   3)   Purchase of the additional trips from the increased capacity of
the Bren Road interchange will be on a first-come, first-served basis. When
all of the additional trips have been purchased, no more fees for additional
trips will be charged and no development beyond that allowed by the allocated
and purchased trips may occur. Purchase of the additional trips may occur
only after a development has received all necessary land use approvals from
the city. The trips will not be reserved for the development until the
payment is made. If all available trips have been purchased before the owner
of an approved development seeks to pay for its needed trips, the development
may not proceed.



   4)   All purchased trips may be used only for the specific
associated development approved by the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the owner of purchased trips may transfer those trips to another development
if the city council has given all necessary land use approvals for that other
development and has approved the transfer of those trips, after considering
the impact on the public health, safety, and welfare.



   5)   Nothing in this chapter may be construed to eliminate developer
responsibility for other improvements unrelated to the Bren Road
interchange.  If a traffic impact study finds that road system improvements
unrelated to the Bren Road interchange are required as a result of the
proposed development, no construction of the development may commence until
arrangements, including financing, for completion of permanent improvements
are made and approved by the city. If qualifying warrants are not met for
such improvements, the city may require that the property owner install
interim improvements.



e)   Phased occupancy: the city may require phased construction or
occupancy of a building or portions of a development/redevelopment project. 
Such phasing may be tied to completion of a road system improvement found to
be needed by the traffic impact study.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



4.   P.M. Peak Hour Trip Generation Limits.



Traffic Analysis District No. 1 (Figure 34-1)








Parcel Number   Max. P.M. Peak Hour Trips





   1         0





   2         0





   3         0





   4         0





   5         49





   6         0





   7         11





   8         10





   9         0





   10         66





   11         30





   12         33





   13         0





   14         0





   15         0





   16         0





   17         0





   18         0





   19         196





   20         0





   21         109





   22         19





   23         14





   24         33





   25         33





   26         44





   27         44





   28         0





   29         86





   30         79





   31         32





   32         127





   33         119





   34         146





   35         268





   36         0





   37         0





   38         24





   39         64





   40         4





   41         3





   42         3





   43         2





   44         2





   45         2





   46         5





   47         5





   48         6





   49         0





   50         29





   51         39





   52         25





   53         0





   54         27





   55         279





   56         39





   57         111





   58         35




   59         0



Traffic Analysis District No. 2 (Figure 34-2)








Parcel Number    Max. P.M. Peak Hour Trips





   1         77





   2         5





   3         5





   4         15





   5         17





   6         13





   7         17





   8         20





   9         13





   10         63





   11         0





   12         44





   13         33





   14         4





   15         122





   16         47





   17         62





   18         0





   19         79




   20         27



Traffic Analysis District No. 2 (Figure 34-3)







Parcel Number   Max. P.M. Peak Hour Trips




   1         8





   2         4





   3         24





   4         4





   5         24





   6         11





   7         14





   8         7





   9         3





   10         20





   11         25





   12         3





   13         3





   14         13





   15         12





   16         5





   17         4





   18         5





   19         6





   20         5





   21         5





   22         7





   23         15





   24         5





   25         4





   26         3




   27         5



Traffic Analysis District No. 4 (Figure 34-4)








Parcel Number   Maximum P.M. Peak Hour Trips





   1         N/A





   2         N/A





   3         N/A





   4         N/A





   5         N/A





   6         N/A





   7         N/A





   8         N/A





   9         N/A





   10         N/A





   11         N/A





   12         N/A





   13         N/A





   14         N/A





   15         N/A





   16         N/A




   17         N/A



(Section added by Ord. #2009-17, adopted December 7, 2009)



SECTION 300.36.   SOUTHWEST LIGHT RAIL TRANSIT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



1.   Preamble.



The Southwest Light Rail Transitway is an identified regional transportation
corridor planned for rail transit improvements to connect the city of
Minneapolis and many communities in the southwest suburban area. Planning has
been ongoing for a number of years as it is a transportation project of
regional significance. In 2009, the Hennepin County Regional Railroad
Authority completed a corridor-wide conceptual station area planning effort.
The Southwest Light Rail Transit Study anticipates the location of two light
rail transit stations in the city of Minnetonka. These stations will be
catalysts for new development and redevelopment in their surrounding areas.
In addition, the city is currently undertaking planning studies of the two
areas to develop a more definitive and coordinated development plan to guide
this development and redevelopment in a transit-friendly manner. A
coordinated development plan is necessary for the Shady Oak Road area station
because there is multiple ownership of affected properties, new and realigned
public infrastructure will be needed, environmental clean-up is needed on
some properties, and many parcels have older development nearing the end of
their life-cycle and are ripe for redevelopment. A coordinated development
plan is also necessary for the Opus area station because there is multiple
ownership of affected properties and the significant size of some that
require further study. Limitations must be placed on these areas in addition
to the underlying zoning requirements in order to ensure that premature
development and redevelopment does not hinder or foreclose a comprehensive
and cohesive plan for each area. Therefore, the southwest light rail transit
station (SWLRT) overlay district is established, and properties in that
district are subject to the provisions in this section. The boundaries of the
district are shown on Figures 36-1 and 36-2, which are a part of the official
zoning map established by section 300.01, subd. 5.



2.   Development and Redevelopment Requirements.



All properties in the SWLRT overlay district are subject to the following
requirements:



a)   Before the adoption of city-approved plans and accompanying
regulations for the applicable station area, construction or development that
requires any land use or building approval from the city is subject to the
following requirements:



   1)   The applicant must include as part of its application to the
city a discussion of how the development would integrate with other
properties in the district when the station is constructed and what future
changes to the property would be necessary for a cohesive transit-friendly
redevelopment of the relevant station area, including



      a.   Building placement,



      b.   Building orientation,



      c.   Building facades,



      d.   Property use,



      e.   Site layout and connections to adjacent properties,



      f.   Parking including shared parking arrangements,



      g.   Bicycle parking,



      h.   Pedestrian connections,



      i.   Access to the station,



      j.   Landscaping,



      k.   Size of the development parcel.



   2)   The applicant may not make new investment into the property
that is more than 50% of the current value of all improvements on the
property; and



   3)   No re-zonings, variances, or conditional use permits will be
allowed for the property. Only site plan approvals and building permits will
be issued.



b)   After the adoption of city-approved plans and accompanying
regulations for the station areas, construction or development must be in
compliance with those approved plans and regulations.



3.   Interim Uses.



The following uses are allowed in the SWLRT overlay district only pursuant to
an approved interim use permit and in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.05 of this ordinance:



a)   all uses allowed as permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the
underlying zoning district that do not comply with the limitations in section
300.36, subd. 2(a).



4.   Boundaries of SWLRT Overlay District.



The boundaries of the SWLRT overlay district are shown on Figures 36-1 and
36-2, which are a part of the official zoning map established by section
300.01, subd. 5.



Figure 36-1







Figure 36-2







(Section added by Ordinance No. 2011-18, adopted August 22, 2011)



SECTION 300.37.   R-1A, RESIDENTIAL ALTERNATIVE, DISTRICT.



1. Purpose.



The purpose of the R-1A district is to continue and promote a diversity of
housing by providing a single-family alternative to the R-1 zoning district.
Development within this district may occur at densities not exceeding three
dwelling units per acre.



2. Applicability.



R-1A zoning may be considered when both a) and b) below are met:



a)   The proposed R-1A development will be appropriately integrated into
existing and proposed surrounding development. This does not mean the R-1A
development must reflect the specific standards of the surrounding area such
as lot size, density, setbacks, or design. While integration may be achieved
through such standards, it may also be achieved through continuation of
existing land use types, architectural transitions, landscape buffering, or
other means.



b)   Either of the following is met:



   1)   At least 60 percent of existing lots within 400 feet of the
proposed R-1A development, and along 1000 feet on both sides of street on
which the proposed development is located, have lot areas less than the R-1
standards as outlined in city code section 400; or



   2)   All lots within the R-1A development will be served by a new
street.



3. Permitted Uses.



Within the R-1A district no structure or land may be used except for any one
or more of the following permitted uses and the accessory and conditional
uses in subdivisions 3 and 4:



a)   single family detached dwelling units, but not more than one dwelling
unit per lot; a manufactured home built in conformance with Minn. Stat. §§
327.31 et seq. is considered a single-family detached dwelling unit;



b)   public park and recreational areas owned and operated by a
governmental unit, including recreational facilities and structures
consistent with the area, except as provided for in subdivision 4;



c)   licensed residential care facilities or community based residential
care facilities serving six or fewer persons, a licensed day care facility
serving 12 or fewer persons, and a group family day care facility licensed
under Minnesota Rules, parts 9502.0315 to 9502.0445 to serve 14 or fewer
children, except a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat
juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or
have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of
criminal statutes relating to sex offenses;



d)   cabinets no larger than 150 cubic feet that hold utility equipment
and for which a landscape plan has been approved by the city planner;
overhead utility poles and lines for a distribution line up to a maximum
height of 60 feet as measured from the ground upon which it is located,
except that poles and lines for a distribution line may be taller than 60
feet, but not taller than 80 feet, when needed to cross a major roadway such
as a freeway.



e)   private recreational uses and structures for the exclusive use of
surrounding property owner(s) as a principal use. Such uses and structures
include tennis courts, pools, patios, and docks, which cannot be used for
commercial purposes or non-recreational uses. The only permitted buildings
are gazebos and storage sheds. Storage sheds may be no larger than 120 square
feet. All structures mentioned in this subsection must meet other
minimum-required setbacks and maximum area requirements for accessory
structures.



4. Accessory Uses.



Within the R-1A district only the following uses are permitted as accessory
uses, provided they are subordinate to, associated with and located on the
same lot as a permitted use:



a)   private swimming pools, tennis courts, and other sport courts;



b)   detached garages, storage sheds, or other accessory structures not
exceeding 12 feet in height, an aggregate of 600 square feet of gross floor
area, or occupying more than 30 percent of the area of the side or rear yard
in which they are located and except as provided for in subdivision 4;



c)   solar equipment;



d)   home occupations that comply with the provisions of section 300.15,
subd. 14;



e)   minor mass transit facilities including benches, except as provided
for in subdivision 4;



f)   licensed day care facilities serving 12 or fewer persons, and
licensed group family day care facilities serving 14 or fewer children,
provided that there is not more than one outside employee in any such
facility;



g)   garage sales, estate sales, yard sales, rummage sales, and other
sales of personal property that have similar traffic and parking patterns, if:



   1)   the sales occur during no more than two periods of a maximum of
three consecutive days each in any 12-month period,



   2)   the items offered for sale consist only of items owned by a
person who occupies the property as his/her residence or by friends of the
resident



   3)   none of the items offered for sale have been purchased for
resale or received on consignment for purposes of resale, and



h)   other uses that are not regulated by this code and that are
customarily associated with but subordinate to a permitted use, as reasonably
determined by the city.



5. Conditional Uses.



Within the R-1A district no structure or land shall be used for the following
except by conditional use permit and in conformance with the standards
specified in section 300.16 of this ordinance:



a)   accessory apartments;



b)   utility poles and appurtenances (such as wires) that are over 60 feet
in height and freestanding upon the ground, and all transmission lines that
are not subject to state review under the Minnesota power plant siting act;



c)   other uses similar to those permitted by this section, as determined
by the city.



6. Specific District Standards.



a)   Lots must meet all of the following minimum standards:



   1)   Lot area: 15,000 square feet



   2)   Lot width at front yard setback: 75 feet



   3)   Lot width at right-of-way: 55 feet, except that lots abutting a
cul-de-sac bulb may have a lot width at right-of-way of 45 feet



   4)   Lot depth: 125 feet



   5)   Buildable area: 2,400 square feet



   6)   Buildable area dimensions: minimum of four sides with 30 feet
per side



b)   Principal structures must conform with the following:



   1)   building height: maximum of 35 feet, except if the building
includes a walkout or lookout elevation, in which case the maximum height is
25 feet.



   2)   front yard setback:



      a.   From streets located outside of the R-1A plat, a minimum
of 35 feet from the right-of-way of streets and railroad lines. In the case
of a corner lot, one front yard setback may be reduced by 10 feet. On double
frontage lots, the setback may be reduced by 10 feet towards the direction
perceived by the city planner to be the rear yard.



      b.   From streets located within the R-1A plat, and only serve
the lots within the R-1A plat, a minimum of 25 feet.



   3)   side yard setback: 10 feet



   4)   rear yard setback: minimum of 30 feet or 20 percent of the
depth of the lot, whichever is less



   5)   maximum impervious surface: 50 percent



   6)   maximum floor area ratio:



      a.   Lot area less than 17,500 square feet: 0.24



      b.   Lot area 17,500 square feet and greater: 0.22



c)   Accessory structures must conform to the setbacks established for
principal structures, except for the following:



   1)   all accessory structures located more than 10 feet from a
principal structure must be located a minimum of 10 feet from a rear or side
lot line;



   2)   all accessory structures except detached garages located
between the principal structure and the front lot line, must maintain a
minimum setback of 50 feet;



   3)   sheds or storage buildings less than 120 square feet in size
must be located behind the rear building line of the house; and



   4)   swimming pools and sport courts must be located behind the
front building line of the house, and set back a minimum of 15 feet  from
side and rear property lines as measured to the water line of pool or edge of
the sport court. On corner lots, swimming pools and sport courts are subject
to front yard setbacks established for principal structures.



d)   All dwellings, including manufactured homes, must have a depth of at
least 20 feet for at least 50 percent of their width and a width of at least
20 feet for at least 50 percent of their depth.



e)   All dwellings must have a permanent foundation in conformance with
the Minnesota state building code.



f)   Off-street parking must be provided for at least two vehicles for all
single-family dwellings. A suitable location for a garage measuring at least
24-feet by 24-feet and that does not require a variance must be provided and
indicated as such on a survey or site plan to be submitted when applying for
a building permit to construct a new dwelling or alter an existing garage.



g)   The city may require that construction within the buildable area of
an R-1A lot be located where the city determines it would reasonably:



   1)   minimize the amount of adverse impacts to the physical
environment on the lot, including such things as significant trees, grading,
erosion, and surface water drainage, and



h)   No principal structure, or any portion of it, may be located outside
the buildable area, except when intrusions into setbacks are allowed by this
code.



7. Review Process.



a)   Applications for rezoning and preliminary or final plat will not be
considered simultaneously. A rezoning to R-1A must be approved by the city
council prior to receipt of a plat application.



b)   Rezoning



   1)   As with any rezoning, the decision to rezone a property to R-1A
is a policy decision that the city council may make in its legislative
capacity. In evaluating a proposal to rezone a property to R-1A, the council
will consider its compliance with the standards outlined in section 2 of this
ordinance.



    2)   The process to rezone a property to R-1A is generally subject
to the procedures outlined in section 300.09 of this ordinance for a zoning
map amendment, except that:



      a.   An application for rezoning to R-1A must include a
conceptual subdivision plan. The plan must note lot area and dimensions and
buildable area and dimensions. If a rezoning to R-1A is approved, future
subdivision must be substantially consistent with the conceptual plan.



      b.   Prior to introduction of the rezoning ordinance, city
staff will establish a public hearing notification area. This area will
include all properties located wholly or partially within 400 feet of the
property proposed to be rezoned R1-A and further extended to existing natural
or manmade boundaries such as wetlands, creeks, lakes, roadways,
intersections, railroads or different land use classifications.



      c.   At the time of ordinance introduction, the council will
determine whether the notification area is appropriate. The council may
require that the area be enlarged or retracted prior to the public hearing
before the planning commission. In no case will the notification area be less
than 400 feet of the property proposed be rezoned R-1A.



      d.   At least 10 days prior to the public hearing before the
planning commission, notice regarding the rezoning will be published in the
official newspaper and sent by mail to the notification area as approved by
the council.



c)   Platting Process



   1)   The process to plat an R-1A property is subject to the
procedures outlined in section 400.



8. Term of Rezoning Approval.



a)   If an application for preliminary plat approval is not made by
December 31 of the year following approval of a rezoning to R-1A or the end
of any extension granted by the city, the city council may rezone the
property back to its original zoning classification.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-06, effective February 29, 2016; section added by Ord.
2014-22, adopted September 15, 2014)



SECTION 310.03 TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES REGULATIONS



1.  Purpose and Findings.



a)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish predictable and
balanced regulations for telecommunication facilities and systems in order to
accommodate such within the city, while protecting the community against any
adverse impacts to the public welfare or aesthetic resources.



b)   Findings. The City of Minnetonka finds the following:



   1)   Wireless telecommunication systems provide a valuable service
to the public. However, telecommunications facilities and systems are not a
public utility nor part of the public infrastructure system.



   2)   To promote and preserve the public health, safety, welfare, and
aesthetics of the community, the location, design, construction, and
modification of telecommunication facilities and systems must be regulated.



   3)   To minimize the visual impact of telecommunication facilities:



      a.   installation of facilities on existing support structures
is favored over installation of new, freestanding telecommunication towers;



      b.   new telecommunication towers must be designed to
accommodate more than one telecommunication provider and must incorporate
stealth design techniques; and



   4)   To minimize safety hazards and visual impacts, and to ensure
continued and adequate space for public utilities, public right-of-way should
be minimally used for telecommunication facilities. 



c)   Severability.  Every section, subdivision, clause or phrase of this
section 310.03 is declared separable from every other section, subdivision,
clause or phrase.  If any such part is held to be invalid by competent
authority, no other part shall be invalidated by such action or decision.



2.  Definitions



For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms below have the meaning given to
them, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:



a)   "Accessory Equipment" - wires, cables, generators, or other equipment
or apparatus associated with an antenna and necessary for telecommunication
transmission.



b)    "Antenna" - any device used for the transmission or reception of
wireless radio television, or electromagnetic waves for cellular, internet
service, personal communication service, enhanced specialized mobilized radio
service, or television purposes.



c)    "Engineer" - an engineer licensed by the state of Minnesota, or an
engineer acceptable to the city if licensing is not available.



d)    "Small Wireless Facility" - a wireless facility that meets both of
the following qualifications:



   1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and



   2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not
including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power
transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed.



e)    "Stealth Design" - design intended to minimize visual impact of an
object on its surroundings. Examples of stealth telecommunication design
include: eliminating horizontal projections; screening with other
architectural elements; nestling into surrounding landscape such that natural
topography or vegetation reduces views; locating in areas that would result
in the least amount of visibility to the public; minimizing size; and
designing a telecommunications facility to appear as something other than a
telecommunications facility.



f)    "Support Structure" - an existing structure on which antenna can be
mounted without increasing the mass of the existing structure. Examples of
support structures include: telecommunication tower, building, water tower,
electrical transmission tower.



g)    "Telecommunication Facility" - antennas, associated equipment, and
support structures.



h)    "Tower" - a freestanding, self-supported structure constructed from
grade for the purpose of supporting one or more antenna.



3.  Citation; Administration and Enforcement.



a)   Citation. This section 310.03 may be cited as the Minnetonka
Telecommunications Ordinance.



b)   Administration and Enforcement. Administration and enforcement of
this section 310.03 is governed by section 300.03.



4.  Permits; Procedures and Variances.



a)   Administrative Permits. The city planner or their designee may
administratively approve permits for the following telecommunication
facilities, provided the facilities do not involve a variance or any other
matter requiring consideration by the planning commission or city council:



   1)   Telecommunication facilities located on electric transmission
towers carrying over 200 kilo volts of electricity.



   2)   Telecommunication facilities located on a telecommunication
support structure for which a conditional use permit has already been
approved.



   3)   A one-time 15-foot extension of an existing telecommunication
tower or one-time replacement of a telecommunication tower by a tower no
greater than 15 feet taller than the original, existing tower up to a maximum
height of 90 feet.



   4)   Telecommunication facilities located on public utility
structures within public rights-of-way, if the facility:



      a.   Does not extend above the top of the existing utility
structure by more than 10 feet;



      b.   Is a replacement utility structure that does not exceed
50 feet in height or the height of the existing utility structure, whichever
is greater, and does not exceed the diameter of the existing utility
structure by more than 50 percent; and



      c.   Includes no component larger than six cubic feet in size.



   5)   Small wireless facilities located on new support structures
within public rights-of way, if the facility is an office, commercial, or
industrial zoning district.



b)   Conditional Use Permits. Any telecommunication facility that is not
eligible for an administrative permit may be allowed only by conditional use
permit.



c)   Permit Application Procedure.



   1)   Applications for both administrative and conditional use
permits must be on the appropriate form provided by the city and must include
all of the following, unless otherwise waived by city staff:



      Name of the wireless telecommunication provider that will utilize
the facility and provider's consent to the application;



      Registered land survey;



      Site plan;



      Any necessary easements and easement exhibits;



      Support structure elevations;



      Construction drawings signed by a registered architect, civil
engineer, landscape architect or other appropriate design professional;



      Coverage and capacity analysis prepared by a radio or electrical
engineer that demonstrates that the location of the proposed facility is
necessary to meet the coverage and capacity needs of the wireless
telecommunication providers system; and



      Cash escrow to cover the reasonable expense of a radio or
electrical engineer retained by the city, at its option, to review the
coverage and capacity analysis and to conduct an interference study.



   2)   Administrative permit applications are subject to the review of
the city planner or their designee, who will render a decision within time
periods provided by Minnesota Statute 15.99 and Minnetonka City Code 1120, as
applicable, and will serve a copy of that decision upon the applicant by
mail. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city planner, or their
designee, may appeal the decision to the planning commission in the manner
specified in section 300.04 of this ordinance.



   3)   Conditional use permit applications are subject to the review
procedures outlined in section 300.06 of this ordinance.



   4)   A variance from the regulations in this ordinance requires a
separate application, according to the procedures in section 300.07 of this
code.



5.  General Regulations



a)   All facilities. All telecommunication facilities, administratively or
conditionally permitted, are subject to the following general regulations:



   1)   Service Provider. A telecommunications service provider must be
identified for the proposed telecommunication facility and must occupy the
facility within twelve months of approval.



   2)   Historic Places. No telecommunications facility may be located
within 400 feet of the boundary of any property that contains a facility or
structure listed on the national register of historic places.



   3)   Location. Facilities must be located in an area that will meet
the applicant's reasonable coverage and capacity needs. However, the city may
require that a different location be used if it would result in less public
visibility, is available, and would continue to meet the applicant's
reasonable capacity and coverage needs.



   4)   Collocation. New towers must be designed to accommodate more
than one telecommunication provider at more than one height within the tower,
unless it is physically impossible or impractical to do so at the tower's
proposed location. In addition, the applicant, tower owner, landlord, and
their successors must agree in writing to: (1) meet reasonable terms and
conditions for shared use; (2) submit a dispute over the potential terms and
conditions to binding arbitration.



   5)   Stealth Design. Facilities must use as many stealth design
techniques as reasonably possible. Economic considerations alone are not
justification for failing to provide stealth design techniques.



   6)   Construction. Telecommunications facilities must be in
compliance with all building and electrical code requirements. A tower must
be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in
conformance with the building code. Structural design, mounting and
installation of the telecommunications facilities must be in compliance with
the manufacturer's specifications.



   7)   Landowner authorization. When applicable, the applicant must
provide written authorization from the property owner. The property owner
must sign the approval document provided by the city agreeing to the permit
conditions, agreeing to remove the telecommunication facilities when they are
unused, obsolete, or become hazardous, and agreeing to the city's right to
assess removal costs under paragraph (l) below.



   8)   Removal. Obsolete telecommunications facilities must be removed
within 90 days after cessation of their use at the site, unless an exemption
is granted by the city council. Unused telecommunications facilities and all
related equipment must be removed within one year after cessation of
operation at the site, unless an exemption is granted by the city council.
Telecommunications facilities and related equipment that have become
hazardous must be removed or made not hazardous within 30 days after written
notice to the current owner and to any separate landowner, unless an
exemption is granted by the city council. Notice may be made to the address
listed in the application, unless another one has subsequently been provided,
and to the taxpayer of the property listed in the Hennepin County tax
records. Telecommunications facilities and all related equipment that are not
removed within this time limit are declared to be public nuisances and may be
removed by the city. The city may assess its costs of removal against the
property.



b)   Facilities located within public right-of-way. In addition to the
regulations outlined in the previous section, telecommunication facilities
located within the public right-of-way are subject to the following general
regulations:



   1)   Facilities are subject to the requirements of Section 1120,
Right-of-Way Management. To the extent that the provisions of Section 1120
are more restrictive than this ordinance, the provisions of Section 1120
govern.



   2)   Facilities may not impact the public health, safety, or
welfare, interfere with safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the
right-of-way, or otherwise negatively impact the right-of-way or its users.
In determining compliance with this standard, the city many consider one or
more of the following factors:



      a.   The extent to which right-of-way space is available for
the proposed facility, including accessory equipment.



      b.   The potential demand for the particular space in the
right-of-way.



      c.   The availability of other locations in the right-of-way
that would have less public impact.



      d.   The extent to which the facility placement minimizes
impacts on adjacent property.



      e.   The applicability of ordinances or other regulations that
may affect the location of the facility or accessory equipment.



   3)   Facilities must be removed when required by the road authority.



6.  Specific Regulations



a)   Facilities located outside of public right-of-way. All
telecommunication facilities, administratively or conditionally permitted,
are subject to the following specific regulations:

   1)   Location. Telecommunication facilities may be located within
any zoning district. However, on properties guided low-density residential,
facilities may only be located on public or institutional property.



   2)   Height. Maximum tower height, excluding lightning rods, is
restricted based on the land use designation of property on which the tower
is located:



 

Land Use Designation
 
Single-User Tower
 
Multiple-User Tower


Low and Medium Density Residential
 
60 feet
 
90 feet


High Density Residential
 
75 feet
 
90 feet


Office, Commercial
 
75 feet
 
90 feet


Industrial
 
150 feet
 
150 feet


Institutional
 
60 feet
 
90 feet



 



The city council may increase height if the applicant can demonstrate that
the increase would not have a significant impact on surrounding properties
because of things like proximity, topography, or screening by trees or
buildings. The council may likewise waive height restrictions for towers
wholly or partially for essential public services, such as public safety.



   3)   Setbacks. Towers located adjacent to low or medium-density
residential properties must meet the minimum setback requirements established
for principal structures within the associated residential zoning district,
but only from the property line abutting the residential district. The city
council may waive the setback requirement if necessary to implement stealth
design techniques. Accessory equipment must meet minimum setback requirements
established for accessory structures within the zoning district.



   4)   Horizontal Projection. Antennas may not project out from an
antenna support structure or tower, unless it is physically impossible to
locate the antenna with the structure or tower, in which case they may not
project out more than three feet.



   5)   Vertical Projection. Antennas mounted on an antenna support
structure may not extend more than 15 feet above the structure to which they
are attached. Wall or façade-mounted antennas may not extend above the
cornice line and must be constructed of a material or color that matches the
exterior of the building.



   6)   Accessory Equipment. Accessory equipment or buildings must be
architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding natural or built
environment or must be screened from view by suitable vegetation, except
where a design of non-vegetative screening better reflects and complements
the character of the surrounding neighborhood. No more than one accessory
building is permitted for each tower. If additional space is needed to
accommodate the co-location of antennas, the existing accessory building must
be expanded or a new accessory building must be constructed adjacent and
complementary to the existing building. Design of the building or equipment
cabinet, screening and landscaping are subject to a site plan review under
section 300.27 of this code.



   7)   Color. Antennas and towers must be painted a non-contrasting
color consistent with the surrounding area such as: blue, gray, brown, or
silver, or have a galvanized finish to reduce visual impact. Metal towers
must be constructed of, or treated with, corrosion-resistant material.



   8)   Lighting. Telecommunications facilities may not be artificially
illuminated unless required by law or by a governmental agency to protect the
public's health and safety or unless necessary to facilitate service to
ground-mounted equipment.



b)   Facilities located within public right-of-way. All telecommunication
facilities, administratively or conditionally permitted, are subject to the
following specific regulations:



   1)   Location.



      a.   Within residential zoning districts, facilities are only
permitted within the rights-of-way of collector or arterial streets as
defined in the Comprehensive Guide Plan. However, in no case are facilities
permitted within certain village centers as designated in Subdivision 3 of
this section.



      b.   Facilities are not permitted adjacent to residentially
zoned property unless an applicant demonstrates, by providing a study
prepared by a radio or electrical engineer, that the proposed location is
necessary to reasonably meet the coverage and capacity needs of its system
and no other location is feasible in a non-residential area.



   2)   Height. Maximum height, including attachments other than
lightning rods, is restricted based on the land use designation of property
adjacent to the proposed facility:



 

Adjacent Land Use Designation
 
Maximum Height


Residential
 
60 feet


Office, Commercial
 
60 feet


Industrial
 
75 feet


Institutional
 
60 feet



 



The council may waive height restrictions for facilities wholly or partially
for essential public services, such as public safety.



   3)   Width. The support structure or tower cannot exceed the width
of the closest public utility pole by more than 50 percent, but in no case
may it exceed 18 inches in diameter.



   4)   Horizontal Projection. Antennas may not project out from a
support structure or tower, unless it is physically impossible to locate the
antenna with the structure or tower, in which case they may not project out
more than two feet.



   5)   Vertical Projection. Antennas mounted on an antenna support
structure may not extend more than 10 feet above the structure to which they
are attached.



   6)   Facility Separation. Telecommunication facilities must be
separated by at least 330 feet.



   7)   Ground-mounted accessory equipment.



      a.   Equipment will be allowed only if it will not adversely
impact public health, safety, or welfare of the community. In determining
compliance with this standard, the city many consider one or more of the
following factors:



         1.   Whether the equipment will disrupt vehicle traffic
or pedestrian circulation.



         2.   Whether the equipment location and screening
minimizes impact on adjacent properties.



      b.   Equipment must not exceed the following size limits:



 



 

Adjacent Land Use Designation
 
Maximum Height
 
Maximum Volume


Residential
 
3 feet
 
28 cubic feet


Non-Residential
 
5 feet
 
81 cubic feet



 



      c.   Equipment must meet the follow setbacks requirements.



 



 


 
Minimum Setback


Existing or planned edge of roadway pavement
 
10 feet


Existing or planned edge of sidewalk or trail
 
3 feet


Nearest intersection right-of-way line
 
50 feet


Nearest principal residential structure
 
50 feet



 



      d.   Equipment must be screened by vegetative or other
screening compatible with the surrounding area, as required by the city.



   8)   Color. The support structure or tower must match the materials
and colors of the closest public utility structures located within the
right-of-way, or as required by the city.



   9)   Lighting. Telecommunications facilities may not be artificially
illuminated unless required by law or by a governmental agency to protect the
public's health and safety or unless necessary to facilitate service to
ground-mounted equipment.



c)   Facilities located within certain village centers. All
telecommunication facilities, administratively or conditionally permitted,
are subject to the following specific regulations:



   1)   The Glen Lake Station and Minnetonka Boulevard/County Road 101
Community Village Centers, and the Minnetonka Mills Area Special Purpose
Village Center are recognized within the Comprehensive Guide Plan as unique
commercial nodes. These village centers represent the earliest developed
commercial areas in the city. They have existing and anticipated pedestrian
designs unique within Minnetonka, typified by sidewalks, trails, landscaped
boulevards, street lights, and buried utilities. Accordingly, there is a
presumption that telecommunication facilities are prohibited in these areas.
An applicant may overcome this presumption by submitting an analysis prepared
by a radio or electrical engineer showing that no other available location
allowed under this ordinance would meet its reasonable coverage and capacity
needs.



   2)   If telecommunication facilities are permitted in these special
village centers under paragraph (a) above, then the installation of the
facilities must meet the following additional standards:



      a.   Accessory equipment must be located within a principal
building. If space is not available in the principal building, an accessory
building may be used. The accessory building must meet the construction
standard of the applicable zoning district and must complement the principal
structure design and materials.



      b.   Telecommunication facilities may not be located within
public right-of-way or within any front yard. The council may waive one or
both of these restrictions if the proposal would provide a public benefit,
such as improving the existing site aesthetics.



7.  Exceptions



This ordinance does not apply to any facility or device that is used for the
private enjoyment of those on the premises where it is located. Examples
include: amateur radio antennas and antennas receiving television signals for
viewing on site. Such facilities or devices are considered accessory uses and
are regulated as such in each zoning district.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-03, effective March 19, 2018)



SECTION 325. SIGN REGULATIONS.



SECTION 325.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



1.  Purpose.



The sign ordinance is intended to establish a comprehensive and balanced
system of sign control that accommodates the need for a well-maintained,
safe, and attractive community, and the need for effective communications
including business identification. It is the intent of this section, to
promote the health, safety, general welfare, aesthetics, and image of the
community by regulating signs that are intended to communicate to the public,
and to use signs that meet the city's goals by authorizing:



a)   permanent signs that establish a high standard of aesthetics;



b)   signs that are compatible with their surroundings;



c)   signs that are designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a
manner that does not adversely impact public safety or unduly distract
motorists;



d)   signs that are large enough to convey the intended message and to
help citizens find their way to intended destinations;



e)   signs that are proportioned to the scale of, and are architecturally
compatible with, principal structures;



f)   permanent signs that give preference to the on-premise owner or
occupant; and



g)     temporary commercial signs and advertising displays that provide
an opportunity for grand openings and occasional sales events while
restricting signs that create continuous visual clutter and hazards at public
right-of-way intersections.



2.  Findings.



The city of Minnetonka finds it is necessary for the promotion and
preservation of the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the
community that the construction, location, size and maintenance of signs be
controlled. Further, the city finds:



a)   permanent and temporary signs have a direct impact on and
relationship to the image of the community;



b)   the manner of installation, location and maintenance of signs affects
the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community;



c)   an opportunity for viable identification of community businesses and
institutions must be established;



d)   the safety of motorists, cyclists, pedestrians and other users of
public streets and property is affected by the number, size, location and
appearance of signs that unduly divert the attention of drivers;



e)   installation of signs suspended from, projecting over, or placed on
the tops of buildings, walks or other structures may constitute a hazard
during periods of high winds and an obstacle to effective fire-fighting and
other emergency service;



f)   uncontrolled and unlimited signs adversely impact the image and
aesthetic attractiveness of the community and thereby undermine economic
value and growth;



g)   uncontrolled and unlimited signs, particularly temporary signs which
are commonly located within or adjacent to public right-of-way or are located
at driveway/street intersections, result in roadside clutter and obstruction
of views of oncoming traffic. This creates a hazard to drivers and
pedestrians and also adversely impacts a logical flow of information;



h)   commercial signs are generally incompatible with residential uses and
should be strictly limited in residential zoning districts; and



i)   the right to express noncommercial opinions in any zoning district
must be protected, subject to reasonable restrictions on size, height,
location and number.



3. Severability.



Every section, subdivision, clause or phrase of this section 325 is declared
separable from every other section, subdivision, clause or phrase. If any
such part is held to be invalid by competent authority, no other part shall
be invalidated by such action or decision.



SECTION 325.02.  DEFINITIONS.



1.   "Blade sign" - see "projecting sign."



2.   "Commercial sign" - any sign that advertises or identifies a product,
business, service, entertainment, or any other matter of a commercial nature,
even though the matter may be related to a nonprofit organization.



3.   "Conditionally permitted uses" - within residential districts,
educational institutions and facilities, religious institutions and
facilities, public buildings or facilities, public or private nursing homes,
and commercial nurseries.



4.   "Copy and graphic" - the wording and other display messages such as
logos or symbols on a sign.



5.   "Copy and graphic area" - the area in square feet of the smallest
four-sided figure which encloses the copy and graphic of a sign.



6.   "Dynamic display" - any characteristics of a sign that appear to have
movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically
removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent
movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other
component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology
or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to
physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also
includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated
display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights
manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any other method or
technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or
displays.



7.   "Feather flag" - a freestanding, temporary sign constructed of a
vertical pole, tube or post supporting one edge of a sheet of cloth, vinyl or
similar material.



8.   "Freestanding sign" - a sign which is self-supporting and affixed to
a frame structure not attached to a building.



9.   "Illumination, internal" - a light source within the sign.



10.   "Illumination, external" - a light source which is not internal to
the sign.



11.   "Items of information" - individual copy and graphic items situated
in a manner which presents separate messages. An item of information can only
be a name, an address, a logo, or geographic directions.



12.   "Limited tenant building" - a commercial retail establishment or a
group of commercial retail establishments with the designed occupancy of
three or less tenants. It must have shared parking and a visual appearance of
a contiguous structure, which may or may not be planned, constructed or
managed as a total entity. This includes single tenant retail structures.



13.   "Merchandise box" - a sign which is affixed on or located adjacent
to a gas pump and used to advertise services and goods.



14.   "Monument sign" - a sign not supported by exposed posts or poles
which is architecturally designed and located directly at grade where the
base width dimension is 50% or more of the greatest width of the sign.



15.   "Monument area" - the area in square feet of an entire monument sign
structure, including copy and graphic area.



16.   "Multi-tenant building" - a building with a designed occupancy of
four or more tenants with shared parking and visual appearance as a
contiguous structure, which may or may not be planned, constructed or managed
as a total entity.



17.   "Non-commercial sign" - any sign that is not a commercial sign,
including but not limited to signs that convey messages concerning political,
religious, social, ideological, public service and informational topics.



18.   "On-premise sign" - a sign relating in it subject matter to, or
which directs attention to, a business, person, activity, commodity, service
or entertainment located on the site where the sign is installed.



19.   "Off-premise sign" - a sign relating in its subject matter to, or
that directs attention to, a business, person, activity, commodity, service,
entertainment or any other matter that is not available, or does not take
place, on the same premises as the sign. A discontinued sign is an
off-premise sign.



20.   "Outdoor advertising sign" - a permanent off-premise sign.



21.   "Permanent sign" - any sign other than a temporary sign.



22.   "Portable sign" - a sign with or without copy and graphic that is
designed or intended to be moved or transported. Examples of portable signs
are: A - or T - frame signs; sandwich signs; signs designed to be transported
by trailer or on wheels; signs mounted on a vehicle for advertising purposes,
when the vehicle is parked and visible from public right-of-way, except signs
identifying a business when the vehicle is being used in the normal
day-to-day operation of that business. A sign may be a portable sign even if
it has wheels removed, was designed without wheels, or is attached
temporarily or permanently to the ground, a structure, or other sign.



23.   "Private road open to public travel" has the meaning given that term
under the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



24.   "Projecting sign" - a sign which extends perpendicularly beyond a
wall face more than 18-inches.



25.   "Pylon sign" - a sign supported by a post or posts so that the sign
and supports are finished to grade by encasing the posts in a material
consistent with the sign and where the base width dimension is a minimum of
10% up to and including 50% of the greatest width of the sign.



26.   "Sandwich sign" - a freestanding temporary sign, typically A-shaped,
with two visible sides that is placed near the main entrance to a building.



27.   "Sign" - any writing, pictorial presentation, number, illustration
or decoration, flag, banner or other device that is used to announce, direct
attention to, identify, advertise, or otherwise make anything known. The term
"sign" shall not be deemed to include: the terms "building" or "landscaping",
or any architectural embellishment of a building not intended to communicate
information; works of art that do not convey commercial messages and that are
painted on a building wall; flags that do not convey commercial messages; or
any sign structure or device that is not visible from an adjacent street,
property line or building on adjacent property.



28.   "Temporary sign" - a sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas,
plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard, plywood or other like materials and that
appears to be intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. This
includes items such as banners, pennants, beacons, sandwich or curb signs,
balloons or other air or gas filled figures.



29.   "Wall sign" - a single faced sign attached to or erected against an
exterior wall of a building with the face in a parallel plane to the plane of
the building wall.



SECTION 325.03. CITATION; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



1.   Citation.



This section 325 may be cited as the Minnetonka Sign Ordinance.



2.   Administration and enforcement.



Administration and enforcement of this section 325 is governed by section
300.03.



SECTION 325.04. PERMITS, PROCEDURE AND VARIANCES.



1.   Permit not required.



The following signs do not require a permit but must meet the regulations in
this section:



a)   Signs required or allowed by section 325.05, subd. 3.



b)   Temporary signs in residential districts as allowed by section
325.06, subd. 1(d)(1).



2.   Permit required.



a)   No person may erect or install any of the following signs without
first obtaining a permit from the community development director or designee:



b)   All permanent signs permitted in section 325.06 require a sign
permit, unless specifically noted otherwise. The permit must be received
prior to installation of the sign. The permit and inspection fee for all
permanent signs is specified in city code section 710.



c)   All temporary signs permitted in section 325.06, require a temporary
sign permit, unless specifically noted otherwise. The permit and inspection
fee for permitted signs, banners, search lights, or inflatable advertising
devices is specified in city code section 710.



3.   Permit procedure.



a)   Application for a permit must be on a form provided by the city and
must include the following information:



   1)   name and address of the owner of the sign;



   2)   street address or location of the property on which the sign is
to be located, along with the name and address of the property owner;



   3)   the type of sign as defined in this section;



   4)   site plan showing the location of the proposed sign;



   5)   specifications and scale drawings showing the materials,
design, dimensions, structural supports, method of attachment and electrical
components of the sign;



   6)   plan showing the location and size of all existing signs
located on the same premises upon city request;



   7)   sign permit fee as specified in city code section 710.



b)   The community development director or designee must approve or deny a
sign permit application within 15 business days after a complete application
is submitted. A decision must be made in writing and must be mailed or
electronically delivered to the applicant at the address or email address
provided in the application. If a permit is denied, the reason must be stated
in writing.



c)   An applicant may appeal a denial by submitting a request in writing
within 10 days after the decision was mailed or electronically delivered. The
appeal must be scheduled for planning commission review as soon as
practicable, but no later than 30 days after the appeal was submitted. The
applicant may appeal a planning commission denial by submitting a request in
writing within 10 days after the decision. The appeal must be scheduled for
city council review as soon as practicable, but no later than 30 days after
the appeal was submitted. All review of a sign permit application must be
based solely on whether the application complies with city ordinances.



4.   Variances.



A variance from the regulations in this section requires a separate
application, according to the procedures in section 300.07 of this code. The
fee for application for variance from this section or approval of a sign plan
for a development is specified in city code section 710.



5.   Permit expiration.



A sign permit becomes null and void if the sign is not installed within 180
days after issuance of the permit, and a new application must be submitted.



SECTION 325.05 GENERAL REGULATIONS.



1.   Scope.



The regulations in this section 325.05 apply to signs in all zoning districts.



2.   Prohibited Signs.



The following signs are prohibited in all districts.



a)   Signs not specifically authorized under this section 325.



b)   Portable signs, except for temporary traffic control devices in
temporary traffic control zones as required by the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices or portable signs specifically permitted in section 325.06.



c)   Feather flags and pennants;



d)   Signs designed to resemble official traffic control devices are
prohibited in all districts, except signs that are used to control traffic on
private property.



e)   Abandoned signs;



f)   Blank signs;



g)   Merchandise boxes or signs not affixed to a principal structure
excluding signs permitted in subdivision 8(d);



h)   Permanent off-premises signs.



3.    Permitted signs.



The following signs are required or permitted in every zoning district:



a)   An assigned street address marking its property with the street
address numerals is required, so that emergency services providers can easily
identify the address from the public street. The identification may be on the
curb or on the principal building of the property. The size and location of
the identifying numerals must be proportional to the size of the building and
the distance from the street to the building. In cases where the building is
not located within view of the public street, or where the building is
located more than 150 feet from the public street, the identifier must be
located on the mailbox or other suitable device that is visible from the
street.



b)   Traffic control devices on private or public property must be erected
and maintained to comply with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
adopted in this state.



c)   Permanent and temporary signs required by law or ordinance for
regulatory/notification purposes.



d)   Permanent freestanding signs on properties with more than 20 parking
spaces, provided the signs comply with the requirements in Table 325.1:



 


Table 325.1: Parking Lot Signs*




Maximum sign area

 

7 sq. ft.




Maximum height

 

6 ft.




Location requirement

 

Within 5 ft. of drive aisles in parking lots and located in proximity to the
change in direction.




Numerical limit

 

1 sign for each 60 degree change in direction of the drive isle.




*Advertisement (Logos or business names) are not permitted. Sign permit not
required.




 



e)   Temporary off-premise commercial signs are permitted in all
districts, provided the signs comply with the following:



   1)   must be at least 5 feet from the edge of a public street and
must not obstruct driver visibility at intersections;



   2)   may not be on the right-of-way of county and state roads and
municipal state-aid streets;



   3)   are limited to one per parcel of property as defined in
subdivision 9 below for the same topic, location, event, or matter;



   4)   may only be displayed between 6:00 a.m. on a Thursday and 6:00
p.m. on the following Sunday; and



   5)   must be no larger than 3 square feet in area and no higher than
6 feet above the ground to which it is attached.



f)   In all districts, any sign authorized in this chapter is allowed to
contain noncommercial copy in lieu of any other copy. For new signs posted
with a noncommercial message, the sign fee is waived until such time as the
sign is converted to contain a commercial message.



4.   Location requirements.



a)   Signs may not be located on property without the permission of the
property owner. For signs located in public right-of-way as allowed under
subdivision 3(e) of this section 325.05, the permission of the immediately
adjacent property owner must be obtained.



b)   Unless specifically noted otherwise, all signs must maintain a
10-foot setback from all lot lines. The city may require a greater or lesser
setback because of public safety reasons which may include the following
conditions: vehicle sight distance, distance from intersection, designation
of adjacent right-of-way.



c)   Signs may not be mounted on a roof surface and may not project above
the roof line of a structure if either attached to the structure or
cantilevered over the structure.



d)   Signs may not be attached to trees or utility poles.



e)   Signs may not be located within public right-of-way except for
official traffic control devices and those allowed by section 3(e) of this
section 325.05.



f)   Signs may not be attached to fences.



g)   Signs may not be located so as to obstruct the vision of pedestrians,
cyclists, or motorists traveling on or entering public streets in a manner
that presents a hazard to public safety.



h)   Signs may not be located so as to obstruct any window, door, fire
escape, stairway or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress or egress
for any structure.



5.   Approved sign plans. 



The city may enforce, in the same manner as the requirements of this section,
the terms of a sign plan or sign covenants which it has approved. Any
violation of an approved sign plan or sign covenants is a misdemeanor.



6.   Changeable messages.



A message that is not permanently attached to the sign face but that is not a
dynamic display may occupy no more than 50 percent of the actual copy and
graphic area. The remainder of the sign must not have the capability to
change messages even if not used.



7.   Font size.



Every line of copy and graphics in a sign must be at least four inches in
height.



8.   Sign illumination. 



a)   All illuminated signs must meet the following standards:



   1)   External illumination on signs must be directed so that the
illumination does not interfere with safe traffic operations;



   2)   Illuminated signs must not be directly oriented to any
residential district;



   3)   No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and
adequate visibility.



   4)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the
vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise
interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle.



   5)   No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it
interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or
signal.



b)   The person owning or controlling the sign must adjust the sign to
meet the brightness standards in accordance with the city's instructions. The
adjustment must be made immediately upon notice of non-compliance from the
city. The person owning or controlling the sign may appeal the city's
determination through the following appeal procedure:



   1)   After making the adjustment required by the city, the person
owning or controlling the sign may appeal the city's determination by
delivering a written appeal to the city clerk within 10 days after the city's
non-compliance notice. The written appeal must include the name of a person
unrelated to the person and business making the appeal, who will serve on the
appeal panel.



   2)   Within five business days after receiving the appeal, the city
must name a person who is not an official or employee of the city to serve on
the appeal panel. Within five business days after the city names its
representative, the city's representative must contact the sign owner's
representative, and the two of them must appoint a third member to the panel,
who has no relationship to either party.



   3)   The appeal panel may develop its own rules of procedure, but it
must hold a hearing within five business days after the third member is
appointed. The city and the sign owner must be given the opportunity to
present testimony, and the panel may hold the hearing, or a portion of it, at
the sign location. The panel must issue its decision on what level of
brightness is needed to meet the brightness standards within five business
days after the hearing commences. The decision will be binding on both
parties.



c)   All signs installed after June 25, 2007 that will have illumination
by a means other than natural light must be equipped with a mechanism that
automatically adjusts the brightness in response to ambient conditions. These
signs must also be equipped with a means to immediately turn off the display
or lighting if it malfunctions, and the sign owner or operator must
immediately turn off the sign or lighting when notified by the city that it
is not complying with the standards in this section.



9.   Outdoor advertising displays.



Outdoor advertising signs which exist as of March 13, 1991 are nonconforming
signs. A permanent outdoor advertising sign is a principal use of property.
No permitted or conditionally permitted use or any part of such use may be
located on the same parcel of property as such a sign. The parcel on which
such a sign is located may not be subdivided to segregate the sign from the
remaining property. For the purposes of this paragraph, "parcel of property"
means any property for which one property identification number has been
issued by the county, or all contiguous property in common ownership as of
October 15, 1997, whichever is greater.



10.   Dynamic Displays.



a)   Findings. Studies show that there is a correlation between dynamic
displays on signs and the distraction of highway drivers. Distraction can
lead to traffic accidents. Drivers can be distracted not only by a changing
message, but also by knowing that the sign has a changing message. Drivers
may watch a sign waiting for the next change to occur. Drivers are also
distracted by messages that do not tell the full story in one look. People
have a natural desire to see the end of the story and will continue to look
at the sign in order to wait for the end. Additionally, drivers are more
distracted by special effects used to change the message, such as fade-ins
and fade-outs. Finally, drivers are generally more distracted by messages
that are too small to be clearly seen or that contain more than a simple
message. Time and temperature signs appear to be an exception to these
concerns because the messages are short, easily absorbed, and become
inaccurate without frequent changes.



   Despite these public safety concerns, there is merit to allowing new
technologies to easily update messages. Except as prohibited by state or
federal law, sign owners should have the opportunity to use these
technologies with certain restrictions. The restrictions are intended to
minimize potential driver distraction and to minimize proliferation in
residential districts where signs can adversely impact residential character.



   Local spacing requirements could interfere with the equal opportunity
to use such technologies and are not included. Without those requirements,
however, there is the potential for numerous dynamic displays to exist along
any roadway. If more than one dynamic display can be seen from a given
location on a road, the minimum display time becomes critical. If the display
time is too short, a driver could be subjected to a view that appears to have
constant movement. This impact would obviously be compounded in a corridor
with multiple signs. If dynamic displays become pervasive and there are no
meaningful limitations on each sign's ability to change frequently, drivers
may be subjected to an unsafe degree of distraction and sensory overload.
Therefore, a longer display time is appropriate.



   A constant message is typically needed on a sign so that the public can
use it to identify and find an intended destination. Changing messages
detract from this way-finding purpose and could adversely affect driving
conduct through last-second lane changes, stops, or turns, which could result
in traffic accidents. Accordingly, dynamic displays generally should not be
allowed to occupy the entire copy and graphic area of a sign.



   In conclusion, the city finds that dynamic displays should be allowed
on signs but with significant controls to minimize their proliferation and
their potential threats to public safety.



b)   Regulations. Dynamic displays on signs are allowed subject to the
following conditions:



   1)   Dynamic displays are allowed only on monument and pylon signs
for conditionally permitted uses in residential districts and for all uses in
other districts. Dynamic displays may occupy no more than 50 percent of the
actual copy and graphic area. The remainder of the sign must not have the
capability to have dynamic displays even if not used. Only one, contiguous
dynamic display area is allowed on a sign face;



   2)   A dynamic display may not change or move more often than once
every 20 minutes, except one for which changes are necessary to correct
hour-and-minute, date, or temperature information. Time, date, or temperature
information is considered one dynamic display and may not be included as a
component of any other dynamic display. A display of time, date, or
temperature must remain for at least 20 minutes before changing to a
different display, but the time, date, or temperature information itself may
change no more often than once every three seconds;



   3)   The images and messages displayed must be static, and the
transition from one static display to another must be instantaneous without
any special effects;



   4)   The images and messages displayed must be complete in
themselves, without continuation in content to the next image or message or
to any other sign;



   5)   Every line of copy and graphics in a dynamic display must be at
least seven inches in height on a road with a speed limit of 25 to 34 miles
per hour, nine inches on a road with a speed limit of 35 to 44 miles per
hour, 12 inches on a road with a speed limit of 45 to 54 miles per hour, and
15 inches on a road with a speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more. If there
is insufficient room for copy and graphics of this size in the area allowed
under clause 1 above, then no dynamic display is allowed;



   6)   Dynamic displays must be designed and equipped to freeze the
device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be
equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it
malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately stop the dynamic display
when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards of this
ordinance;



   7)   Dynamic displays must comply with the brightness standards
contained in subdivision 15;



   8)   Dynamic displays existing on June 25, 2007 must comply with the
operational standards listed above. An existing dynamic display that does not
meet the structural requirements in clause 1 may continue as a non-conforming
development subject to section 300.29. An existing dynamic display that
cannot meet the minimum size requirement in clause 5 must use the largest
size possible for one line of copy to fit in the available space.



c)   Incentives. Outdoor advertising signs do not need to serve the same
way-finding function as do on-premises signs. Further, outdoor advertising
signs are no longer allowed in the city, and there is no potential that they
will proliferate. Finally, outdoor advertising signs are in themselves
distracting and their removal serves public safety. The city is extremely
limited in its ability to cause the removal of those signs. This clause is
intended to provide incentives for the voluntary and uncompensated removal of
outdoor advertising signs in certain settings. This removal results in an
overall advancement of one or more of the goals set forth in this section
that should more than offset any additional burden caused by the incentives.
These provisions are also based on the recognition that the incentives create
an opportunity to consolidate outdoor advertising services that would
otherwise remain distributed throughout the community.



   1)   A person may obtain a permit for an enhanced dynamic display on
one face of an outdoor advertising sign if the following requirements are met:



      (a)   The applicant agrees in writing to permanently remove,
within 15 days after issuance of the permit, at least two other faces of an
outdoor advertising sign in the city that are owned or leased by the
applicant, each of which must satisfy the criteria of parts (b) through (d)
of this subsection. This removal must include the complete removal of the
structure and foundation supporting each sign face. The applicant must agree
that the city may remove the sign if the applicant does not timely do so, and
the application must be accompanied by a cash deposit or letter of credit
acceptable to the city attorney sufficient to pay the city's costs for that
removal. The applicant must also agree that it is removing the sign
voluntarily and that it has no right to compensation for the removed sign
under any law.



      (b)   The city has not previously issued an enhanced dynamic
display permit based on the removal of the particular faces relied upon in
this permit application.



      (c)   Each removed sign has a copy and graphic area of at
least 288 square feet and satisfies two or more of the following additional
criteria:



         (1)   The removed sign is located adjacent to a highway
with more than two regular lanes and with a general speed limit of 45 miles
per hour or greater, but that does not have restrictions on access equivalent
to those of an interstate highway;



         (2)   All or a substantial portion of the structure for
the removed sign was constructed before 1975 and has not been substantially
improved;



         (3)   The removed sign is located in a noncommercial
zoning district;



         (4).   The removed sign is located in a special planning
area designated in the 1999 comprehensive plan; or



         (5)   The removed copy and graphic area is equal to or
greater than the area of the copy and graphic area for which the enhanced
dynamic display permit is sought.



      (d)   If the removed sign face is one for which a state permit
is required by state law, the applicant must surrendered its permit to the
state upon removal of the sign. The sign that is the subject of the enhanced
dynamic display permit cannot begin to operate until proof is provided to the
city that the state permit has been surrendered.



      (e)   The applicant must agree in writing that no dynamic
displays will ever be used on one additional outdoor advertising sign that
has a copy and graphic area of at least 288 square feet in size. This
agreement will be binding on the applicant and all future owners of the sign.
If the sign is subsequently removed or destroyed and not replaced, the holder
of the enhanced dynamic display permit is not required to substitute a
different sign for the one that no longer exists.



   2)   If the applicant complies with the permit requirements noted
above, the city will issue an enhanced dynamic display permit for the
designated outdoor advertising sign. This permit will allow a dynamic display
to occupy 100 percent of the potential copy and graphic area and to change no
more frequently than once every eight seconds. The designated sign must meet
all other requirements of this ordinance.



11.   Sign construction and maintenance.



All signs must conform to the following standards.



a)   Construction specifications. All permanent signs must be constructed
in accordance with the following:



   1)   the Minnesota state building code;



   2)   all electric signs must be approved and labeled as conforming
to the standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., the United States
bureau of standards or other similar institutions of recognized standing. All
illuminating elements must be kept in satisfactory working condition or
immediately repaired or replaced. Signs that are partly illuminated must meet
all electrical requirements for the portion that is illuminated;



   3)   all permanent freestanding signs must have self-supporting
structures erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations;



   4)   for wall signs, the wall must be designed for and have
sufficient strength to support the sign;



   5)   signs may not be painted on the wall of a building; and



   6)   Unless otherwise specified in this section, the maximum angle
permitted between faces of a double face freestanding sign is 45 degrees.



b)   Sign maintenance and repair. All signs must be maintained in a safe,
presentable and good structural condition at all times, including the
replacement of defective parts, cleaning and other items required for
maintenance of the sign. Vegetation around, in front of, behind, and
underneath the base of ground signs for distance of 10 feet must be neatly
trimmed and free of weeds. Rubbish or debris under or near the sign that
would constitute a fire or health hazard must be removed.



12.   Removal of Abandoned Signs, Signs in Disrepair and Signs Located in
Public Right-of-Way.



a)   Abandoned signs and signs in disrepair. An abandoned sign or sign in
disrepair is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the premises
within 30 days after notification. If compliance with the provisions of this
section is not achieved within 30 days, the city may remove the sign as a
public nuisance by following the procedure as specified in section 1120.045
of the municipal code of ordinances. If an abandoned sign remains in good
condition and without holes or other evidence of disrepair or damage, the
sign shall not be considered as abandoned for a period of one year.



b)   Signs on public property or within public right-of-way: The city may
at any time and without notice may impound signs that have been installed on
public property or within public right-of-way or easement. The sign owner may
retrieve the signs according to the following:



   1)   a fee must be paid to the city as established in city code
section 710. For each subsequent impoundment in a calendar year, the
specified fee shall be doubled;



   2)   the sign may be retrieved from a designated impound area during
routine business hours and within 15 days from the date of impounding. After
15 days, the city will dispose of the sign; and



   3)   the city may not be held liable for any damage to impounded
signs.



13.   Nonconforming Signs.



Any sign that complied with all applicable laws and ordinances at that time
that it was erected but that has been or is made nonconforming due to a
subsequently enacted amendment of this city code is governed by section
300.29.



SECTION 325.06.  DISTRICT REGULATIONS.



1.   Residential Districts.



Within residential zoning districts, signs are permitted as provided in this
subsection. Except as expressly permitted in this subsection, commercial
signs are not allowed:



a)   Permanent signs, must comply with Table 325.2. In addition:



   1)   One wall sign is permitted per building.




   2)   One freestanding sign is permitted per development. Sign may be
single or double-faced. The sign must be perpetually maintained by a
homeowners association or responsible property owner.





   3)   Internal illumination is not allowed if a sign faces
low-density residential properties. External illumination may not include
exposed light sources.












 




Table 325.2 Permanent Signs in Residential Districts




Property Type

 

Max. Area

 

Max. Copy & Graphic Area

 

Max. Height

 

Illumination Type

 

Other




Permanent Wall Signs




Any Residental use***

 

2 sq. ft.

 

2 sq. ft.

 

1 ft.

 

External only

 






Conditionally permitted principal use

 

50 sq. ft. or 10% of the wall in which the sign is located, whichever is less

 

50 sq. ft. or 10% of the wall in which the sign is located, whichever is less

 

2 ft.

 

Internal or External

 






Permanent Freestanding Signs




Low density Residential**

 

75 sq. ft. per entrance

 

30 sq. ft. per entrance

 

6 ft.

 

External

 

Must be located at primary entrance(s), two signs permitted per development




Medium/High density Residential

 

100 sq. ft. per entrance

 

36 sq. ft. per entrance

 

8 ft.

 

Internal or External

 

Must be located at primary entrance(s), two signs permitted per development




Conditionally Permitted Use, except for public buildings and parks

 

75 sq. ft.

 

30 sq. ft.

 

6 ft.

 

Internal or External

 






Public Building and Park

 

32 sq. ft.

 

32 sq. ft.

 

8 ft.

 

Internal or External

 

Hours of illumination 6 am to 10 pm only




Athletic Field, with structured seating for 2000 or fewer people

 

410 sq. ft. per sign face

 

410 sq. ft. per sign face

 

35 ft.

 

Internal only

 






Athletic Field, with structured seating for more than 2000 people

 

500 sq. ft. per Sign face
1000 sq. ft. aggregate


 

500 sq. ft. per sign face
1000 sq. ft. aggregate


 

35 ft.

 

Internal only

 






*    Internal illumination is not allowed when a sign faces low-density
residential properties.
      External illumination may not include exposed light sources.
**  Allowed only for single-family developments of at least 6 lots and
two-family
      development with at least 12 dwelling units.
*** Sign permit not required.














b)   Temporary non-commercial signs, must comply with Table 325.3.
Temporary signs may not be illuminated.




 


Table 325.3 Temporary Non-Commercial Signs in Residential Districts




Property Type

 

Sign Type

 

Max. Number of Signs

 

Max. Area

 

Max. Height

 

Duration of Display




Any residential use*/**

 

Banner or freestanding

 

3

 

6 sq. ft. per sign
18 sq. ft. aggregate per property

 

3

 

N/A




*  Signs must be located at least five feet from the edge of a public
street, must not
    obstruct driver visibility at intersections and must be placed with the
consent of the
    property owner.
** Sign permit not required.




 












c)   Temporary commercial signs must comply with Table 325.4. Temporary
signs may not be illuminated.




 




Table 325.4 Temporary Commercial Signs in Residential District




Property Type

 

Sign Type

 

Max. Number of Signs

 

Max. Area

 

Max. Height

 

Display Duration




Development Properties




Low-Density*/**

 

Freestanding

 

1 per development

 

32 sq. ft.

 

8 ft.

 

Must be removed When building permits have been issued for 90% of lots




Medium/High Density**

 

Must be removed 18 months after a building permit has been issued




For Sale or Lease Properties




Low/Medium Density**

 

Freestanding

 

1 per property

 

6 sq. ft.

 

6 ft.

 

Must be removed 7 days after a property is no longer for sale or lease




High Density**

 

Freestanding

 

1 per property

 

32 sq. ft.

 

8 ft.

 

Must be removed 12 months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
the last building








Banner attached to wall

 

1 per property

 

60 sq. ft.

 

N/A




General Commercial Signage




Conditionally Permitted Principal Use

 

Banner

 

1 per property

 

30 sq. ft.

 

N/A

 

Two occasions per calendar year for a maximum of 10 day display for each
occasion




*  Allowed for low-density developments with at least four lots under
development.
** Sign permit not required.











2.    Office Business District Sign Regulations.



Within the B-1, office business district, signs are permitted according to
the following standards:



a)   Permanent Signs.



   1)   Permanent monument signs: One monument sign is permitted per
development provided the sign complies with the requirements of Table 325.5.
In addition,



      (a)   Signs may be single or double-faced



      (b)   Signs may be internally or externally illuminated,
except internal illumination is not allowed if a sign faces low-density
residential properties. External illumination may not include exposed light
sources.



   2)   Permanent wall signs: One permanent wall sign is permitted per
building, except that buildings with frontage on more than one public street
are allowed one wall sign facing each frontage. Signs must comply with the
requirements of Table 325.5. In addition:



      (a)   Signs must be comprised of individually dimensioned
letters, unless all wall signs are incorporated into architecture of
structure and of similar design.



      (b)   Signs may be internally illuminated or backlit, except
illumination is not allowed if a sign faces low-density residential
properties.



 


Table 325.5 Permanent Signs in Office District




Sign Type

 

Max. Monument Area

 

Max. Copy & Graphic Area

 

Max. Height




Permanent monument sign - adjacent ROW is less than 100 ft in width

 

72

 

36 sq. ft.

 

15 ft.




Permanent monument sign - adjacent ROW is 100 ft. or more in width

 

100

 

50 sq. ft.

 

15 ft.




Permanent wall sign

 

N/A

 

Maximum wall sign height x 25% of length of building where sign is located

 

36 inches for one and two story buildings
48 inches for three and four story buildings
60 inches for five or more story buildings




 









b)   Temporary Signs. On-premise signs must comply with the requirements
of Table 325.6. Signs may not be illuminated.



 




Table 325.6 Temporary On-Premise Signs, Office Districts




Property Type

 

Sign Type

 

Max. Number of Signs

 

Max. Area

 

Max. Height

 

Disply Duration




Vacant Properties, During Construction*

 

Freestanding

 

1 if property is 3 acres or less,
2 signs if property is over 3 acres in size

 

32 sq. ft.

 

12 ft.

 

Must be removed 7 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy




Improved Properties,
For Sale or Lease*


 

Freestanding or Wall

 

Only while property is for sale or lease space is available




General Temporary Signs

 

Banners

 

1 sign per tenant

 

30 sq. ft.

 

N/A

 

Max. 30 day period to coincide with grand opening
Max. 2 occasions per calendar years with each occasion not to exceed 10 days




Sandwich Signs*/**/***

 

1 per tenant

 

12 sq. ft.

 

4

 

Allowed during business hours, but must be removed at closing




Search Light or Inflatable***

 

1 per development

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

Max. 2 occasions per calendar year with each occasion not to exceed 3 days




Non-
commercial banner or freestanding sign*/****

 

3 per property

 

6 sq. ft. per sign,
18 sq. ft. aggregate per property

 

3 ft.

 

N/A




*      Sign permit not required.
**    Sign must be located directly in front the tenant space the sign is
associated with and must
        not reduce sidewalk area to less than 4 ft. in width.
***  Sign must be located on the ground.
**** Signs must be located at least five feet from the edge of a public
street, must not obstruct
        driver visibility at intersections and must be placed with the
consent of the property owner.





 









3.    Commercial Business and Industrial Sign Regulations



Within the B-2, B-3 and I-1 districts, the following signs are permitted:



a)   Permanent signs.



   1)   Freestanding signs. Signs must comply with requirements of
Table 325.7. In addition,



      (a)   One freestanding sign is allowed per development, except
that a second sign is allowed for properties with drive-thru windows.



      (b)   Signs may be single or double-faced.



      (c)   Signs may be internally or externally illuminated,
except internal illumination is not allowed if a sign faces low-density
residential properties. External illumination may not include exposed light
sources.



 




Table 325.7 Permanent Freestanding Signs in the Commercial Business and
Industiral Districts






 

Pylon Sign

 

Monument Sign




Principal Structure
(gross square feet)

 

Max. Height

 

Max. Sign Size

 

Max. Height

 

Max. Copy & Graphic

 

Max. Monument Area




Greater than 400,000

 

30 ft.

 

200 sq. ft.

 

21 ft.

 

100 sq. ft.

 

150 sq. ft.




100,000 - 400,000*

 

24 ft.

 

100 sq. ft.

 

21 ft.

 

100 sq. ft.

 

150 sq. ft.




20,000 - 100,000

 

18 ft.

 

80 sq. ft.

 

18 ft.

 

80 sq. ft.

 

120 sq. ft.




Less than 20,000

 

15 ft.

 

60 sq. ft.

 

15 ft.

 

60 sq. ft.

 

90 sq. ft.




Building with multiple screen theater

 

30 ft.

 

200 sq. ft.

 

21 ft.

 

100 sq. ft.

 

150 sq. ft.




Second Sign for properties with drive-thru

 

8 ft.

 

50 sq. ft.

 

8 ft.

 

50 sq. ft.

 

50 sq. ft.




* For multi-tenant building or limited tenant building with more than 100,000
gross sq.
  ft. and with 2 or more access points, one monument sign allowed at primary
access and
  second monument allowed at second access; height and graphic limits for
second
  monument are 50% of those in outlined in this table.





 









   2)   Permanent Wall Signs:



      (a)   Limited tenant wall signs. Signs must comply with the
requirements in Table 325.8. In addition,



         (1)   One permanent wall sign is permitted per exterior
wall face.



         (2)   Signs must be comprised of individually
dimensioned letters, unless all wall signs are incorporated into the
architecture of structure and of similar design.



         (3)   Signs may be internally illuminated or backlit,
except illumination is not allowed if a sign faces low-density residential
properties.



 


Table 325.8: Wall Signs, Limited Tenant Building




Principal Structure Size
(Gross Sq. Ft.)

 

Individual Wall Sign Calculation

 

Total Wall Signage for Property




100,000 - 400,000 sq. ft.

 

200 sq. ft. or 10 percent of wall face, whichever is less

 

300 sq. ft.




20,000 - 100,000 sq. ft.

 

150 sq. ft. or 10 percent of wall face, whichever is less

 

240 sq. ft.




less than 20,000 sq. ft.

 

100 sq. ft. or 15 percent of wall face, whichever is less

 

150 sq. ft.




 



      (b)   Multi-tenant wall signs. Each tenant is permitted one
wall sign per tenant exterior wall face, but no more than two total signs.
For example, a tenant that occupies a corner or endcap space is allowed two
wall signs, whereas a tenant that occupies an interior space is allowed one
wall sign. Signage size is regulated under Table 325.9. In addition,



         (1)   Signs may be located no closer than 2 feet from
any lease line.



         (2)   Signs may be internally illuminated or backlit,
except internal illumination is not allowed when a sign faces low-density
residential properties.



 


Table 325.9 Wall Signs, Multi-tenant Building






 

Max. Height

 

Max. Copy & Graphic Area




Horizontal-mounted signs

 

36 inches for graphic
26 inches for copy

 

Defined by maximum allowed height and lease lines*




Projecting sign

 

Must not project above the roofline of building and provide for no less than
8 feet of clearance between the lowest portion of the sign and the grade
below.




*Signs may not project out from the face of the building by more than 48
inches.










b)   Temporary Signs. On-premise signs must comply with Table 325.10.
Signs may not be illuminated.



 




Table 325.10 Temporary On-Premise Signs, Commercial and Industrial Districts




Property Type

 

Sign Type

 

Max. Number of Signs

 

Max. Area

 

Max. Height

 

Display Duration




Vacant Properties, During Construction*

 

Freestanding

 

1 if property is 3 acres or less
2 signs if property is over 3 acres in size

 

32 sq. ft.

 

12 ft.

 

Must be removed 7 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy




Improved Properties,
For Sale or Lease*

 

Freestanding or Wall

 

Only while property is for sale or lease space is available




General Temporary Signs

 

Banners

 

1 sign per tenant

 

30 sq. ft.

 

N/A

 

Max. 30 day period to coincide with grand opening
Max. 2 occasions per calendar years with each occasion not to exceed 10 days




Sandwich Signs*/**/***

 

1 per tenant

 

12 sq. ft.

 

4

 

Allowed during business hours, but must be removed at closing




Search Light or Inflatable***

 

1 per development

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

Max. 2 occasions per calendar year with each occasion not to exceed 3 days




Noncom-



mercial banner or freestanding sign*/****

 

3 per property

 

6 sq. ft. per sign,
18 sq. ft. aggregate per property


 

3 ft.

 

N/A




*      Sign permit not required.
**    Sign must be located directly in front the tenant space the sign is
associated with and
        must not reduce sidewalk area to less than 4 ft. in width.
***  Sign must be located on the ground.
**** Signs must be located at least five feet from the edge of a public
street, must not obstruct
        driver visibility at intersections and must be placed with the
consent of the property
        owner.





 









4.   Planned Unit Development Districts.



Permanent and temporary signs in planned unit development and planned I-394
districts are regulated according to the standards for the corresponding land
use and zoning category as stated in this chapter 3. A sign plan with
differing requirements may be approved by the city. Factors that will be used
in determining if an individual P.U.D./P.I.D. sign plan will be considered
include the following:



   a)   The development includes a high rise (greater than 3 story)
structure;



   b)   the development includes multiple structures and/or substantial
site area;



   c)   the development includes mixed uses;



   d)   a sign plan is uniquely adapted to address the visibility needs
of a development while remaining consistent with the intent of this section
to direct high quality signage; and



   e)   the sign plan includes permanent sign covenants which can be
enforced by the city.



(Section 325 repealed and replaced by Ord. 2018-17, effective Nov. 5, 2018)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 4:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   400.    SUBDIVISIONS.



   400.005. SHORT TITLE.



   400.010.  PURPOSE.




   400.015.  DEFINITIONS.





   400.020.  APPROVAL REQUIRED.





   400.025.  SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS.





   400.030.  DESIGN STANDARDS.





   400.035.  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.





   400.040.  PARK DEDICATION.





   400.045.  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCESS FOR SIMPLE SUBDIVISIONS.





   400.050.  WAIVER OF SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.





   400.055.  VARIANCES.





   400.060. SUBDIVISIONS PREVIOUSLY APPROVED.




   400.065.  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



SECTION 400.  SUBDIVISIONS.



SECTION 400.005.  SHORT TITLE.



This ordinance shall be known as the “subdivision ordinance" and will be
referred to herein as “this ordinance”.



SECTION 400.010.  PURPOSE.



Minnesota Statutes Sections 462.358 and 505.03 convey responsibilities and
authority to cities for the establishment of platting and subdivision
regulations.  The purpose of this Chapter is to establish platting and
subdivision regulations that:



1.     Provide for the orderly, efficient, and safe development of land,
urban services and facilities;



2.   Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
community by establishing physical standards, design requirements, and
procedures for the platting and subdivision of land; and



3.    Establish procedures that permit flexibility in land development.



SECTION 400.015.  DEFINITIONS.



For the purpose of this ordinance, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:



1.   "Abut" - to border upon a parcel of land, sharing all or part of a
common property line with the parcel of land.



2.   "Block" - a tract of land consisting of one or more lots, as
identified on the plat, and bounded by plat boundaries, public ways, outlots,
parks or bodies of water.



3.   "Buildable Area" - a contiguous portion of a lot that is suitable for
the location of a primary structure and that excludes all existing and
proposed easements, setbacks for structures, ordinary high water levels,
wetlands, floodplains, the neck portion of any neck or flag lot, steep slopes
that are unbuildable under the zoning ordinance, and other unbuildable areas.
Certain easements may be included in the buildable area at the discretion of
the city if their inclusion is consistent with the intent of the zoning
ordinance and of this ordinance.



4.   "Chord" - a straight line connecting two points on a curve.



5.   "Comprehensive plan" - the comprehensive municipal plan, as defined
in Minnesota Statutes section 462.352, in effect at the time of final action
on an application, except as otherwise required by Minnesota Statutes section
462.357.



6.   "Cul-de-sac" - a street with a single means of ingress and egress and
having a turnaround at its end for a safe and convenient reversal of traffic.



7.   "Cul-de-sac bulb" - the turnaround at the end of a cul-de-sac.



8.   "Easement" - an interest in land granted by a property owner that
entitles the easement holder to a specified use of the land.



9.   "Lot" - a tract or parcel of land which is part or all of a block and
is identified on a plat.



10.   "Pedestrian way" - a public or private right-of-way designated for
pedestrian use.



11.   "Plat" - a drawing done by a licensed land surveyor that details the
location and boundaries of public rights-of-way, public easements, lots and
blocks.



12.   "Plat, final" - a plat of a subdivision that includes all
information required by state law and this ordinance, which plat will be
recorded in the county land records.



13.   "Plat, preliminary" - a proposed plat showing all information
required by this ordinance.



14.   "Right-of-way" - an area of land dedicated on a plat or by legal
document or by operation of law that is intended to be used for location of
streets, pedestrian ways, railroads, or utility purposes.



15.   "Street" - a vehicular way located within a right-of-way, further
designated as local, collector, minor arterial, principal arterial or private.



16.   "Street, collector" - a street so designated in the comprehensive
plan that is designed to provide access from local streets to arterial
streets.



17.   "Street, local" - a street so designated in the comprehensive plan
that is designed to provide access to adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
All streets not designated as collector or arterial streets are local streets.



18.   "Street, minor arterial" - a street so designated in the
comprehensive plan that is designed for mobility rather than access and
connects land uses that generate a large number of vehicle trips.



19.   "Street, principal arterial" - a street so designated in the
comprehensive plan that is designed to provide high-speed mobility between
the Twin Cities and other locations outside of the metropolitan area.



20.   "Street, private" - a street that is not owned or maintained by a
government body.



21.   "Street width" - the shortest distance generally measured between
the face of parallel curbs.



22.   "Subdivision" - the separation of an area, parcel, or tract of land
under single ownership into two or more parcels, as defined in Minnesota
Statutes section 462.352. Subdivision includes the division of any land
previously combined for tax purposes.



23.   "Water course" - a flowing body of water including, rivers, creeks
streams, or public ditches.



SECTION 400.020.  APPROVAL REQUIRED.



1.  Property line changes.



Approval under this ordinance is required for any change to property lines or
boundaries, by subdivision, combination or lot line adjustments.



2.  Conveyance.



Approval under this ordinance is required for conveyances of land as provided
in this subdivision.  No conveyance of land that constitutes a subdivision
under this ordinance may be filed or recorded, if the land is described in
the conveyance by metes and bounds, by reference to an unapproved registered
land survey made after April 21, 1961, or by reference to an unapproved
plat.  The foregoing provision does not apply to the conveyance if the land
described:



a)   was a separate parcel of record on or prior to July 10, 1967; or



b)   was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior
to March 6, 1996; or



c)   was a separate parcel of not less than 2½ acres in area and 150 feet
in width on or before January 1, 1966, or



d)   was a single parcel of land of not less than 5 acres in area and 300
feet in width .on July 1, 1980, or



e)   is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of not less than
5 acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its conveyance does
not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or parcels,
any one of which is less than 5 acres in area or 300 feet in width, or



f)   is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land of not less
than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and its conveyance
does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more lots or
parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet in width.



3.  Registered land surveys.



Approval under this ordinance is required for any proposed registered land
survey.



4.  Right-of-Way Conveyance.



Land conveyed to the city of Minnetonka, Hennepin County, the State of
Minnesota, or railroads for right-of-way, or any residual land resulting from
such conveyance, is not required to be platted.



5.  Certification.



When a claim for an exemption to platting as outlined in this section is
presented to the city, the city planner will determine whether the
regulations of this ordinance apply to the particular division or combination
of land or lot line adjustment.  If the determination is that the
subdivision requirements do not apply, the city clerk will within ten
business days, for the purpose of documenting the exemption, certify that the
subdivision regulations do not apply to the particular division or
combination of land or lot line adjustment.



SECTION 400.025.  SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS.



Any subdivision that results in two or more parcels requires two approvals:
preliminary plat approval and final plat approval. Each approval constitutes
a separate action by the city, requiring a separate application, and subject
to separate statutory deadlines. The review and approval procedures are
outlined in the following:



1. Preliminary Plat.



a)   An application to subdivide a property must be submitted to the
planning division. The application must be accompanied by all of the
following:



   1)   An application fee.



   2)   A full legal description of the existing property, as
documented by current land title records.



   3)   An existing conditions survey. The survey must include: lot
dimensions, all platted and recorded easements, natural features (lakes,
creeks, floodplain, and wetlands), all existing structures with dimensions to
show size and location, structure setbacks from all property lines, the
location of existing driveways, streets, and utility lines, existing two foot
contours, grade elevations at lot and building corners and lowest floor
elevations.



   4)   Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat must include the
proposed plat name, location and dimensions of existing and proposed
easements, existing and proposed rights-of-way, and the following information
for each proposed lot:  lot dimension, lot area, buildable area, driveways,
and housing type (slab on grade, walkout, or lookout) for all lots.



   5)   Grading and drainage plan. The grading and drainage plan must
include: proposed building pads, existing and proposed two-foot contours,
existing high-priority and significant trees, location and size of proposed
pipes and stormwater treatment areas, design features such as retaining
walls, and associated engineering calculations.



   6)   Street and utility plan. The street and utility plan must
include the proposed centerline grades of streets, street plans and profiles
showing both existing and proposed grade lines, and detailed location and
size of all utilities.



   7)   Tree plans. Woodland preservation, high priority and
significant trees, as defined by the zoning ordinance, must be identified in
existing and resulting conditions plans.



   8)   Wetland delineation. If the property includes any wetland
areas, a wetland delineation and appropriate documentation is required. The
delineation must be staked in the field for city staff verification during
the growing season.



   9)   Stormwater pollution prevention plan.



   10)   Evidence of the current condition of title to the land to be
platted, in a form reasonably acceptable to the city attorney, which may
include an abstract of title or registered property abstract or a commitment
for an owner's policy of title insurance.  The city attorney may require the
applicant to also provide copies of recorded instruments that are referenced
in the submitted title evidence.



   11)   Other documents or items as may be required by city staff.



b)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the planning division will
provide a copy of the preliminary plat to the county highway engineer or
state transportation commissioner if required by law and will set a date for
a public hearing before the planning commission. Not less than 10 days before
the public hearing, the city will publish notice in the official newspaper
and send notice by mail to the applicant and to the owners of all properties
located wholly or partially within 400 feet of the property to be subdivided
or a larger notice area as may be required by the city council.



c)    Following the hearing the planning commission must make a
recommendation to the city council. The planning commission may recommend
that the city council impose conditions on preliminary plat approval in order
to ensure compliance with this ordinance.



d)   After receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the
city council must consider the preliminary plat application and may hold
whatever hearing it deems advisable. In evaluating the plat, the city council
must consider and adopt findings regarding compliance with this ordinance.
The city council may impose conditions on the preliminary plat approval. The
city council must make a decision within the time period specified in state
law.



e)   Preliminary plat approval will be void if: (1) a final plat
application is not received and approved within one calendar year of
preliminary plat approval; and (2) the city council has not received and
approved a written application for a time extension within the one-year
period.



2. Final Plat.



a)   A final plat application must be submitted to the planning division.
The application must be accompanied by all of the following:



   1)   Application fee.



   2)   Final plat drawing prepared and presented in accordance with
appropriate provisions of state statute and county regulations. The final
plat must include:



      a.   Boundary Information.



         1.   Municipal, township, county or section lines must
be accurately tied to the boundary of the plat by distance and angles.



         2.   The boundary line of the plat must be dimensioned
by distance and angles which must close by latitude and departure. All angles
of the boundary excepting the closing angle must be indicated.



         3.   The recorded names or numbers of adjoining
subdivisions must be shown dotted to a distance of at least 100 feet from the
boundaries of the plat under consideration. Dimensions of such adjoining
plats need not be shown, but the lot, block and street arrangement must be
shown to scale. Where adjacent land is not platted, it must be so indicated.



      b.   Monuments.



         1.   Accurate locations and the ties of all monuments
and survey irons must be shown. Official monuments as designated and adopted
by the Hennepin county surveyor's office and approved by the Hennepin county
district court for use as judicial monuments, must be set at each corner or
angle as the outside boundary of the final plat. Each angle point of the
boundary perimeter must be monumented.



         2.   Pipes or steel rods must be placed at each corner
of each lot. All United States, state, county or other official bench marks,
monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property must be
preserved in precise position and must be shown on the plat.



         3.   All irons and monuments must be placed after
streets are graded and said irons and monuments must be described on the plat
with a symbol for each type.



      c.   Lots and Blocks.



         1.   All lot and block dimensions must be shown on the
plat, as well as all necessary angles pertaining to the lots and blocks to
aid to future surveys. Ditto marks are not permitted in indicating dimension.



         2.   Lots must be numbered in numerical order. In plats
containing more than one block, the blocks must be numbered in numerical
order.



         3.   Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any
area to be dedicated or reserved for public use, or for the exclusive use of
property owners within the subdivisions, must be indicated.



         4.   In case of a replat, the original platting must be
shown in dashed marks.



      d.   Streets and Other Information



         1.   Streets and roadways names must be indicated on the
plat. A sequence of street naming must be followed, consistent to the pattern
that has been established by use in the particular area under consideration.



         2.   All dimensions must be shown for public
rights-of-way and all horizontal curve data must be indicated by radius,
degree, bearings and lengths.



         3.   Judicial and county ditches must be shown by
dimensions and angles as determined from the records on file in the county.



         4.   All easements must be indicated and dimensioned.



b)   Upon receipt of a complete application, a date will be set for city
council consideration. In evaluating the plat, the city council must consider
and adopt findings regarding compliance with the preliminary plat approval
and with this ordinance. The city council may impose conditions on the final
plat approval, which may include a development contract or development
agreement. The city council must make a decision within the time period
specified in state law.



c)   No final plat may be approved by the council on land subject to
flooding or containing poor drainage facilities and on land which would make
adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. However, final approval
may be given if the subdivider makes the necessary improvements which will,
in the opinion of the city engineer, make the area reasonably safe for
residential occupancy and provide adequate street and lot drainage. Financial
security in a form acceptable to the city may be required to guarantee the
completion of these improvements, and upon the posting of the security, the
council may give final approval to the plat prior to the making of the
improvements.



d)   Final plat approval will be void if: (1) a final plat is not recorded
with the county within one calendar year of preliminary plat approval; and
(2) the city has not received and approved a written application for a time
extension within one calendar year of final plat approval.



SECTION 400.030.  DESIGN STANDARDS.



In evaluating a subdivision, the city will consider its compliance with the
following standards:



1. General Standards.



a)   The preliminary plat must incorporate all contiguous property held
under common ownership. The final plat may cover only a portion of the
preliminary plat, provided it is in compliance with the preliminary plat and
other standards of this ordinance.



b)   The plat must take into consideration access to existing streets and
future extension of streets where appropriate.



c)   All lots within the plat must have frontage on the public
right-of-way from which the lot will have access.



d)   All registered land surveys in the city must be presented in the form
of a preliminary plat in accordance with the standards set forth in this
ordinance for preliminary plats. Unless plat approval has been received in
accordance with the standards and process set forth in this ordinance,
building permits will be withheld for buildings on tracts which have been
subdivided by registered land surveys and the city may refuse to take over
tracts as streets or roads or to improve, repair or maintain any such tracts
unless so approved.



2. Street Standards.



a)   The arrangement, character, extent, width and location must be
consistent with the comprehensive plan.



b)   Streets must be designed and located with consideration to existing
and planned streets, reasonable circulation patterns, topographical
conditions, stormwater runoff, public conveyance and safety.



c)   Streets must be designed in accordance standards and specifications
as required by the city engineer.



d)   Right-of-way widths must be the minimum required by the city engineer
and appropriate for the street classification. The required minimum will
generally fall with the following ranges:



   1)   Local street: 50 to 80 feet



   2)   Collector street: 60 to 100 feet



   3)   Minor arterial street: 60 to 150 feet



   4)   Principal arterial street: 100 to 300 feet.



d)   Street intersections must be at right angles wherever possible.



e)   Street jogs with centerline off-sets must be at least 125 feet in
length wherever possible.



f)   Property lines at street intersections must be rounded with a radius
of at least 20 feet or with comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded
corners.



3. Cul-de-sac Standards.



a)   Cul-de-sacs are measured along the center line of the street from the
intersection of origin to the end of the cul-de-sac right-of-way.



b)   Each cul-de-sac must have a terminus of nearly circular shape unless
modified by the city with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet and a
minimum pavement diameter of 80 feet.



c)   The property line at the intersection of the cul-de-sac bulb and the
straight portion of the street must be rounded at a radius of not less than
20 feet.



d)   Center islands are prohibited.



e)   Cul-de-sacs may not be longer than 500 feet unless the city council
approves a longer length based upon the following conditions:



   1)   severe topography: the resulting street grade is more than
seven percent or substantial grading is required so that the physical
character of the property or adjacent properties is severely impacted;



   2)   significant vegetation: the cul-de-sac would serve to preserve
mature trees on the property, whereas an extension or through street would
cause their destruction. Significant vegetation is defined to include but not
be limited to indigenous deciduous hardwood trees of 12 inches in diameter or
more and indigenous coniferous trees of 15 feet high or more;



   3)   existing development: the pattern of existing development
requires that the only practical method of providing public access is a long
cul-de-sac; or



   4)   temporary cul-de-sac: the cul-de-sac is temporary and designed
to be extended to provide access to an adjacent property that has not
undergone development.



f)   In a case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a limited access
highway, other major highway or arterial street, the city may require the
developer to configure the lots in a manner that does not permit direct
access between any lot and the highway or arterial street.



g)   All proposed streets shown on the plat must be offered for dedication
as public streets.



4. Utility Standards.



a)   Storm sewer, sanitary sewer, and water distribution facilities are
required. The facilities must be constructed in accordance with standards and
specifications as required by the city engineer.



b)   Private utilities must be entirely accommodated underground.



5. Easements Standards.



a)   Drainage and utility easements must be provided, at least 14 feet
wide, centered on rear and side lot lines, and at least 10 feet wide adjacent
to public rights-of-way. The easements must have continuity of alignment from
block to block and lot to lot and at deflection points.



b)   Drainage and utility easements must be provided over designated
floodplain and wetland areas.



c)   Drainage and utility easements must be provided over existing or
proposed infrastructure for storm sewer, sanitary sewer and watermain
facilities. Such easements must be at least 20 feet in width or twice the
depth of the infrastructure, whichever is greater.



d)    Where a plat is traversed by a water course, drainage and utility
easements must be provided over the water course and such additional area as
will be adequate for the drainage of the area.



6. Lot Standards.



a)   Residential lots:



   1)   All residential lots must meet the following area and dimension
standards:



 




Zoning

 

Lot Area

 

Lot Width

 

Lot Depth

 

Buildable Area




at Setback

 

at ROW

 

Size

 

Dimensions



R-1
 

22,000 sq.ft.

 

110 ft

 

80 ft, but 65 ft at



cul-de-sac



bulb

 

125 ft

 

3,500 sq.ft.

 

minimum 4 sides and 40 ft per side



R-1A
 

As outlined in City Code Section 300.37



R-2
 

As outlined in City Code section 300.11



R-3
 

Low-



density

 

10,000 sq.ft per unit

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA



Medium-density
 

3,600 sq.ft. per unit

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA




R-4 and R-5

 

30,000 sq.ft.

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA

 

NA




PUD

 
As approved under the PUD master development plan specific to the property in
question




   2)   For the purpose of determining lot area, all land lying below
the ordinary high water level of a lake or creek must be excluded from the
lot area calculation.



   3)   Variances to permit lots with substandard or no frontage on the
public right-of-way from which the lot will have access will be considered,
but not necessarily granted, only upon evidence that all of the following
standards are or will be met:



      a.   One of the following conditions exists:



         1.   severe grades make it infeasible according to the
city to construct a public street to minimum city standards;



         2.   the city determines that a right-of-way extension
would adversely impact natural amenities including wetlands or stands of
regulated trees; or



         3.   there is no feasible present or future means of
extending right-of-way from other directions;



      b.   if access to the public right-of-way is to be provided by
a private access easement,



         1.   the number of lots to share a common private access
drive does not exceed three;



         2.   the easement must address the property owners'
respective responsibilities for driveway installation and future maintenance;



         3.   the easement must require that the driveway to be
constructed meets minimum requirements established at the time of subdivision
approval by the engineering department and the fire marshal; and



         4.   the easement must be recorded in the land title
records, and proof of recording must be provided to the city.



      c.   if a property could be developed with required frontage
on a public street, the number of lots created by this variance must not
exceed the number of lots that could be subdivided with a public street;



      d.   the neck portion of a neck or flag lot must have a
minimum width of 14 feet plus the actual driveway width required by the fire
marshal pursuant to the uniform fire code. If an easement is used to provide
access, the easement must have a minimum width equal to the width required
for a neck, plus an additional ten feet; and



      e.   the variance must not set a precedent that would alter
the essential character of the neighborhood from lots with frontage to
lots-behind-lots.



b)   Lots in B-1, B-2, B-3 or I-1 zoning districts must be designed as
such, and the lot must be of adequate size to meet the zoning requirements of
that district to allow off street parking, loading areas and such other
facilities as are required to satisfy the requirements of section 300 of this
ordinance.



c)   In all zoning districts:



   1)   All lots must have a minimum of 30 feet in width at the rear
lot line.



   2)   Side lot lines must be substantially at right angles or radial
to the street lines.



   3)   Double-frontage, or lots that abut two parallel streets, are
not permitted except where lots back on arterial streets or highways, or
where topographic or other conditions render subdivision otherwise
unreasonable. Double frontage lots must have an additional depth of at least
20 feet in order to allow space for screen planting along the rear lot line.



   4)   Lot remnants that are below the minimum lot size must be added
to adjacent or surrounding lots rather than be allowed to remain as an
unusable outlot or parcel unless the owner can show acceptable plans for the
future use of the remnants.  The city may require covenants to be recorded
that provide reasonable assurance that the remnant lots will be maintained
and that real estate taxes will be paid.



SECTION 400.035.  REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.



1. Construction of Improvements.



a)   The owner or subdivider of the land covered by plat may choose to
construct the streets and required utilities within the plat in compliance
with standards and specifications required by the city engineer. In that
case, the owner or subdivider must deposit with the city a letter of credit,
cash escrow, or other financial guarantee acceptable to the city attorney in
an amount equal to 150% of an estimated or 125% of an actual bid cost for
constructing the streets and utilities.



b)   The owner and subdivider will have two full construction seasons from
the date of the city's release of the final plat for recording to complete
the road construction and appurtenances in such a manner as to allow the city
to accept the subdivision for maintenance. If said construction is not
completed in the time allotted, the city may use the full value of the
financial guarantee to complete the remaining construction to city standards
and specifications. If the amount of funds recovered is insufficient to cover
the cost of actual construction, the council may assess the remaining cost to
the properties within the subdivision.



c)   Any violation or non-conformance with the specifications for street
construction will be grounds for the city to issue a stop-work order on the
site. In that event, no further operation with regard to the construction of
a roadway or appurtenances within the affected subdivision will be allowed
until the original violation or non-conformance is corrected.



d)   After having completed all of the required construction to the
satisfaction of the city engineer in accordance with the city's standards and
specifications, the owner or subdivider must submit the following to the
city: a record of all improvements as built in the format designated by the
city engineer, the appropriate inspection fee and all required agreements and
documents. After those items have been submitted to the city, the owner or
subdivider may request final acceptance of the streets and appurtenances by
the city for maintenance. Final acceptance must be evidenced in writing by
the city engineer.



e)   All of the required improvements must be inspected during the course
of their construction by the city engineer or designee. All of the inspection
costs must be paid by the owner or subdivider.



2. Issuance of Building Permits.



The city may withhold building permits for the construction of any building
until the following requirements have been met in accordance with standards
and specifications for street construction as required by the city engineer:



a)   Streets



   1)   The full width of the right-of-way must be graded, including
the subgrade of the areas to be paved.



   2)   All streets must be improved to their overall width with, at
minimum, the base course of bituminous surfacing and concrete curb and gutter.



   3)   The position of the right-of-way outside the bituminous
surfacing, curb and gutter must be stabilized.



   4)   Street signs of the standard design approved by the city must
be installed at each street intersection.



b)   Utilities



   1)   All required storm sewers, culverts, stormwater inlets, and
other drainage facilities associated with the public street must be installed.



   2)   Sanitary sewers must be installed to serve all properties in
the subdivision.



   3)   Water distribution facilities, including pipe fittings,
hydrants, etc., must be installed to serve all properties in the subdivision.



SECTION 400.040.  PARK DEDICATION.



Park dedication is required for any subdivision of property to facilitate
adequate provision of and access to park and recreational facilities within
the city. The city, at its discretion, will determine whether dedication is
required in the form of a cash contribution or as land. This decision will be
based on existing and proposed development and on the approved park system
plan in the comprehensive plan.



1.  Cash Contribution.



a)   Cash contributions must be made according to the following fee
schedule:



   single dwellings               $5,000.00 per buildable
lot



   two-family and multiple dwellings         $5,000.00 per unit



   office/industrial               $7,000.00 per acre



   commercial                  $8,000.00 per acre



b)   For mixed use development, the required contribution will be based on
the specific fee outlined for each use.



c)   Cash contributions for single-family residential developments must be
paid prior to the city's release of the final plat for recording. Cash
contributions for all other types of residential, commercial, office or
industrial developments must be paid before the city issues the first
building permit for the project.



d)   Cash contributions must be placed in a separate city fund and used
only for the acquisition and development or improvement of parks,
recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands or open space based on
the approved park, open space, and trail system plan in the comprehensive
plan.



2.  Dedication of Land.



a)   Land dedication must not be less than 10 percent of the total land in
the proposed subdivision.



b)   The city may determine the location and configuration of any land
dedicated, taking into consideration the suitability of the land for its
intended purpose and future needs of the community for park, playground,
trail, or open space property.



c)   At the city's option, the following properties will not be accepted
for purposes of the owner's compliance with subdivisions 1 or 2 of this
section:



   1)   land dedicated or obtained as easements for stormwater
retention, drainage, roadway and other utility purposes;



   2)   land that is unusable or of limited use; and



   3)   land that is protected wetlands/floodplain area.



d)   Prior to the dedication of the required property, the subdivider must
provide the city with an owner's policy of title insurance naming the city as
the insured and insuring the city's interest in the property. In any
dedication of required land, the subdivider must transfer good and marketable
title to the city, free and clear of any mortgages, liens, encumbrances or
assessments, except easements or minor imperfections of title acceptable to
the city. If the land is not formally dedicated to the city in the final
plat, the subdivider must record all deeds for conveyance of the property to
the city at the same time as the final plat or other appropriate division
documents.



3.  Park Dedication Credit.



The city may, at its discretion, credit park dedication. Consideration may be
given to previous park dedication for a parcel or to subdivision that would
result in development or redevelopment that achieves a recognized public
purpose.



SECTION 400.045.  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW PROCESS FOR SIMPLE SUBDIVISIONS.



Subdivision done for the purpose of adjusting a lot line between two existing
lots or dividing a lot along an existing party wall(s) of a multi-family
building may be approved by the city planner if the following conditions are
met.



1.  Lot Line Adjustment Conditions.



a)   The new legal descriptions for the properties are metes and bounds;



b)   The adjustment does not result in the creation of a new lot, does not
make one of the lots large enough to be eligible for further subdivision, and
does not make an unbuildable lot buildable; and



c)   The resulting parcels meet all applicable ordinance requirements,
except that if one of the parcels was previously non-conforming, it must
become more conforming as a result of the subdivision.



2.  Party Wall Division Conditions.



a)   The new legal descriptions for the properties are metes and bounds;



b)   The multi-family building is already built;



c)   The lot line(s) is along an existing, common wall;



d)   The division does not make one of the lots large enough to be
eligible for further subdivision;



e)   Verification has been provided that the building would meet building
code requirements with the new lot line;



f)   Variances associated with the creation of the separate lots are not
required; and



g)   The following items are submitted for review by the city attorney,
who will designate which items must be recorded:



   1)    Documents establishing how the building, common sewer and
water lines and any common drives will be maintained and who will be
responsible; and



   2)   Common access easements for each lot.



3.  Application Process.



a)   An application to adjust a lot line between two existing lots or
divide a lot along an existing party wall(s) of a multi-family building must
submitted to the planning division. The application must be accompanied by
all of the following:



   1)   An application fee.



   2)   A full legal description of the existing properties, as
documented by current land title records.



   3)   An existing conditions survey. The survey must include: lot
dimensions, all platted and recorded easements, all existing structures with
dimensions to show size and location, structure setbacks from all property
lines, and the location of existing driveways and utility lines.



   4)   A proposed conditions survey. The survey must include: the
proposed lot lines, all platted, recorded, and proposed easements, all
existing structures with dimensions to show size and location, structure
setbacks from all property lines, and the location of existing driveways and
utility lines.



   5)   Evidence of the current condition of title to the land affected
by the lot line adjustment, in a form reasonably acceptable to the city
attorney, which may include an abstract of title or registered property
abstract or a commitment for an owner's policy of title insurance.  The city
attorney may require the applicant to also provide copies of recorded
instruments that are referenced in the submitted title evidence.



b)   After receipt of the application, the city planner will consider the
subdivision's consistency with this ordinance. The city planner must make a
decision within the time period specified in state law and provide the
applicant written notice of that decision.



c)   The city must receive evidence that the documents required to be
recorded have been filed with the county within one year of this approval or
the approval becomes null and void.



d)   The city planner may choose, in his or her discretion, to require
that a minor subdivision that would result in a lengthy or complicated legal
descriptions follow the application and process outlined in section 400.015
of this ordinance.



SECTION 400.050.  WAIVER OF SUBDIVISION APPROVAL.



In any case in which compliance with the subdivision ordinance will create an
unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere with the
purpose of the subdivision regulations, the city council may waive compliance
by adopting a resolution to that effect and the conveyance may then be filed
or recorded.



SECTION 400.055.  VARIANCES.



1. Variance Standard.



The planning commission may recommend, and the city council may approve, a
variance from the requirements of this ordinance. A variance may be granted,
but is not mandated, when the applicant meets the burden of proving that:



a)   the proposed variance is a reasonable use of the property,
considering such things as:



   1)   functional and aesthetic justifications for the variance; and



   2)   improvement to the appearance and stability of the property and
neighborhood.



b)   the circumstances justifying the variance are unique to the property,
are not caused by the landowner, are not solely for the landowner's
convenience, and are not solely because of economic considerations; and



c)   the variance would not adversely affect or alter the essential
character of the neighborhood.



2. Council Approval.



The city council may grant a variance only upon an affirmative vote of at
least two-thirds of its full membership. The city council may impose
conditions in granting a variance to effect the intent of this ordinance and
to protect adjacent properties.



3. Violation of Conditions.



A person who violates, fails to comply with, or assists, directs or permits
the violation of the terms or conditions of a variance is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A violation is a violation of the variance and renders the
variance null and void. A violation also constitutes a public nuisance that
may be abated in accordance with the provisions of section 845.



SECTION 400.060.  SUBDIVISIONS PREVIOUSLY APPROVED.



Any subdivision previously approved under any previous regulations will,
after the effective date of this ordinance amendment, be subject to all
requirements contained herein.



SECTION 400.065.  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



1.  Penalty for prohibited conveyances.



Any person who conveys a lot or parcel without the approval required by this
ordinance must forfeit and pay to the city a penalty of not less than $100
for each lot or parcel conveyed.



2.  Building permits.



No certificate of occupancy, building permit or other city approval will be
issued for any land in a subdivision that is in violation of this ordinance,
until the violation has been corrected and appropriate fines and penalties
have been paid.



3.  Misdemeanor.



A person who violates this ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor.



4.  Other actions.



The city may commence proceedings at law or in equity to prevent any
violation of this section, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal
occupancy of a building, structure or premises.  Nothing in this section
prevents the city from taking other actions permitted by law, and the
penalties and remedies provided here and under law are cumulative.



(Section 400 repealed and replaced by Ord. 2014-24, adopted September 15,
2014)



CHAPTER 5:  BUILDING AND
CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



Section



   500.   BUILDING CODE.



   505.   ELECTRICAL CODE.



   510.   PLUMBING CODE.



   515.   MECHANICAL CODE.



   520.   REGULATION OF BUILDING MOVES.



   525.   HOUSING CODE; BUILDING MAINTENANCE.



SECTION 500.  BUILDING CODE.



500.005.  Adoption.



The mandatory provisions of the Minnesota state building code, authorized by
Minn. Stat. § 16B.61 and contained in Minnesota Rules, chapter 1300 et seq.,
are adopted by reference as the city building code, with the following
additional optional provisions:



1.   IBC appendix chapter J, excavation and grading, except that permit
fees for excavation and grading permits will be as specified in section 710
of this code; and



2.   chapter 1306, special fire protection systems, with option Subpart 2
of 1306.0020 (existing and new buildings).



All amendments to the mandatory portions of the Minnesota state building code
will also be considered adopted and incorporated by reference in the city
building code.  One copy of the state building code and any codes that it
incorporates by reference will remain on file in the city clerk's office.



(Amended by Ord. #2007-23, adopted August 6, 2007; amended by Ord. #2004-05,
adopted February 9, 2004)



500.010.  Permits, Inspections, and Fees.



1.   In General.  Permits, inspections and collection of fees will be as
provided in section 710 and section 715 of this code and chapter 1 of the
international building code that is adopted as part of the state building
code, except that the city may reduce or waive fees for construction that
meets the city's affordable housing goals. Permit fees will be established by
the city using the current building valuation data provided by the building
codes and standards division of the Minnesota department of administration.



2.   Surcharge.  In addition to the permit fees required in paragraph 1,
the applicant must pay a surcharge to be paid to the Minnesota department of
administration as required in Minn. Stat. § 16B.70.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



500.015.  Enforcement.



The code enforcement agency created under chapter 1 of the international
building code is the community development department.  The building
official will be a state-certified building official who will be appointed by
the city manager and be under the direction and control of the community
development director.  The building official is responsible for
administration and enforcement of the city building code, including all
regulations governing electrical, heating, plumbing, and gas fitting
installations.  The building official may delegate this authority to
qualified individuals under the building official's direction and control.
The building official may refuse to issue a building permit, and may stop
work being done under a building permit, if other work on the property is not
in compliance with provisions of the city's ordinances. The building official
may also refuse to issue a building permit if the proposed work appears to be
located in an easement area, unless the easement holder has given written
permission.



(Amended by Ord. 2005-21, adopted December 5, 2005; amended by Ord. 2004-05,
adopted February 9, 2004)



500.020.  Fire Zones.



For the purpose of building code enforcement, the city is divided into the
following designated fire zones:



1.   Fire Zone No. 1.  None.



2.   Fire Zone No. 2.  All land included within the following districts
as described in section 300:  R-3 low or medium residential district, R-4
medium density residential district, R-5 high density residential district,
B-1 office business district, B-2 limited business district, B-3 general
business district, I-1 industrial district, PUD planned unit development
district, and PID planned I-394 district.



3.   Fire Zone No. 3.  All land included within the following districts
as described in section 300: R-1 low density residential district and R-2 low
density residential district.



500.025.  Building Exteriors.



1.   The council finds that the use of finished exterior building
materials such as concrete masonry units, common clay brick, sand lime,
concrete brick, unfinished structural clay tile, sheet metal (corrugated or
plain), exposed unfinished concrete, and other materials of the same general
character, rapidly deteriorate or quickly become unsightly and have an
adverse effect on the general welfare and on the values of other premises. 
When a building permit application proposes to use those materials as
exterior finished materials, the building official must require an elevation
view and other information that indicate accurately the proposed use of the
materials.  The building official must bring the permit application to the
council for its review.  If the council finds that the proposed finished
exterior materials will adversely affect the general welfare and value of
adjacent premises, the council may, by resolution, order a denial of the
building permit.



2.   Asbestos-cement shingles and sheets, or composition shingle roofs,
are limited to two layers.



500.030.  Razing or Demolishing Buildings.



1.   A person must not raze or demolish a building or structure within the
city without first applying for and receiving a permit from the building
official and paying the fee specified in section 710.



2.   The applicant must submit with the application a bond or certified
check in the amount of $2,000.00 payable to the city of Minnetonka to ensure
the adequate filling of foundations, capping of wells, and filling of septic
tanks on the property from which the building is removed.  A permit is
issued subject to the condition that those tasks are adequately completed. 
If they are not adequately completed, the city may use the proceeds of the
bond or check to complete the work.



500.035.  Plans and Specifications.



1.   With each application for a building permit, and when required by the
building official for enforcement of any provision of the building code, two
sets of plans and specifications must be submitted.



2.   All plans and specifications must be prepared and signed by a
“registered architect” or a “registered professional engineer” who is
qualified by registrations as required by Minn. Stat. § 326.02.  This
provision does not apply to a single family dwelling, or any other structure,
if the cost will not exceed $30,000, and any other building exempted by
statute.



500.040.  Certificate of Survey.



1.   The applicant for a building permit must also submit with the
application a certificate of survey for the lot where the construction will
occur.



2.   The certificate of survey must provide the following information and
be attested to by a registered land surveyor qualified by registration as
required by Minn. Stat. § 326.02:



   a.   scale of drawing;



   b.   legal description;



   c.   dimensions of lot and north point;



   d.   dimensions of front, rear and side yards;



   e.   locations of all existing buildings on the lot;



   f.   location of the proposed building or construction.  In
locating a residence upon a lot, provisions must be made to permit the
location of a possible future garage if no garage is constructed with the
residence;



   g.   location of stakes established by the surveyor along each side
lot line a distance of 35 and 65 feet from the front lot corner.  The
maintenance of these stakes once established by the surveyor will be the
responsibility of the building permit applicant;



   h.   the location of all recorded easements including those shown on
recorded plats, but only platted easements for additions and garages for
single family residences;



   i.   grade elevations at the following points:



      (1)   each lot corner (either existing or proposed);



      (2)   crown of proposed street at each lot line extended; and



      (3)   proposed lawn and driveway elevations at the street side
of building.



      The elevations may be based on 1929 datum and must be tied by the
surveyor to a specified benchmark for which the elevation has been obtained
from the city engineer's office.



   j.   the proposed disposal of surface water drainage (indicate
direction of surface water drainage by arrows).



3.   A certificate of survey is required for all new construction and all
additions; however, the building official may waive the requirement for a
certificate of survey for additions if the resident owner and contractor
submit a scaled drawing and sign a form provided by the city of Minnetonka,
certifying that:



   a.   they do not have a survey of the property and are not aware of
an existing survey for the property;



   b.   they are responsible for ensuring that the structure meets
applicable setback requirements;



   c.   they understand that the city can require a survey of the
property if there is reason to question the submitted drawing;



   d.   they will discontinue work if a violation is found and correct
any illegal setbacks, including removal of the structure; and



   e.   other information reasonably required by the building official.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-21, adopted December 5, 2005; amended by Ord.
#2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



500.045.  Drainage Requirements.



1.   The building official may deny a building permit if the proposed
construction and disposal of surface water drainage are not consistent with
the city's adopted water resources management plan as defined in city code
section 300.02, or are likely to cause damage by altering the drainage or
flow of surface waters to nearby streets or other property.



2.   The building official may deny a building permit for construction
upon ground which is too low for proper drainage or which is set below the
minimum basement elevation established by the engineering department.



3.   In the course of the construction, alteration, repair or moving of a
structure, a person must not temporarily or permanently divert, bridge,
obstruct, or confine an existing channel or natural waterway over which a
lake, pond, storm water detention area, stream, creek, ditch, or surface
water naturally flows, except with approval of the city engineering and
community development departments.



4.   Drain tile, sump systems, sumps, or other devices designed to collect
and convey stormwater, surface water, ground water, subsurface drainage,
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water must be constructed to
discharge the water to the stormwater drainage system whenever feasible. 
The installation must not discharge these waters into the municipal sanitary
sewer.  If discharge to the storm water drainage system is not feasible, the
direction and method of discharge must not negatively impact nearby streets
or other property. When discharging to public streets, the point of discharge
must be no closer to the street than the edge of the public right-of-way or
20 feet from the edge of the traveled street surface, whichever distance is
greater.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-25, adopted August 23, 2004)



500.050.  Radio Antenna and Supporting Towers.



All radio antenna and supporting structures more than 15 feet in height must
be designed and constructed as provided in this section.



1.   Definitions.  Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
certain words and phrases have the meanings set forth below.



   a.   “Antenna” means the outdoor portion of equipment used for
transmitting and receiving radio waves from space.



   b.   “Mast” means that portion of the outdoor antenna system to
which the antenna is attached, and the support or extension required to
elevate the antenna to a height deemed necessary for adequate operation.



2.   Distance Requirements.  An antenna or mast must not be installed
within the building setback areas established in the zoning ordinance or
closer than 10 feet to an existing structure or building, unless approved by
the council. Wires, cables or guy wires must not cross or extend over part of
a street or sidewalk.



3.   Code Compliance.  All wiring must comply with the building code and
other ordinances relating to electrical construction and installation.



4.   Tower Materials.  All towers must be constructed of steel or other
approved corrosive- resistant non-combustible materials.  Steel members must
be designed and fabricated as required by the building code, except that
steel members may not be less than  inch thick if galvanized and not less
than 3/16 inch thick if painted.



5.   Wind Load.  All towers must be designed to withstand a wind load
from any direction as specified in the building code, in addition to any
other load.



6.   Foundations.  The foundations for radio towers must be designed in
accordance with accepted engineering practices and must be able to resist two
times the calculated wind uplift.



7.   Existing Antenna.  Every radio transmitting and receiving station
antenna erected before June 7, 1971, may be maintained and operated in its
present location, unless the antenna is so constructed and maintained as to
be unsafe and dangerous.



500.055.  Performance Bonds.



The building official may require that a performance bond in an amount equal
to the value of the work to be done be supplied by an applicant for a
building permit if the applicant is deemed by the official not to be a
responsible builder.



500.060.  Proposed Owner-Occupant Permits.



For construction of a new dwelling unit, the proposed owner may receive only
one building permit within any eighteen month period.  Other phases of
construction such as electrical, plumbing, heating and ventilation, must be
done by a contractor licensed by the city or state.



500.065.  Building and Grading Permits for Outlots.



No building permit or grading permit will be issued for a parcel of land
designated in a plat as an outlot unless specifically authorized by the
council.  Council authorization is not required for grading that is
consistent with grading plans approved by the planning commission or city
council as part of a site plan or preliminary plat approval for the property.



500.070.  Construction Completion.



All construction and grading must be completed in a manner to avoid a public
nuisance as defined in section 845.010.  Construction and grading that has
become a public nuisance is subject to abatement under section 845.



SECTION 505.  ELECTRICAL CODE.



505.005.  Definitions.



1.   The term "this code" as used in this section means the national
electrical code adopted as part of the Minnesota state building code and the
city building code.



2.   The term "electrical equipment" means all materials necessary to
supply electrical service to and throughout a building or structure.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



505.010.  Scope.



1.   All electrical equipment for the operation of a new or existing
building, structure or premise must be constructed, installed, altered or
removed in conformity with the provisions of this code.



2.   When the market value of alterations and repair within a 12-month
period exceeds 50 percent of the present market value of an existing building
or structure, the building or structure must be made to conform in all
respects to the requirements of this code for new buildings or structures.



3.   Electrical equipment for the operation of a building or structure
moved into or within the city must conform with all requirements of this code
for new buildings or structures.



4.   Electrical equipment for the operation of new and existing buildings
and structures must be maintained in a safe condition.  The owner of the
building or structure is responsible for this maintenance.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



505.015.  Safety Requirements.



Installations of electrical equipment must be reasonably safe for persons and
property and in conformity with the applicable state laws and regulations.



505.020.  Permits.



1.   A person, firm or corporation must not install, alter, repair or
extend electrical work for light, heat or power within the city without first
obtaining a permit from the city and paying the fee specified in chapter 710.



2.   A permit application must be accompanied by a complete set of plans
and specifications for the work to be done.  The building official may waive
this requirement if the building official believes that the nature of the
work is such that construction documents are not necessary to obtain
compliance with this code. If plans are submitted and a permit is issued, the
work must be completed in accordance with the approved plans.



3.   A permit must be obtained before work begins. A person, firm or
corporation that begins work specified in paragraph 1 without obtaining the
necessary permit is required to pay double the permit fee specified in
chapter 710 and is subject to the penalty provisions of this code. The
building official may waive this provision if the building official believes
that the work was required by an emergency.



4.   Permits for electrical work in new structures will only be issued to
electrical contractors licensed by the state of Minnesota.  Permits for
electrical work in existing structures will only be issued to electrical
contractors licensed by the state of Minnesota or to resident owners who
homestead the property where the work is to be done.



5.   Every permit issued will become invalid unless the work authorized by
the permit is started within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the work is started. The building official is authorized to grant one
or more written time extensions for periods not more than 180 days each. An
extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
Renewal of an invalid permit will require payment of the full permit fee.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



505.025.  Administration.



The building official will assign responsibility for administration of this
ordinance to qualified inspectors.



505.030.  Inspection.



1.   The authorized inspector will make the inspections necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.  No work may be covered until it has
been inspected and accepted by an inspector.  The permit applicant must
notify the city that the work is ready for inspection or reinspection.  The
owner or occupant of the property must give the inspector free access to the
property at reasonable times to make the inspections.

2.   If the inspector discovers that a part of the work is not constructed
in accordance with the minimum standards provided in this code, the inspector
will give the applicant written notification describing the defects.  The
applicant must pay an additional fee as prescribed in chapter 710 for each
reinspection that is necessary.  The applicant is responsible for the
correction or elimination of defects.  No system may be placed in service
until all defects have been corrected or eliminated.

(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



SECTION 510.  PLUMBING CODE.



(Divisions 510.005 - 510.015 were repealed by Ordinance No. 2004-05, adopted
February 9, 2004.)



510.020.  Permit Required.



1.   A person, firm or corporation must not install, alter, repair or
extend a plumbing system, or individual sewage disposal system in the city,
or cause the work to done, without first obtaining a permit from the city and
paying the fee specified in chapter 710.



2.   A permit application must be accompanied by a complete set of plans
and specifications for the work to be done.  The building official may waive
this requirement if the building official believes that the nature of the
work is such that construction documents are not necessary to obtain
compliance with this code. If plans are submitted and a permit is issued, the
work must be completed in accordance with the approved plans.



3.   A permit must be obtained before work begins. A person, firm or
corporation that begins work specified in paragraph 1 without obtaining the
necessary permit is required to pay double the permit fee specified in
chapter 710 and is subject to the penalty provisions of this code.  The
building official may waive this provision if the building official believes
that the work was required by an emergency.



4.   Permits for plumbing work in a new structure or to within 36 inches
of the outer foundation of a new or existing structure will only be issued to
contractors licensed by the state of Minnesota. Permits for plumbing work in
an existing structure will only be issued to contractors licensed by the
state of Minnesota or to resident owners who homestead the property where the
work is to be done.



5.   Every permit issued will become invalid unless the work authorized by
the permit is started within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the work is started. The building official is authorized to grant one
or more written time extensions for periods not more than 180 days each. An
extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
Renewal of an invalid permit will require payment of the full permit fee.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



510.025.  Inspections.



A person, firm or corporation who does or causes to be done plumbing work
that requires a permit must immediately notify the city upon completion of
the work that it is ready for inspection and testing.  A permittee must also
notify the city before any portion of the work is connected within a
building, and give the city reasonable time and opportunity to inspect the
work before construction progresses to a point where the work can no longer
be  examined and inspected.  A permittee must not cover work until it has
been inspected and accepted by the city.  A person must not occupy new
premises until the city has had an opportunity to make a final inspection of
the premises, has approved the installation, and has issued a certificate of
occupancy.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



510.030.  Enforcement.



It is the duty of the community development director and authorized agents to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



SECTION 515.  MECHANICAL CODE.



515.005.  Definitions.



1.   The term "mechanical contractor" means a person engaged in the
business of installing, altering, repairing, or extending a heating,
ventilating or exhaust system, refrigeration unit, air conditioning unit,
manufactured gas or wood fireplaces and stoves, manufactured chimney and
venting systems, hot water, low pressure steam equipment or other mechanical
equipment or systems discussed in the international mechanical code and
international fuel gas code adopted as part of the state building code.



2.   The term "gas piping contractor" means a person engaged in the
business of installing, altering, repairing, testing or extending gas lines,
oil burners, gas or oil piping or gas appliance items or connections.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



515.010.  License Required.



1.   A person, firm or corporation must not engage in the business of a
mechanical contractor or gas piping contractor within the city without first
obtaining a license from the city.



2.   An applicant for a license must submit a copy or other evidence of
the applicant's bond posted with the state of Minnesota. No city bond is
required.



3.   A license applicant must also submit a certificate of insurance
certifying that the business is currently insured by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota.  The certificate must be
in the form prescribed by the city.  The minimum limits of coverage for the
insurance must be:



   a.   each claim, at least $100,000;



   b.   each occurrence, at least $300,000;



   c.   property damage, at least $50,000; and



   d.   workers' compensation, statutory amounts.



   The insurance must be kept in force during the term of the license and
must provide for notification to the city ten days before termination or
cancellation.  A license is automatically revoked upon notice of termination
or cancellation of this insurance and will remain revoked until other
insurance is provided as required.



4.   The building official may require the license applicant to undergo an
examination before a license is issued.  The examination will be for the
purpose of determining the applicant's ability to adequately undertake the
work being licensed.  The applicant must perform to the satisfaction of the
building official before a license will be granted. The building official may
waive the examination for applicants who provide proof that they passed the
examination in the Minnesota cities of Bloomington, Minneapolis, St. Cloud,
St. Paul, St. Louis Park, or Rochester.



5.   A person, firm or corporation that has obtained a license must not
allow another person, firm or corporation to use the license for doing work
covered by the provisions of this ordinance.



6.   A license is renewable annually on or before January 31 of every year
and may be revoked, suspended or refused renewal for cause.  Adequate cause
includes work done in violation of this chapter or a licensee's refusal to
correct defective work performed by the licensee, its agents or employees. 
A license revocation, suspension or refusal of renewal will be done under the
provisions in section 700.035 of this code.



7.   Application for a license must be made annually on a form furnished
by this city.  The annual license fee is specified in chapter 710.



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-03, effective January 23, 2017; Amended by Ord.
#2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



515.015.  Categories of Licenses.



1.   There are three categories of the mechanical contractor's license, as
specified below. In addition, the holder of a Minnesota builders contractor
license may do the limited mechanical work specified below.



   a.    The holder of warm air license may install, alter, repair,
clean or extend any heating, ventilation or exhaust system, manufactured
fireplaces, fireplace stoves, stoves or other manufactured wood burning
devices, incinerators, chimneys or vents.  The holder of this license is the
only person allowed to install furnaces.



   b.   The holder of a refrigeration license may alter, install,
repair, clean or extend any cooling or refrigeration system.



   c.   The holder of a steam/hot water license may install, alter,
repair, clean or extend any hot water low-pressure steam system.



   d.   The holder of a Minnesota builders contractor license
certificate may install, alter or repair manufactured fireplaces, fireplace
stoves, stoves, or other manufactured wood burning devices and accessory
items such as humidifiers, electronic air cleaners, air filter devices,
residential exhaust fans and window air conditioners and other self-contained
refrigeration units. The holder of this license cannot do any gas-piping work



2.   There is one category of the gas piping license. The holder of a gas
piping license may install, alter, repair, extend any gas piping system from
the house side of the meter to appliances and may install manufactured gas
and wood fireplaces.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



515.020.  Permit Required.



1.   A person must not do, or cause to be done, the work listed in the
definitions in section 515.005 without first obtaining a permit from the city
and paying the fee specified in chapter 710.



2.   A permit application must be accompanied by a complete set of plans
and specifications for the work to be done.  The building official may waive
this requirement if the building official believes that the nature of the
work is such that construction documents are not necessary to obtain
compliance with this code. If plans are submitted and a permit is issued, the
work must be completed in accordance with the approved plans.



3.   A permit must be obtained before the work begins.  A person, firm or
corporation that begins work specified in paragraph 1 without obtaining the
necessary permit is required to pay double the permit fee specified in
chapter 710 and is subject to the penalty provisions of this code. The
building official may waive this provision if the building official believes
that the work was required by an emergency.



4.   Permits for work in new structures will only be issued to contractors
licensed by the city.  Permits for work in existing structures will only be
issued to contractors licensed by the city or to resident owners who
homestead the property where the work is to be done.



5.   Every permit issued will become invalid unless the work authorized by
the permit is started within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days
after the work is started. The building official is authorized to grant one
or more written time extensions for periods not more than 180 days each. An
extension must be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
Renewal of an invalid permit will require payment of the full permit fee.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



515.025.  Inspection.



A person, firm or corporation who does or causes to be done any work that
requires a permit under section 515.020(1) must immediately notify the city
upon completion of the work that it is ready for inspection and testing.  A
permittee must also notify the city before any portion of the work is
connected within a building, and give the city reasonable time and
opportunity to inspect the work before construction progresses to a point
where the work can no longer be examined and inspected.  A permittee must
not cover work until it has been inspected and accepted by the city.  A
person must not occupy new premises until the city has had an opportunity to
make a final inspection of the premises, has approved the installation, and
has issued a certificate of occupancy.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



515.030.  Enforcement.



It is the duty of the community development director and authorized agents to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



SECTION 520.  REGULATION OF BUILDING MOVES.



520.005.  Building Code Requirements.



Buildings or structures, including manufactured homes, that have been
previously used or occupied for any purpose and that are moved into or within
the city must comply with the provisions of the city building code for new
buildings or structures.



520.010.  Moving Permit Required.



A person must not move or cause to be moved a building or structure including
manufactured homes, that have been previously used or occupied for any
purpose, into, within, or out of the city without first obtaining a permit to
do so.



520.015.  Moving Permit Application.



An application for a moving permit must include the following:



1.   a certificate from the city building official that the building or
structure meets the requirements of the city building code;



2.   a list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties
wholly or partially within a radius of 400 feet from the boundaries of the
land on which the building or structure will be located, as those names and
addresses appear on the certified records of the Hennepin county auditor;



3.   the legal description of the premises from which the building is to
be moved;



4.   the legal description of the premises to which the building will be
moved;



5.   a certificate of survey from a registered land surveyor showing the
location of the building on the lot;



6.   a rendering showing the proposed:



   a.   grade and elevation as it relates to adjacent lots;



   b.   elevation of the first floor; and



   c.   drainage and fill requirements.



7.   photos showing:



   a.   all sides of the building or structure; and



   b.   the proposed building locations.



8.   the highways, streets, and other property over which the building is
proposed to be moved;



9.   the proposed moving date and hours;



10.   evidence that the building and lot from which it is to be removed
are free from mortgages, liens or other encumbrances, and that all taxes and
other charges against the lots from which, and to which, the building is to
be moved are currently paid;



11.   evidence, such as a bill of sale, showing that the applicant is
entitled to move the building;



12.   the permit fee specified in section 710;



13.   a bond or certified check from the property owner for $2,000 payable
to the city to ensure that the structure is properly removed from the former
property, located on the proposed property and attached to the foundation in
compliance with the permit, building code, and this chapter;



14.   the name and address of the proposed building mover; and



15.   any additional information requested by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2006-24, adopted December 18, 2006; amended by Ord.
#2006-20, adopted November 6, 2006)



520.019.  Public Hearing.



After receipt of a completed application for moving a building to a location
within the city, a date must be set for a public hearing before the city
council.  Not less than 10 days before the public hearing, the city must
publish notice in the official newspaper and send notice by mail to the
applicant and to the owners of all properties located wholly or partially
within 400 feet from the boundaries of the land on which the building or
structure will be located. The notice must provide the time, date, and
location of the public hearing at which the application will be considered
and must invite public comment. The city council must hold the public hearing
before acting on the application.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-30, adopted October 13, 2008; added by Ord. 2006-24,
adopted December 18, 2006)



520.020.  Permit Issuance.



1.   The city council may grant a moving permit only after holding the
public hearing and only with an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of
the council members. The city council may refuse to issue the moving permit
if it finds that:



   a.   a requirement has not been met;



   b.   the building is too large to move or that no routes are
available to be used without endangering persons or property or seriously
inconveniencing traffic in the city. Limited vegetation trimming or removal
may be allowed in the permit;



   c.   the proposed route includes use of private property, and no
consent from the owner has been obtained;



   d.   people or property in the city would be endangered by moving
the building;



   e.   the proposed building mover's equipment is unsafe, and persons
and property would be endangered by its use;



   f.   the proposed building mover does not have a current license
issued by the state under Minn. Stat. § 221.81;



   g.   the proposed building mover has been shown to be unreliable and
irresponsible in complying with city requirements;



   h.   the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose
for which moved;



   i.   the building to be moved is not worth at least 50 percent of
the cost of a similar new building;



   j.   the building in the proposed location in the city would fail to
comply with a provision of this code, and proper assurances of future
compliance have not been given; or



   k.   the building in the proposed location in the city would not
conform to the general character of, and the types of architecture in, the
neighborhood.



2.   Applications to move a building out of the city will be acted upon by
the community development director. The director may deny an application
based on the criteria listed in paragraph 1, except subparagraphs h through k.



3.   The permit must specify the permitted days, hours, route, movement,
parking, speed limit, and vegetation removal for the proposed move.



4.   The city council or the community development director may impose
additional conditions or requirements in the permit.



5.   The issuance of a city permit does not relieve the obligation to
obtain required permits from other governmental agencies and does not permit
the use of private property except when consent of the landowner has been
received.



(Amended by Ord. #2008-30, adopted October 13, 2008; amended by Ord. 2006-24,
adopted December 18, 2006)



520.025.  Supplemental Information.



1.   At least ten city business days before the actual move is to take
place, the applicant must submit to the community development director the
following supplemental information:



   a.   the proposed moving date and hours;



   b.   a copy of the proposed building mover’s state license and an
insurance certificate showing that the mover has current insurance coverage
required by state law;



   c.   the identity of the motor vehicle and trailer to be used,
including the make, model, model year, license number, and vehicle
identification number, and evidence that the motor vehicle, trailers, and
other equipment is in compliance with state and federal requirements for use
on public highways;



   d.   a signed statement from the applicant or a contractor agreeing
to fence or secure the foundation at the original building location, to fill
the foundation cavity, and to keep the area safe and clean, in accordance
with section 520.030(5), (6), and (7), if that location is in the city;



   e.   a signed statement from the applicant or a contractor agreeing
to properly abandon any wells and fill any septic tanks in accordance with
Section 520.030(8), if the original building location is in the city; and



   f.   a signed statement from the applicant or a contractor agreeing
to connect the building to its new foundation in accordance with Section
520.030(9).



2.   A permit for a building move is void if the additional information
required in paragraph 1 above is not provided in a timely manner.



3.   In consultation with the chief of police and the public works
director, the community development director may deny the proposed moving
date and hours if the move at that time would unreasonably interfere with the
public's use of a street or highway or would otherwise adversely affect the
public interest.  The director may also deny use of the proposed building
mover if its equipment is not in compliance with federal and state
requirements, it does not have a current license or insurance as required by
state law, or it has previously been unreliable or irresponsible in complying
with city requirements.  The director must notify the applicant in writing
of a denial at least five city business days before the proposed date, giving
the reasons for denial.  The applicant may file a written appeal of this
decision with the city clerk, to be heard by the city council at its next
available meeting, unless the applicant selects a later date.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-01, adopted January 6, 2003)



520.030.  Building Moving Conditions.



1.   A licensed building mover must comply with the following when moving
buildings into, within, or out of the city.  The building mover must:



   a.   move a building only in compliance with the permit conditions
and only over the streets and other property designated for that use in the
permit;



   b.   obtain prior permission from the chief of police for any
changes in the route or times for the move;



   c.   notify the police department at least one hour in advance of
the proposed move;



   d.   notify the public works director of all damage done to property
during the move within 24 hours after the damage has occurred;



   e.   be responsible for all damage caused by the move and pay the
cost to correct the damage or the value of the property lost because of the
damage;



   f.   comply with state and county requirements for over-sized
vehicles and loads;



   g.   use only the motor vehicle and trailer identified in the
supplemental information or obtain police department approval of any
substitution before the move;



   h.   when necessary, erect and maintain barricades across the
streets to protect the public from damage or injury because of the move;



   i.   complete the move within 48 hours after either:



      (1)   the building crosses into the city, if moved from a
location outside the city; or



      (2)   the building is raised from its original foundation, if
moved from a location within the city.



      A move is complete when the structure has been moved to the
precise location shown on the approved certificate of survey and the
equipment used to move the building has been removed;



   j.   pay the expense of employees or other individuals who are
required by the city to accompany or monitor the movement of the building for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the moving permit or protecting the
public health, safety or welfare; and



   k.   comply with all applicable state laws and local ordinances.



2.   A building mover cannot transfer its obligations under paragraph 1 to
the building owner or any other party, except where the responsibility for
damage is insured by a contract for liability insurance.



3.   Within 120 days after the date of the permit issuance, the building
must be moved, the building code requirements met as they apply to the
structure at its new location, and a certificate of occupancy for the
building received.



4.   A person must not cause or permit a structure that has been raised
from a foundation and placed on supports to: (a) remain at a location or
locations in the city, other than the new permanent location, for longer than
48 hours; or (b) remain on any property without the property owner’s
permission.



5.   The applicant, the landowner and the contractor hired to be
responsible for the work must not leave rubbish or other materials at the
site from which the building is moved or otherwise allow that site to remain
in an unsafe, unsanitary or unsightly condition.



6.   The applicant, the landowner and the contractor hired to be
responsible for a building foundation must not allow an open and unattended
foundation to remain unsecured for more than a two-hour period immediately
after a building has been raised from the foundation.  Foundations must be
fenced or secured in some other manner to prevent uninvited access,
particularly by children, to the open foundation.



7.   The applicant, the landowner and the contractor hired to be
responsible for a building foundation must not allow a foundation from which
a building has been removed to remain open longer than seven days after the
building was removed.  Foundations must be removed and the cavity filled
with appropriate earth materials that are graded level with the adjacent
areas, or be used in the construction of a new building if approved by the
building official.



8.   No later than the time required by paragraph 7 above for filling the
foundation, the applicant, the landowner, or a contractor hired to be
responsible must property abandon any wells and fill any septic tanks
remaining on the original site of the building, if these will no longer be
used.



9.   The building must be connected to the foundation at its new location
in accordance with the city building code within ten days after the move has
been completed.



10.   Variances from the provisions of this section may be granted by the
community development director upon good cause shown.



11.   A failure to comply with a permit provision, building code
requirement, or condition in this chapter will result in a forfeiture of the
bond or cash deposit.  The city may use the bond proceeds or cash deposit to
complete unfinished work required by the permit, the building code, or this
chapter, or to pay for any damage caused by the move.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-01, adopted January 6, 2003)



520.035.  Enforcement.



This chapter will be enforced by the community development director, the
chief of police, and authorized agents.



SECTION 525.  HOUSING CODE; BUILDING MAINTENANCE.



525.005.  Adoption by Reference.



The 2015 International Property Maintenance Code published by International
Code Conference, Inc., including the appendix, is adopted by reference as the
housing code for the city.  One copy of the code will be kept on file in the
city clerk's office.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-06, effective June 17, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2004-05,
adopted February 9, 2004)



525.010.  Housing Advisory and Appeals Board.



Until it appoints a housing advisory and appeals board, the city council will
have the duties of that board as described in section 111 of the
International Property Maintenance Board.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-06, effective June 17, 2017)



525.015.  Building Maintenance and Appearance.



Buildings, fences, and other structures must be maintained in a manner to
avoid a public nuisance as defined in section 845.015.  Those that are
public nuisances are subject to abatement under section 845.



525.020.  Enforcement.



The community development director has the authority to enforce this chapter,
including the authority to issue citations in lieu of arrest or continued
detention. The director has the authority to issue orders for the evacuation
of buildings when there is an immediate threat to public health or safety.
The occupants may appeal this decision by submitting a written request to the
city clerk for a hearing before the city council. This hearing will be
scheduled as quickly as reasonably possible.



CHAPTER 6:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Section



   600.   LIQUOR LICENSES.



   605.   CHARITABLE GAMBLING ACTIVITIES.



   610.   PAWNBROKERS.



   615.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   620.   [REPEALED].



   625.   TOBACCO SALES.



   630.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.



   635.   [REPEALED].



   640.   PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT.

   645.   PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER SUPPLIERS



SECTION 600.  LIQUOR LICENSES.



600.005.  Provisions of State Law Adopted.



The provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter 340A, commonly known as the liquor act,
are adopted and made a part of this ordinance as if set out in full. 
Whenever there is an inconsistency between the provisions of Minn. Stat.
chapter 340A and the provisions of this ordinance, the more restrictive
governs.



600.010.  Definitions.



In addition to the definitions set forth in Minn. Stat. chapter 340A, the
following words are defined for the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   “License” includes a permit for consumption and display, unless
otherwise indicated.



2.   “Licensee” means any person to whom a license has been issued
under the provisions of this ordinance.



3.   “Liquor” includes both 3.2 percent malt liquor and intoxicating
liquor.



4.   “Minor” means any person under the age of 21 years.



5.   “Person” means any individual, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability company, club or other organization.



6.   “Sale” and “purchase” include all barters, gifts, sales and
any other means used to obtain or furnish alcoholic beverages.



7.   “Restaurant” has the meaning given to the term by Minn. Stat. §
340A.101, subd. 25, except that these establishments must have facilities for
seating not fewer than 100 guests at one time for on-sale intoxicating liquor
licenses.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015; amended by Ord. 2005-10,
adopted April 25, 2005)



600.015.  License/Permit Required.



1.   Except as provided below, a person must not directly or indirectly,
on any pretense or by any device, sell, barter, keep for sale, or otherwise
dispose of alcoholic beverages as part of a commercial transaction without
having obtained the appropriate license from the city.



2.   A business establishment or club that does not hold an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license must not directly or indirectly allow the
consumption and display of intoxicating liquor or knowingly serve any liquid
for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first having
obtained a permit from the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2005-10, adopted April 25, 2005)



600.020.  Persons Eligible.



1.   A license may be issued only to a person who is:



   a.   eligible for a license under Minn. Stat. § 340A.402; and



   b.   a proprietor of the establishment for which the license is
sought.



2.   No license may be issued to a person who is:



   a.   ineligible under state law; or



   b.   not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the
business operated under the license.



3.   No license may be issued if the representative of the applicant, as
specified in this subdivision, does not satisfy the residency requirements of
this subdivision. The specified representative must be a natural person and
must be, in the case of an individual applicant, the individual; in the case
of a partnership applicant, the managing partner; and in the case of a
corporate or other applicant, the manager or assistant manager with the
authority to receive legal process.  The specified representative must
reside within 75 miles of city hall. The required residency must be
established by the time the license is issued and must be maintained
throughout the existence of the license and all renewals.  The time for
establishing residency may, for good cause, be extended by the council.



4.   No more than one off-sale intoxicating liquor license, nor more than
two on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be directly or indirectly issued
to any one person or for any one place in this city.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015)



600.025.  Places Ineligible.



1.   No license may be issued for any place or any business ineligible for
a license under state law.



2.   No license may be granted for operation on any premises on which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city are delinquent and
unpaid.



3.   No license may be issued under sections 600.030(1), 600.035(1) or
600.035(2) of this code unless the applicant makes a bona fide estimation
that at least 50 percent of the gross receipts of the establishment during
its first year of business will be attributable to the sale of food.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-06, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2005-10,
adopted April 25, 2005)



600.030.  3.2 Percent Malt Liquor Licenses.



The city council may issue the following types of 3.2 percent malt liquor
licenses.



1.   “On-sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor” Licenses. Retail “on-sale 3.2
percent malt liquor” licenses obtained pursuant to this ordinance will
permit the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors for consumption on the
licensed premises and will be issued only to restaurants, hotels, bona fide
clubs and establishments used exclusively for the sale of nonintoxicating
malt beverages with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.



2.   “Off-sale 3.2 Percent Malt Liquor” Licenses. Retail “off-sale
3.2 percent malt liquor” licenses obtained pursuant to this ordinance will
permit the licensee to sell 3.2 percent malt liquors in original packages for
consumption off the premises only.



3.     "Off-sale brew pub 3.2 percent malt liquor" licenses may be issued
only to a brewer who holds a state license issued under Minn. Stat. §
340A.301, subd. 6, clause (d) and a city-issued on-sale 3.2 percent malt
liquor license for a restaurant operated in the place of manufacture.  The
off-sale brew pub malt liquor license authorizes the off-sale of 3.2 percent
malt liquor produced and packaged on the premises. The license is subject to
the requirements of this section and Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subd. 7(b).



4.     "Off-sale small brewer 3.2 percent malt liquor" licenses may be
issued only to a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the state
pursuant to Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subd. 6, clause (c), (i) or (j).  The
license authorizes the brewer to sell, at off-sale, 3.2 percent malt liquor
that has been produced and packaged by the brewer at its licensed premises in
64-ounce containers commonly known as "growlers" or in 750 milliliter
bottles.  The license is subject to the requirements of this section and
Minn. Stat. § 340A.301, subd. 6d.



5.   “Temporary” Licenses.



   a.   A temporary on-sale license for 3.2 percent malt liquor may be
issued to a club or charitable, religious or nonprofit organization subject
to the following:



      (1)   submission of a completed application to the director of
community development at least 60 days in advance of the event for which the
license is requested;



      (2)   submission of evidence of insurance with the same
coverage limits and provisions as is required for the issuance of an
“on-sale” or “off-sale” license for an establishment with sales of
3.2 percent malt liquor of $25,000 or more per year;



      (3)   posting of a performance bond in the amount of $1,000;



      (4)   payment of the license fee specified in section 710;



      (5)   submission of a list of responsible persons who may be
contacted in case of any emergency.  Those persons must be residents of the
twin cities metropolitan area as defined by Minn. Stat. § 473.121, subd.
2.  At least one of the listed persons must be present on the licensed
premises during all hours of sale.



      (6)   submission of other information as may be required by
the city council.



   b.   The license may be issued for a specified period of time, not
to exceed three consecutive days, after a hearing on the matter by the city
council. Notice of the hearing must be published in the official newspaper at
least ten days before the date of the hearing.



   c.   The license may be issued for an event to take place on public
property, including in or near any school building.



6.   Exemptions. Any person holding an on-sale intoxicating liquor license
may sell 3.2 percent malt beverages at on-sale without obtaining a license
under this section.  Any person holding an off-sale intoxicating liquor
license may sell 3.2 percent malt beverages at off-sale without obtaining a
license under this section.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-06, adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2008-22,
adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. 2005-10, adopted April 25, 2005)



600.035.  Intoxicating Liquor Licenses.



The city council may grant the following types of intoxicating liquor
licenses.



1.   “On-sale intoxicating” licenses may be issued only to hotels,
clubs, and restaurants.  A license may be issued to clubs and
congressionally chartered veterans organizations if they have been in
existence for at least three years and liquor sales will only be to members
and bona fide guests. A restaurant that holds an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license may also operate under a caterer’s permit issued by the Minnesota
commissioner of public safety, if the operation is in accordance with state
law.



2.   “On-sale wine” licenses may be issued to restaurants for the sale
of wine not exceeding 14 percent alcohol by volume and for consumption on the
licensed premises only in conjunction with the sale of food. An on-sale wine
license may only be issued to a restaurant that has seating for at least 25
guests at one time.



3.     "On-sale brewer taproom" licenses may be issued only to the holder
of a brewer's license issued by the state and in accordance with Minn. Stat.
§ 340A.26.



4.   "On-sale brew pub" licenses may be issued only to a brew pub in
accordance with Minn. Stat. § 340A.24.



5.  "On-sale microdistillery cocktail room" licenses may be issued only to
the holder of a microdistillery license issued by the state of Minnesota and
in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 340A.22.



6.   "On-sale culinary class" license may be issued to a business
establishment that  is not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license and that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or
cooking classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance
reservation required. The license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each
participant in each class, at no additional cost to the participant, up to a
maximum of six ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor,
during and as part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises
only. All provisions of city code section 600 that apply to on-sale
intoxicating liquor licenses apply to licenses issued under this subdivision,
except section 600.055 and other provisions inconsistent with this
subdivision.



7.   “Off-sale intoxicating” licenses may be issued only to exclusive
liquor stores and will permit “off-sales” of intoxicating liquor and 3.2
percent malt liquor.  As an incident to these sales, ice, soft drinks and
all forms of tobacco may also be sold.



8.     "Off-sale brew pub malt liquor" licenses may be issued only to the
holder of an on-sale brew pub license, in accordance with Minn. Stat. §
340A.24.  The off-sale brew pub malt liquor license authorizes the off-sale
of malt liquor produced and packaged on the premises.



9.     "Off-sale small brewer malt liquor" licenses may be issued only to
a brewer who holds a brewer license issued by the Minnesota commissioner of
public safety, in acordance with Minn. Stat. § 340A.28.  The license
authorizes the brewer to sell, at off-sale, malt liquor that has been
produced and packaged by the brewer at its licensed premises in 64-ounce
containers commonly known as "growlers" or in 750 milliliter bottles.



10.  "Off-sale microdistillery" licenses may be issued only to a
microdistillery in accordance with Minn. Stat. § 340A.22.  The license
authorizes the microdistillery to sell, at off-sale, one 375 milliliter
bottle per customer per day of product manufactured on-site, subject to the
requirements of § 340A.22.



11.   A license for “Sunday sales” at on-sale may be issued only to a
hotel or restaurant to which an “on-sale” license has been issued. A
license for Sunday sales at off-sale may be issued only to a brewer that
holds an off-sale brew pub malt liquor license or an off-sale small brewer
malt liquor license, and Sunday off-sales may only be made between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.  No Sunday sales license is needed for
“on-sale wine” licensees.  Except in the case of “on-sale wine”
licensees, no Sunday sales of intoxicating liquor may be made without a
license for Sunday sales.



12.   A “consumption and display permit” may be issued to an
organization that complies with the requirements of Minn. Stat. § 340A.414
and that has obtained a permit from the commissioner of public safety.  No
business establishment or club that does not hold an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license may directly or indirectly allow the consumption and display
of alcoholic beverages or knowingly serve any liquid for the purpose of
mixing with intoxicating liquor in the city without first obtaining a permit
from the city.



13.   “Temporary on-sale licenses” may be issued only to (a) a club or
charitable, religious, or other nonprofit organization that has been in
existence for at least three years or (b) a brewer who manufacturer fewer
than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year, in connection with a social
event sponsored by the organization holding the temporary license.  The
licenses are subject to the same conditions listed in 600.030(5) except that
the time period may not exceed four consecutive days. The insurance
requirements of Minnesota Statutes section 340A.409, subdivisions 1 through
3a, apply to a temporary license issued to a brewer under this subdivision. 
The number of temporary licenses issued may not exceed the number of
temporary licenses established by state law.



14.   “Temporary consumption and display permits” may be issued for
one day to nonprofit organizations in conjunction with social events
sponsored by the organization in the city. No more than ten temporary permits
may be issued in one year.  The permits are subject to the same conditions
listed in 600.030(5).



15.   “Temporary off-sale wine licenses” may be issued to allow for
the off-sale of vintage wine at an auction.  The wine must be at least five
years old and of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for
sale by any wholesaler in Minnesota.  No more than 600 cases of wine may be
sold at any auction, and each license may not exceed three consecutive days.



16.   Exemption.  A person who holds an on-sale wine license and an
on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license, may sell intoxicating malt liquors
at on-sale without an additional on-sale license.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015; amended by Ord. 2014-06,
adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2009-09, adopted July 13, 2009;
amended by Ord. 2008-22, adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. 2005-10,
adopted April 25, 2005)



600.040.  License Application.



Every person desiring a liquor license or permit under this ordinance must
file with the director of community development a verified written
application in the form prescribed and approved by the commissioner of public
safety of the state of Minnesota.  In addition to the information required
on the prescribed application form and information required by any other
officer or office of the state of Minnesota, the application made to the city
must include the items listed below. A person must not make a false statement
or material omission in a license application.  Any false statement or
material omission is grounds for denying or revoking a license.



1.   The true name, place and date of birth, street residence address, and
phone number of the applicant.



2.    The name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate of assumed name required by state law.



3.    Whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business and
if not, who is.



4.    Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other
than his/her true name, and if so, what was the name, or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used.



5.    Whether the applicant is married or single and, if married, giving
all the information about said spouse as is required about the applicant by
subdivisions 1 and 6 through 10 of this section.



6.    Street address at which applicant has lived during the preceding ten
years.



7.   Kind, name and location of every business or occupation applicant has
been engaged in during the preceding ten years.



8.   Names and addresses of applicant's employers and partners, if any,
for the preceding ten years.



9.   Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been convicted of a
violation of any state law or local ordinance, other than a non-alcohol
related traffic offense.  If so, the applicant must furnish information as
to the time, place and offense for each conviction.



10.   Whether the applicant has ever been engaged as an employee or in
operating a saloon, hotel, restaurant, café, tavern or other business of a
similar nature.  If so, applicant must furnish information as to the place
and length of time.



11.   Whether the applicant has ever been in military service.  If so,
the applicant must, upon request, exhibit all discharges.



12.   Whether the applicant is a natural person, corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, unincorporated association or other business
entity.



13.   If the applicant is other than a natural person, the name(s) of the
owners, stockholders or partners thereof, giving all the information about
said owners, stockholders or partners as is required about the applicant by
subdivisions 1 through 15 of this section.  This subdivision 13 does not
apply to a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange. 
The requirement to provide additional information on owners does not apply to
persons who, together with spouses, parents, siblings, children, affiliated
trusts or parent or subsidiary business organizations, own less than a 10
percent interest in the entity for which the information is required to be
provided;



14.   If the applicant is other than a natural person, the name(s) of its
officers, giving all the information about said officers as is required about
the applicant by subdivisions 1 through 11 of this section and a certified
copy of the minutes of the meeting setting forth the officers;



15.   If the applicant is other than a natural person, the state in which
the applicant was organized and a true copy of organizational documents
applicable to the form of organization, such as certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation, partnership agreement, articles of organization or
certificate of assumed name required by state law;



16.   The names of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of,
or to be in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all information
about that person as is required in the case of an individual applicant;



17.   The floor number and street number where the sale of alcoholic
beverages is to be conducted and the rooms where the beverages are to be sold
or consumed. An applicant for an “on-sale” license must submit a floor
plan of the dining room, or dining rooms, which will be open to the public,
must show dimensions and must indicate the number of persons intended to be
served in each of the rooms. Whenever the application for an "on-sale"
license is for premises either planned or under construction or undergoing
substantial alteration, the application must be accompanied by a set of the
preliminary plans showing the design of the proposed premises to be
licensed.  If the plans are on file with the department of community
development, no further plans need to be filed;



18.   Information regarding the financial status of the applicant,
including the amount of the investment that the applicant has in the
business, land, building, premises, fixtures, furniture, or stock in trade,
and proof of the source of the money.  The applicant must submit a
certification that the applicant is the real party in interest, is
financially solvent, and has sufficient capital to responsibly operate the
licensed establishment . The certification must be on the city's approved
form and issued by an independent, licensed or certified professional such as
a lawyer or accountant;



19.   A list of responsible natural persons, including the names of
owners, managers and assistant managers, who may be notified or contacted by
state or city employees in case of emergency.  The listed persons must
reside within 75 miles of Minnetonka city hall;



20.   For each manager and assistant manager with responsibility for
service of liquor, the following information must be provided:



   a.   complete personal information requested on the city's form;



   b.   two sets of fingerprints and a driver's license or state-issued
photographic indentification card; and



   c.   such other information as the director may require.



21.    A business plan which shall include the following information:



   a.  hours of operation for the licensed premises, including a listing
of hours and days of the week when live entertainment, dancing, or amplified
music is allowed and/or provided;



   b.  a copy of the menu and a listing of the hours each day of the week
that food from the menu is available;



   c.  description of the alcohol server awareness program training that
the applicant will provide to all staff;



   d.  description of the type of entertainment, if any, that the
applicant intends to offer on the premises and where on the premises the
entertainment activity will be provided;



   e.  a security plan that describes the security features, including
personnel and equipment, that the applicant will employ and how they will be
utilized;



   f.  description of how the applicant will maintain the orderly
appearance and operation of the premises with respect to litter, graffiti and
refuse control; and



   g.  a sound and noise management plan that describes the purpose and
location of sound equipment and the hours and days of the week that amplified
music will be provided;



   h.  such other reasonable and pertinent information as the city
council may require. An applicant shall promptly notify the licensing
official, in writing, of any amendment to the submitted business plan.



22.   Other information which the director deems appropriate.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015; amended by Ord. 2008-22,
adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. 2005-10, adopted April 25, 2005)



600.045.  Fees.



1.   Every applicant for an “on-sale”, “off-sale”, “on-sale
wine”, "on-sale culinary class", or “Sunday sale” license or
consumption and display permit must pay to the city the investigation fee
specified in section 710.  This fee will be for the purpose of conducting a
preliminary background  investigation of the applicant.  If the council
believes that the public interest so warrants, it may require a similar
investigation at the time of renewal of any license.  If an investigation is
ordered by the city council at the time of license renewal, the applicant
must pay the fee specified above, except that the fee will be the smaller of
the stated dollar amount or the actual cost of the investigation.  There
will be no refund of the investigation fee for any person after the
investigation has begun.



2.   The annual fee for a liquor license will be as set forth in section
710.



3.   Each application for a license must be accompanied by payment of at
least 20 percent of the fee set forth in section 710 for the liquor license.
The remainder of the fee will be due at the time of issuance of the
license.  A refund of the amount paid pursuant to this provision will be
granted only if the application is withdrawn by the applicant or if the city
council denies the application.  All fees will be paid into the general fund.



4.   Each license, except consumption and display permits, will expire on
December 31st of the year in which it is issued.  Consumption and display
permits will expire on June 30 of each year.  Fees for licenses issued
during the license year will be prorated according to the number of months
remaining in the year.  For this purpose an unexpired fraction of a month
will be counted as a whole month which has elapsed.



5.   No refund of any fee will be made except as authorized by statute.



6.   The fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license will be reduced
by $100 if the following conditions are met:



   a.    the licensee agrees to have a private vendor train all
employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining
to the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the
responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;



   b.   the licensee agrees to post a policy requiring identification
checks for all persons appearing to be 30 years old or less; and



   c.   a cash award and incentive program is established by the
licensee, to award employees who catch underage drinkers, and a penalty
program is established to punish employees in the event of a failed
compliance check.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-09, adopted July 13, 2009; amended by Ord. 2008-22,
adopted August 25, 2008)



600.050.  Bond.



1.   The council may also require posting a separate surety bond or letter
of credit for the purpose of complying with council requirements regarding
screening, landscaping, or other site improvements.  These bonds must be in
an amount reasonably calculated to assure compliance with the requirements of
the city council and will be released upon compliance with those requirements.



2.   Operation of a licensed business without having on file with the city
at all times effective security as required in this section is a cause for
revocation or suspension of the license.



600.055.  Financial Responsibility.



1.   Every application for a liquor license must be accompanied by
evidence of adequate financial responsibility for liability in a form
permitted by Minn. Stat. § 340A.409, subd. 1. This provision does not apply
to "on-sale culinary class" licenses and to establishments exempt from
financial responsibility requirements by Minn. Stat. § 340A.409, subd. 4.



2.   A liability insurance policy must name the city of Minnetonka as an
additional insured and provide for the following minimum coverages:



   a.   $100,000 because of bodily injury to any one person in any one
occurrence, $200,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any
one occurrence, and $50,000 because of injury or destruction of property of
others in any one occurrence;



   b.   $100,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in any
one occurrence, and $200,000 for loss of means of support of two or more
persons in any one occurrence; and



   c.   $50,000 for other pecuniary loss of any one person in any one
occurrence, and $100,000 for other pecuniary loss of two or more persons in
any one occurrence.



3.   The liability policy must provide that it may not be canceled for any
cause either by the insured or the insurance company without first giving ten
days notice to the city in writing of that intention.  The policy must also
provide that any amount paid by the insurance company as a result of a claim
will not reduce the coverage available to pay subsequent claims.



4.   A person must not operate any business or conduct any activities
requiring a liquor license from the city without having in effect, and
evidence on file with the city of, the financial responsibility required by
this section.  The failure to have the financial responsibility in effect or
on file will be grounds for immediate revocation or suspension of a license.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; amended by Ord. 2010-12,
adopted September 13, 2010; amended by Ord. 2008-22, adopted August 25, 2008)



600.060.  Application Procedure.



1.   No liquor license of any kind, except temporary licenses, may be
issued until the police department has conducted an investigation of the
representations set forth in the application, the applicant's moral
character, and the applicant's financial status.  All applicants must
cooperate with this investigation.  Any false statement or material omission
made by the applicant during the course of the investigation will be grounds
for denying or revoking the license.



2.   No license may be issued until the council has held public hearings
in accordance with the following.



   a.   For 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, one public hearing must
be held before the city council at least ten days after notice of the time
and place has been published in the official newspaper.



   b.   For intoxicating liquor licenses and consumption and display
permits, two public hearings will be held at least 27 days apart.  Notice of
the hearings will be done in the same manner as that specified in section
300.09, subd. 3 for a zoning ordinance amendment affecting district
boundaries.



   c.   For temporary licenses, the public hearing will be held in
accordance with section 600.030(5).



   d.   At the public hearings, all persons interested in the matter
will be heard, and the hearings may be adjourned from time to time.  No
hearing is required for a renewal of a license, but the council may at its
option, hold a hearing.



3.   The city council may issue a license before an investigation, notice
and public hearing for:



   a.   an applicant who:



      (1)   had a liquor license within the previous five years for
the establishment that is specified in the application and that is continuing
to operate under a liquor license;



      (2)   wishes to resume operation of the business without
sufficient time, through no fault of his/her own, to meet the normal
procedural requirements;



      (3)   had no liquor license ordinance violation convictions,
suspensions or revocations during the prior licensed period; and



      (4)   otherwise qualifies and meets the requirements for a
license.



   (b)   an existing establishment that was covered by a liquor license
issued for the current year and that accepts reservations for private parties
in separate banquet rooms, as long as the interim liquor license allows sales
only to guests at the private parties.



   In these situations, the city council may immediately issue an interim
license to the applicant for a period no longer than 90 days, but the
applicant must proceed immediately through the specified requirements for an
investigation, notice, and public hearing.  At the public hearing the
council will decide whether the license should continue in effect or be
revoked.  The applicant will be treated as an applicant for a new license
and will receive no preference because of the interim license.



4.   After investigation and hearing, the council may, at its discretion,
grant or deny the application.  Each application requires five affirmative
votes by the city council for approval. No "on-sale wine" license, "off-sale
intoxicating" license, club "on-sale intoxicating" license, or consumption
and display permit may become effective until it, together with the security
furnished by the applicant, has been approved by the commissioner of public
safety.  Within ten days of issuing an "on-sale intoxicating" license or an
off-sale or on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license, the city must submit to
the commissioner of public safety the full name and address of each person
granted a license, the effective date of the license, and the name under
which the licensee will conduct the business.



5.   An application for a liquor license may be considered by the city
council at the same time an applicant is requesting any land use approvals
needed for the site, including site plan review, rezoning, or an amendment to
the comprehensive guide plan.  Final approval of a liquor license may not be
granted until the city council has given at least preliminary approval to any
necessary land use request.



6.   A liquor license is a privilege, not a right. Even if a person meets
the minimum requirements for a license, the city council is not obligated to
grant the license. The city council has broad discretion to decide if, where,
and how liquor is sold. The city council may limit the number of licenses,
when in its judgment, the welfare of the city suggests such action. The city
council may develop criteria for evaluating a license application.



7.   The city council may impose reasonable conditions on any license
issued or renewed under this section in order to promote public health,
safety, and welfare. The conditions may include regulations of such things as
the type of product sold, type of establishment, hours of operation, and
relationship or proximity to other uses.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015; amended by Ord. 2010-03,
adopted April 5, 2010; amended by Ord. 2005-10, adopted April 25, 2005)



600.061.  License Term, Renewal.



Except as otherwise provided, each license will expire on December 31st of
the year in which it is issued.  The application for the renewal of an
existing license must be made at least 90 days before the date of the
expiration of the license and must be made on the form which the city
provides.



(Amended by Ord. 2005-10, adopted April 25, 2005)



600.065.  Temporary Amendments to Liquor Licenses.



1.   After a public hearing held at least ten days after mailed notice to
all property owners within 400 feet of the licensed premises, the city
council may approve a temporary amendment to an existing on-sale, on-sale
wine, or Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor license to allow the sale of
liquor in an area outside the licensed premises if the council determines in
its sole discretion that the following criteria are met:



   a.   the area to be used must be immediately adjacent to the
licensed premises;



   b.   the area will be used in connection with a special event no
longer than two days in duration;



   c.   no more than three temporary amendments per year will be
allowed for a licensee at one establishment.  A special license issued to a
non-profit organization which contracts with the licensee for provision of
service will be counted as part of this total;



   d.   adequate measures will be taken to control access to the
additional area, to ensure that alcoholic beverages are not sold to minors
and are not carried outside of the licensed premises and the additional area;



   e.   adequate measures will be taken to ensure that there will be no
violation of the city's noise ordinance;



   f.   the use of the additional area will not decrease available
parking below that required by the zoning ordinance for the licensed premises;



   g.   the use of the additional area will not unreasonably impede
traffic circulation;



   h.   the licensee has obtained adequate liability insurance for the
additional area; and



   i.   the issuance of the temporary amendment would not be adverse to
the public health, safety and welfare.



2.   To obtain a temporary amendment, the licensee must submit an
application accompanied by:



   a.   a diagram showing the expanded area to be used;



   b.   a detailed description of the special event for which the area
will be used;



   c.   a detailed description of the security measures to be used;



   d.   evidence that the licensee has liability insurance to cover the
additional area;



   e.   evidence that the licensee has the right to use the additional
area; and



   f.   the fee specified in chapter 710.



600.070.  License Restrictions.



1.   Generally. Every license is subject to the conditions in the
following paragraphs, all other provisions of this ordinance, and of any
other applicable regulations, ordinance or state law.



2.   Maintenance of Peace. Every licensee is responsible for the conduct
of his or her place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in
it.  The act of any employee of the licensed premises authorized to sell
intoxicating liquor there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the
licensee is liable for all penalties provided by this ordinance equally with
the employee, except criminal penalties.



3.   Display of License. Every license to sell alcoholic beverages and
permit for consumption and display must be posted in a conspicuous place in
the premises for which it is used.



4.   Inspection. Every licensee must allow any peace officer, health
officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to enter,
inspect, and search the premises of the licensee at reasonable hours without
a warrant.



5.   Possession of Federal Stamps. No licensee may possess a federal
wholesale liquor dealer's special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.



6.   Consumption on Premises. A person must not consume any intoxicating
or 3.2 percent malt liquor on any licensed premises more than 30 minutes
following the time established by law for cessation of the sale of liquor. 
No person, except an employee of the licensed establishment, may remain on
the premises or site more than 30 minutes following the time established by
law for cessation of the sale of liquor.



7.   Death of Licensee. In the event of the death of a person holding a
license, the personal representative of that person is allowed to continue to
operate the business within the terms of the license for a period not to
exceed 90 days after the death of the licensee.



8.   Changes to Premises. Persons holding “on-sale” licenses, in
addition to being subject to the requirements of section 300.27 of this code,
must report any internal change to the licensed premises which materially
enlarges, expands, reconfigures, or alters the size of the area connected
with the consumption of liquor or the type of service offered by the
establishment, before the beginning of the work.  The report must be made to
the director of community development for review by the city council and may
result in altering the terms under which the license is granted. No work may
be done nor city permits issued for the work until the change is approved by
the city council.  Each day the licensee operates under the license after
beginning construction of the changes and before obtaining city council
approval constitutes a separate violation of this ordinance, resulting in a
mandatory minimum civil penalty of $100.00 per day.



9.   Gambling. A licensee must not keep, possess, or operate or permit the
keeping, possession or operation of, on the licensed premises or in any room
adjoining the licensed premises, any slot machine, dice or any gambling
device or apparatus, nor permit any gambling therein.  A licensee must not
permit the licensed premises or any portion of it, or any adjoining building
directly or indirectly under its control, to be used for any illegal
purpose.  Notwithstanding the above, gambling licensed and permitted by the
Minnesota charitable gambling board is allowed in connection with temporary
licenses and events, and sales sponsored by the Minnesota state lottery may
be made at any licensed establishment.



10.   Hours and Days. A licensee must not sell or permit the consumption
of alcoholic beverages except in compliance with the hours and days
established in Minn. Stat. § 340A.504.



11.   Consumption Outside Licensed Premises. A person must not possess
open containers of alcoholic beverages or consume alcoholic beverages on the
premises under the licensee's control outside of the licensed structure or in
any area of the licensed premises that was not designated for these
activities in the license application.



12.   Mandatory Training Seminars.



    a.   Generally.  Each licensee must have at least one
representative attend all mandatory liquor license training seminars
conducted by the city.  The representative need not be the same person each
time but must hold a position of responsibility in either the ownership or
management of the licensee.



   b.   New licensees. For 12 months after initial issuance of a
license, each new licensee must have a city-approved vendor train all
managers and employees who serve alcoholic beverages, within 60 days after
hire. The training must include the laws pertaining to the sale of alcohol,
the rules for identification checks, and the responsibilities of
establishments serving intoxicating liquors. An owner who works at the
establishment is considered a manager for this requirement.



13.   Health and Food Regulations. Each “on-sale” and “on-sale
wine” license has the continuing obligation to comply with all state and
local health and food-handling regulations.  At the time of application for
any new or renewed license, the city council may review the establishment's
health and food-handling inspection results.  In addition to other remedies
that it may have available, the council may place the license of any
“on-sale” or “on-sale wine” licensee on probationary status for up to
one year when inspections reveal the establishment has not achieved passing
scores.  During the probationary period, the licensee must take such action
as may be required to achieve passing scores, will be subject to subsequent
inspections for compliance, and will be subject to other conditions which the
council may impose.



14.   Sale of Food. Each licensee has the continuing obligation to have at
least 50 percent of gross receipts from the establishment attributable to the
sale of food during the license term.  This subdivision applies only to
licensees holding licenses issued under sections 600.030(1), 600.035(1) or
600.035(2) of this code.



   a.   For the purpose of this requirement, "establishment" includes
the food and beverage portion of a multi-service establishment.  Financial
records for the food and beverage portion must be maintained separately from
the records of the remainder of the establishment.



   b.   For the purpose of this section, "sale of food" includes gross
receipts attributable to the sale of food items, soft-drinks and nonalcoholic
beverages.  It does not include any portion of gross receipts attributable
to the nonalcoholic components of plain or mixed alcoholic beverages, such as
ice, soft-drink mixes or other mixes.



   c.   The council may require the production of such documents or
information, including but not limited to books, records, audited financial
statements or pro forma financial statements as it deems necessary or
convenient to enforce these provisions.  The council may also obtain its own
audit or review of such documents or information, and all licensees must
cooperate with such a review, including prompt production of requested
records.



   d.   In addition to other remedies that it may have available, the
council may place the license of any "on-sale" or "on-sale wine" licensee on
probationary status for up to one year, when the sale of food is reported, or
found to be, less than 50 percent of gross receipts for any business year. 
During the probationary period, the licensee must prepare any plans and
reports, participate in any required meetings, and take other action that the
council may require to increase the sale of food.



15.   Changes in Required Information. Each licensee has the continuing
duty to promptly notify the director of community development of any change
in the information or facts required to be furnished on the application for a
license.  This duty continues throughout the period of the license and
failure to comply with this section constitutes cause for revocation or
suspension of the license.



16.   Change in Managers. For each new manager or assistant manager
employed after the license is issued, a licensee must make the offer of
employment contingent upon the city's approval.  Each licensee must notify
the director of community development within ten days after any new manager
or assistant manager begins employment.  This notification must include the
information required in section 600.040(20).  Failure to provide complete
and timely information will subject the licensee to the penalties provided in
this code and to potential denial of a renewed license.  The director may
cause an investigation of the new managers and may disapprove the employment
of these personnel by notice to the licensee in writing.  The licensee may
appeal this decision to the city council by placing a request in writing to
the city clerk within ten days after the issuance of the notice.  A failure
to request an appeal waives the licensee's ability to contest the director's
decision.  After the appeal period has expired without an appeal, or the
city council has upheld the director's decision upon an appeal, no manager
who has been disapproved may operate in that capacity upon the licensed
premises.



17.   Transfer of License.



   a.   Generally. Each license is issued only to the applicant and for
the specific location on the premises that is described in the application
and that is approved by the city council. No license may be transferred to
another person or place without application to the council in the same manner
as an application for a new license.



   b.   Corporations. and other organizations. Transfer of 25 percent
or more of the ownership interest in a corporation or other organization or
of a controlling interest thereof, whichever is less, is deemed a transfer of
the license of a business organization licensee, except for a corporation
whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange or which is wholly owned
by a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange. If a
complete application for a new license is submitted to the city within 20
days after the transfer of corporate ownership takes place, a corporate
licensee may continue to operate under the current license, but only while
the new license application is pending. Each day a licensee operates under
the license after a transfer has taken place without complying with this is a
separate violation.



18.   Outdoor seating area. Each outdoor seating area that is part of the
licensed premises must be surrounded by a physical barrier that prevents
access to the area except through the licensed building.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015; amended by Ord. 2014-06,
adopted March 24, 2014; amended by Ord. 2009-09; adopted July 13, 2009;
amended by Ord. 2008-22, adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. 2008-06,
adopted March 24, 2008; amended by Ord. 2005-10, adopted April 25, 2005)



600.071.    Prohibitions.



1.   No sale of liquor may occur in connection with any athletic or
sporting event, musical concert, or similar event, unless specifically
allowed by the city council. This prohibition applies equally to sales of
liquor under licenses issued by the city and under permits issued by the
state of Minnesota.



2.   The holder of a permit issued by the state of Minnesota may not sell
or serve liquor outside of an enclosed building without the specific advance
approval of the city council.



(Section added by Ord. 2010-03; adopted April 5, 2010)



600.075.  Minors and Other Prohibited Persons.



1.   A person must not sell, give, barter, furnish, deliver or dispose of,
in any manner, either directly or indirectly, any liquor in any quantity, for
any purpose to a minor, or to an intoxicated person. The person taking an
order in a licensed establishment has the responsibility for determining if
the person placing the order is prohibited from receiving liquor under this
paragraph. If liquor is provided in violation of this paragraph, the person
who takes an order from a prohibited person and does not refuse service to
the prohibited person is guilty of a misdemeanor, whether or not the person
taking the order actually delivered the liquor.



2.   A minor must not enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of
liquor for the purpose of purchasing, or having served or delivered to
him/her any liquor or to consume any liquor, purchase or attempt to purchase
or have another purchase for him/ her, any intoxicating liquor.



3.   A person must not misrepresent or mistake his/her age or identity, or
the age or identity of any other person for the purpose of inducing any
licensee or any employee of any licensee, to sell, serve or deliver any
liquor to a minor.



4.   A minor must not have in his/her possession any liquor, with intent
to consume the same at a place other than the household of his/her parent or
guardian.  Possession of liquor at a place other than the household of the
minor's parent or guardian is prima facie evidence of intent to consume the
same at a place other than the household of his/her parent or guardian.



5.   No person under the age of 18 shall sell or serve alcoholic beverages
in any licensed premises.



(Amended by Ord. 2000-16, adopted August 14, 2000; amended by Ord. 99-23,
adopted September 27, 1999)



600.080.  Suspensions and Revocations.



The council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke any liquor license
or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation, or any
combination of these sanctions, upon a finding that the licensee or an agent
or employee of the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute,
regulation or ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages or the operation of
the licensed establishment, or failed to comply with a lawful license
condition imposed by the city or agreed to by the licensee.  No suspension
or revocation will take effect until the licensee has been afforded an
opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minn. Stat. §§ 14.57 to 14.70.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015)



600.085.  Penalty.



Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of
this ordinance is subject to the penalties established in chapter 13 of this
code.  A fine or sentence imposed will not affect the right of the city to
suspend or revoke the license of the licensee as the council deems
appropriate.



SECTION 605.  CHARITABLE GAMBLING ACTIVITIES.



605.005.  General Provisions.



A person or organization must not conduct gambling activities in the City
except when those activities are lawful gambling that is licensed or exempt
from licensing pursuant to the provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter 349.  For
purposes of this ordinance, “gambling” has the same meaning as in Minn.
Stat. § 609.75.



605.010.  Investigation.



1.   Requirement.  Any person or organization applying for a state
license to conduct lawful gambling within the city must submit to a
background investigation conducted by the city.  At the time that it files
its application for a license with the charitable gambling control board, the
person or organization must:



   a.   complete an investigation form provided by the city;



   b.   furnish any additional information required by the city; and



   c.   pay an investigation fee of $250.00.  This fee will be
refundable if the application is withdrawn and no investigation has been
started before the city receives this information.



2.   Exception.  A person or organization that is exempt from state
license requirements is not required to comply with these investigation
requirements.



3.   Renewals.  If the council determines that the public interest so
warrants, it may require a similar investigation at the time of any license
renewal.  If an investigation is ordered by the city council, the applicant
must comply with the requirements of paragraph 1, except that the fee will be
the smaller of the stated dollar amount or the actual investigation cost. 
Any difference between the stated amount and actual amount will be refunded
to the applicant.



605.015.  Reporting Requirements.



All organizations that conduct lawful gambling in the city must file with the
community development department, copies of all records and reports filed
with the charitable gambling control board pursuant to state law and rules. 
All such organizations must promptly notify the city of any change in the
identity of its gambling manager.



SECTION 610.  PAWNBROKERS,  PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS, AND SECONDHAND DEALERS.



610.005.  Purpose.



The city council finds that pawnbrokers, precious metal dealers, and certain
secondhand dealers potentially provide an opportunity for the commission and
concealment of crimes.  These businesses have the ability to receive and
transfer stolen property easily and quickly.  The city council also finds
that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving
these businesses.  The purpose of this section is to prevent these
businesses assisting in the commission of crimes, to identify criminal
activities through timely collection and sharing of certain transaction
information, and to ensure that such businesses comply with basic consumer
protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.010.  Definitions.



1.   “Billable transaction” means a reportable transaction except
renewals, redemptions or extensions of existing pawns on items previously
reported and continuously in the licensee's possession, voided transactions,
and confiscations.



2.   "Gemstone" means a precious or semiprecious stone that may be used as
a jewel when cut and polished.



3.   “Item containing precious metal” means an item made in whole or
in part of metal and containing more than one percent by weight of silver,
gold or platinum.



4.   “Minor” means a natural person under the age of 18 years.



5.   “Pawnbroker” means a person who loans money on deposit or pledge
of personal property or other valuable thing; who deals in the purchasing of
personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling it back
again at a stipulated price; or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage
on personal property, taking possession of the property or a part of it.  If
a pawnbroker business includes buying personal property previously used,
rented, or leased, the provisions of this section are applicable.  Any bank,
savings and loan association, or credit union is not a pawnbroker for
purposes of this section.



6.   “Person” means one or more natural persons; a partnership,
including a limited partnership; a corporation; including a foreign,
domestic, or nonprofit corporation; a trust; a political subdivision of the
state; or another business organization.



7.   “Precious metal dealer” means a person engaging in the business
of buying coins or secondhand items containing precious metal including
jewelry, watches, eating utensils, candlesticks, and religious and decorative
objects.



8.   “Precious metals” means silver, gold, or platinum.



9.   “Reportable transaction” means a transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer in which merchandise
is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment or trade except:



   a.   the bulk purchase or consignment of new or used merchandise
from a merchant, manufacturer or wholesaler having an established permanent
place of business, and the retail sale of said merchandise, if the
pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer maintains a record
describing the items in each transaction and marks each item in a manner that
relates it to that transaction record; and



   b.   retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally received
by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and redemption periods
have expired.



10.   "Secondhand dealer" means a person in the business of buying, or
receiving as "trade-in," secondhand items that are in one or both of the
following categories: (a) consumer electronics, including peripherals and
electronic media, and (b) jewelry and gemstones. A secondhand dealer does not
include a person who buys or receives fewer than 25 such items within any
period of 12 consecutive months.



11.   “Secondhand item” means tangible personal property, excluding
motor vehicles, that has been previously used, rented, owned or leased.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2011-12, adopted June
20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



610.015.  License Required.



A person must not engage in the business of pawnbroker, precious metal
dealer, or secondhand dealer within the city unless the person is currently
licensed under this section.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.020.  Exceptions to License Requirement.



A person conducting the following transactions is not required to obtain a
license under this section:



1.   transactions at occasional “garage” or “yard” sales, or
estate sales or farm auctions held at the owner's residence, except that
precious metal dealers must comply with the requirements of Minn. Stat. §§
325f.734 to 325f.742, for these transactions;



2.   transactions regulated by Minn. Stat. § 80a;



3.   transactions regulated by the federal commodity futures commission
act;



4.   transactions involving the purchase of precious metal grindings,
filings, slag, sweeps, scraps, or dust from an industrial manufacturer,
dental lab, dentist, or their agent;



5.   transactions involving the purchase of photographic film, such a
lithographic and x-ray film or silver residue or flake recovered in
lithographic and x-ray film processing;



6.   transactions in which the secondhand item containing precious metal
is exchanged for a new item containing precious metal and the value of the
new item exceeds the value of the secondhand item, except that a person who
is a precious metal dealer by engaging in a transaction that is not exempted
by this section must comply with the requirements of Minn. Stat. §§
325f.734 to 325f.742;



7.   transactions between precious metal dealers if both dealers are
licensed under Minn. Stat. § 325f.733, or if the seller's business is
located outside of the state and the item is shipped from outside the state
to a dealer licensed under Minn. Stat. § 325f.733; and



8.   transactions in which the buyer of the secondhand item containing
precious metal is engaged primarily in the business of buying and selling
antiques, the items are resold in an unaltered condition except for repair,
the items are resold at retail, and the buyer paid less than $2,500 for
secondhand items containing precious metals purchased within any period of 12
consecutive months.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.025.  Persons Ineligible.



1.   No license may be issued to a person who:



   a.   is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;



   b.   is a minor at the time the application is filed;



   c.   has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
licensed occupation and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of pawnbroker or
precious metal dealer under Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3, or a person not
of good moral character and repute;



   d.   holds a liquor license under section 600;



   e.   in the judgment of the city council is not the real party in
interest or beneficial owner of the business operated under the license;



   f.   has had a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer's, or secondhand
dealer's license revoked anywhere within five years of the license
application; or



   g.   in the case of an individual, is not a resident of the twin
cities; in the case of a partnership, the managing partner is not a resident
of the twin cities; or in the case of a corporation, the manager is not a
resident of the twin cities.  The required residency must be established by
the time the license is issued and maintained throughout the existence of the
license and all renewals.  The time for establishing residency within the
twin cities may, for good cause, be extended by the council.  For the
purposes of this paragraph, the twin cities means the seven-county
metropolitan area defined by Minn. Stat. § 473.121, subd. 2.



(Amended by Ord. #2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.030.  Places Ineligible.



1.   No license may be issued for a place or a business ineligible for a
license under city ordinance or state law.



2.   No license may be issued for operation in a residential zoning
district.



3.   No license may be issued for a place or business that holds a liquor
license.



4.   No license may be granted for operation on a premises for which
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or other government
agency are delinquent and unpaid.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



610.035.  License Application.



In addition to information that is required by the county under Minn. Stat.
§ 471.924, every application for a license under this ordinance must be made
on a form supplied by the city, must be verified and must contain the
following information:



1.   If the applicant is a natural person:



   a.   the name, place and date of birth, street residence address,
and phone number of the applicant;



   b.   the name of the business if it is to be conducted under a
designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and a
certified copy of the certificate of assumed name required by state law;



   c.   whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business
and if not, who is;



   d.   whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name
other than his/her true name, and if so, what was the name, or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used;



   e.   whether the applicant is married or single.  If married, the
true name, place and date of birth and street address of applicant's spouse;



   f.   street address at which applicant and spouse have lived during
the preceding ten years;



   g.   kind, name and location of every business or occupation
applicant and spouse have been engaged in during the preceding ten years;



   h.   names and addresses of applicant's and spouse's employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding ten years;



   i.   whether the applicant or spouse has ever been convicted of a
violation of any state law or local ordinance, other than a non-alcohol
related traffic offense.  If so, the applicant must furnish information as
to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had;



   j.   whether the applicant or spouse has ever been engaged as an
employee or in operating a pawnshop, precious metal dealership, or secondhand
dealership or other business of a similar nature.  If so, applicant must
furnish information as to the time, place and length of time;



   k.   whether the applicant has ever been in military service.  If
so, the applicant must, upon request, exhibit all discharges;



2.   If the applicant is a partnership:



   a.   the name and address of all partners and all information
concerning each partner as is required of an individual applicant as above;



   b.   the name(s) of the managing partner or partners, and the
interest of each partner, or partners in the business;



   c.   a true copy of the partnership agreement and a copy of the
certificate of assumed name required by state law;



3.   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:



   a.   the name, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



   b.   a true copy of the certificate of incorporation, articles of
incorporation or association agreements;



   c.   the name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge
of, or to be in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all information
about the person as is required in the case of an individual applicant; and



   d.   a list of all persons who, single or together with their
spouse, own or control an interest in the corporation or association in
excess of five percent or who are officers of the corporation or association,
together with their addresses and all information as is required for a single
applicant;



4.   For all applicants:



   a.   information regarding the financial status of the applicant,
including the amount of the investment that the applicant has in the
business, land, building, premises, fixtures, furniture, or stock in trade,
and proof of the source of the money. The city may require the applicant to
submit a certification that the applicant is the real party in interest, is
financially solvent, and has sufficient capital to responsibly operate the
licensed establishment. The certification must be on the city's approved form
and issued by an independent, licensed or certified professional such as a
lawyer or accountant;



   b.   a list of responsible persons, including the names of owners,
managers and assistant managers, who may be notified or contacted by state or
city employees in case of emergency.  These persons  must be residents of
the twin cities metropolitan area as defined by Minn. Stat. § 473.121, subd.
2;



   c.   for each manager and assistant manager with responsibility for
operation of the business, the following information must be provided:



      (1)   complete personal information requested on the city's
form;



      (2)   two sets of fingerprints and a photograph; and



      (3)   such other information as the city may require.



   d.   whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker, or precious
metal dealer, or secondhand dealer license from any other governmental unit
and whether the applicant is licensed under Minn. Stat. § 471.924 or Minn.
Stat. §§ 325F.731 to 325F.744;



   e.   whether the applicant has ever been denied a pawnbroker,
precious metal dealer, or secondhand dealer license from any other
governmental unit;



   f.   the location of the business premises;



   g.   the legal description of the premises to be licensed including
a map of the area for which the license is sought, showing dimensions,
locations of buildings, street access and parking facilities;



   h.   whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are
due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not
paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid; and



   i.   other information that the city deems appropriate.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.040.  Fees.



1.   Investigation Fee. Every applicant for a new license must pay to the
city the investigation fee specified in section 710.005 of this code.  This
fee will be for the purpose of conducting a preliminary background and
financial investigation of the applicant.  If the council believes that the
public interest so warrants, it may require a similar investigation at the
time of renewal of a license.  If an investigation is ordered by the city
council at the time of license renewal, the applicant must pay the fee
specified above, except that the fee will be the smaller of the stated dollar
amount or the actual cost of the investigation.  There will be no refund of
the investigation fee after the investigation has begun.



2.   License Fee. The annual fees for a pawnshop or precious metal
dealer's, or secondhand dealer's license are set forth in section 710.005 of
this code. The annual fee must be paid before conducting activity that
requires a license under this section. No refund of a fee will be made except
as authorized by ordinance.



3.   Transaction Fee. In addition to the annual license fee, licensee must
pay a transaction fee based on the actual number of billable transactions
conducted by the licensee. The transaction fee will be billed monthly to the
licensee and must be paid within 25 days after the billed date. The
transaction fee will reflect the cost of processing transactions and other
regulatory expenses related to processing transaction information, including
the cost of participating in an automated records system. The amount of the
transaction fee is specified in section 710.005 of this code and is dependent
on the accuracy of the report and type of medium by which the daily reports
are submitted to the city.



4.   Late Transaction Fees.  A licensee failing to make a transaction fee
payment within 25 days after the billed date is required to pay a penalty of
5% of the unpaid amount.  The amount of the transaction fee not timely paid,
together with the penalty, will bear interest at the rate of twelve percent
per annum (12%), from the time the transaction fee should have been paid
until it is paid.  Any interest and penalty will be added to the transaction
fee and be collected as part of it.  If payment of the amount due plus the
5% penalty is not paid within 30 days after the due date, an additional 10%
penalty will be imposed upon the amount due and the 5% penalty.  If the
delinquency continues beyond 60 days, a license revocation notice may be sent
and a revocation hearing may be commenced.  The city manager may waive
penalties when their enforcement would be unjust or inequitable.



5.   Erroneously Reported Transaction Penalty.  Each transaction reported
electronically that contains an omission or inaccuracy will be classified as
erroneous.  Licensees who electronically submit five or more erroneous
transactions within a billable month will be charged for each erroneous
transaction during that billable month at double the normal rate.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2006-18,
adopted Sept. 25, 2006; amended by Ord. #2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



610.045.  Bond Required.



At the time of filing an application for a license, the applicant must file a
bond in the amount of $5,000 with the city clerk.  The bond, issued by a
licensed surety company, must be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
The bond must be conditioned on the licensee’s compliance with the city
ordinances, in relation to the business of pawnbroker, precious metal dealer,
and secondhand dealer. The bond must also be conditioned on the licensee’s
obligation to account for and deliver articles to a legally entitled person
or to pay the person or persons the reasonable value of the articles.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.050.  Application Procedure.



1.   No license may be issued until the police department has conducted an
investigation of the representations set forth in the application, the
applicant's moral character, and the applicant's financial status.  All
applicants must cooperate with this investigation.



2.   No license may be issued until the council has held public hearings
in accordance with the following:



   a.   two public hearings must be held at least 27 days apart. 
Notice of the hearings will be made in the same manner as that specified in
section 300.09, subd. 3, for a zoning ordinance amendment affecting district
boundaries; and



   b.   at the public hearings all persons interested in the matter
must be heard, and the hearings may be adjourned from time to time.  No
hearing is required for a renewal of a license, but the council may, at its
option, hold a hearing.



3.   The city council may issue a license before an investigation, notice
and public hearing for an applicant who:



   a.   had a license within the previous five years for the
establishment that is specified in the application and that is continuing to
operate under a license;



   b.   wishes to resume operation of the business without sufficient
time, through no fault of his or her own, to meet the normal procedural
requirements;



   c.   had no criminal license convictions, or license suspensions or
revocations during the prior licensed period; and



   d.   otherwise qualifies and meets the requirements for a license.



   In this situation, the city council may immediately issue an interim
license to the applicant for a period no longer than 90 days.  The applicant
must thereafter proceed through the specified requirements for an
investigation, notice, and public hearing.  At the public hearing the
council will decide whether the license should continue in effect or be
revoked.  The interim license gives the applicant no greater right to
continuation of the license than it would have had to issuance of a new
license following the normal procedure.



4.   After investigation and hearing, the council will grant or deny the
application, considering the factors in sections 610.025, 610.030, and
610.070 and the best interests of the public health, safety, and general
welfare.  Each application requires five affirmative votes by the city
council for approval. The council may impose conditions on a license to
protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.



5.   A license is a privilege, not a right. Even if a person meets the
minimum requirements for a license, the city council is not obligated to
grant the license. The city council has broad discretion to decide if, where,
and how licensed businesses may operate. The city council may limit the
number of licenses, when in its judgment, the welfare of the city suggests
such action. The city council may develop criteria for evaluating a license
application.



6.   An application for a license may be considered by the city council at
the same time an applicant is requesting land use approvals needed for the
site, including site plan review, rezoning, or an amendment to the
comprehensive guide plan.  Final approval of a license will not be granted
until the city council has given at least preliminary approval to any
necessary land use request.  If an application is granted for a location
where a building is under construction or not ready for occupancy, the
license will not be delivered to the licensee until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued for the licensed premises.



7.   In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative
of a licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90
days after the licensee's death.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.055.  License Term, Renewal.



Each license will expire on December 31st of the year in which it is
issued.  The application for the renewal of an existing license must be made
at least 90 days before the date of the expiration of the license and must be
made on the form which the city provides.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



610.060.  License Restrictions.



1.   Generally.  Every license is subject to the conditions in the
following paragraphs, all other provisions of this section, and of other
applicable regulations, ordinances or state law.



2.   Maintenance of Peace.  Every licensee is responsible for the conduct
of his or her place of business and the conditions of order in it.  The act
of any employee of the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as
well, and the licensee will be liable for all penalties provided by this
ordinance equally with the employee, except criminal penalties.



3.   Display of License.  Every license must be posted in a conspicuous
place in the premises for which it is used.



4.   Written Records.  At the time of a receipt of an item of property, a
licensee must immediately record the information listed below, in English, in
a computer program approved by the police department. Licensees not required
to report electronically under subdivision 8 below may as an alternative
record the information in indelible ink, in a book or journal that has page
numbers that are preprinted:



   a.   an accurate description of the item of property including any
trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, or
other identifying mark on such item;



   b.   the date and time the item of property was received by the
licensee;



   c.   the name, residence address, residence telephone number, and
date of birth and a reasonably accurate physical description of the person
from whom the item of property was received, including approximate height,
weight, color of eyes, color of hair,  sex, and race;



   d.   the identification number and state or agency of issue for one
of the following forms of identification of the person from whom the item was
received:



      (1)   a current, valid Minnesota photo driver's license;



      (2)   a current, valid Minnesota photo identification card;



      (3)   a current, valid photo driver's license or
identification card issued by another state or Canadian province, and one
other form of identification;



      (4)   valid passport; or



      (5)   current, valid military photo identification.



   e.   the amount of money loaned, advanced to the pledgor or paid to
the seller, or the nature of the transaction if not a loan or sale;



   f.   the maturity date of the pawn transaction and the amount due;



   g.   the monthly and annual interest rates, including pawn fees and
charges;



   h.   the last regular day of business by which the item must be
redeemed by the pledgor without risk that the item will be sold, and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;



   i.   the signature or unique identifier of the licensee or employee
that conducted the transaction; and



   j.   the description of the item or serial number for an item that
is "traded-in" and the item received as a result of the exchange.



5.   Photographic Record.  The licensee must obtain a color photograph or
color video of each person selling, trading-in, or pawning an item of
property and of each item pawned, traded-in, or sold that does not have a
unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.  The
licensee must notify the person being photographed or videotaped by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place in the premises.
A photograph must be at least two inches in length by two inches in width and
must be referenced with the information regarding the person and the item
sold, traded-in, or pawned.  The major portion of the photograph or video
image must include a front facial pose and a clear and accurate depiction of
the item, if required.  Video recordings must be electronically referenced
by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated with all other
records of the transaction to which they relate. The photograph or video must
be in digital format.



6.   Inspection and Retention of Records.  The licensee must make
available the information required in subsections 4 and 5 above at all
reasonable times for inspection by the police department.  The information
required in subsection 4 must be retained by the licensee for at least four
years. The photographic records required in subsection 5 must be retained for
at least three months. Upon the request of a licensed police officer, the
licensee must provide copies of all records required in subsections 4 and 5
above.



7.   Receipts/Pawn Tickets.  The licensee must provide a receipt to the
seller or pledgor of an item of property received, which must be numbered to
correspond to the entry in the licensee's records and must include the items
listed below.  The pledgor or seller must sign the receipt/pawn ticket and
receive an exact copy of it:



   a.   the name, address, and phone number of the licensee's business;



   b.   the date and time on which the item was received by the
licensee;



   c.   a description of the item received and amount paid to the
pledgor or seller in exchange for the item pawned or sold, and whether it was
pawned or sold;



   d.   the signature or unique identifier of the licensee or agent
engaged in the transaction;



   e.   the last regular business day by which the item must be
redeemed by the pledgor without risk that the item will be sold and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item(s) on that date;



   f.   the monthly and annual rate of interest charged on pawned items
received and all fees and charges;



   g.   the name and address of the seller or pledgor;



   h.   the statement that “Any personal property pledged to a
pawnbroker within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has
been no payment made on the account for a period of not less than 60 days
past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension; no further
notice is necessary.  There is no obligation for the pledgor to redeem
pledged goods”;



   i.   the statement that “The pledgor of this item attests that it
is not stolen, it has no liens or encumbrances against it, and the pledgor
has the right to sell or pawn the item”;



   j.   the statement that “This item is redeemable only by the
pledgor to whom the receipt was issued, or any person identified in a written
and notarized authorization to redeem the property identified in the receipt,
or a person identified in writing by  the pledgor at the time of the initial
transaction and signed by the pledgor.  Written authorization for release of
property to  persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained
along with the original transaction record”; and



   k.   a blank signature line for the pledgor’s signature.



8.   Daily Reports to Police.  At the close of each business day, the
licensee must submit the information for each reportable transaction that is
required by subsections 4 and 5 above. The information must be transferred by
electronic means from the licensee's computer to an automated record system
specified by the police department. Licensees may provide the required
information in writing or on computer disc to the police department by twelve
o'clock noon the first business day following the date of the transaction if
there are technical problems with the electronic system, as long as the
licensee corrects the problems within its system within one business day
after the failure and re-submits all transactions by electronic means when
the problems are corrected. If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer
the required reports by electronic means as required by this section, the
licensee must have on the premises and available for inspection by the police
department printed copies of all reportable transactions that have not been
reported by electronic means.



9.   Stolen or Lost Property.  A licensee must report to city police an
item pledged or received, or sought to be pledged or received, if the
licensee has reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost.



10.   Police Order to Hold or Confiscate.



   a.   Investigative Hold.  Whenever a law enforcement official from
any agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold
or removed from the premises.  If the investigative hold is confirmed in
writing by the originating agency within 72 hours, it will remain in effect
for 15 days from the date of initial notification, or until the investigative
order is canceled, or until an order to hold/confiscate is issued by the
chief of police or the chief's designee.



   b.   Order to Hold.  Whenever the chief of police or the chief's
designee notifies a licensee in writing  or electronically not to sell an
item, the item may not be sold or removed from the licensed premise until
authorized by the chief of police or the chief's designee.  An order to hold
will expire 90 days from the date it is issued, unless the chief of police or
the chief's designee determines the hold is still necessary and notifies the
licensee in writing to continue the hold.



   c.   Order to Confiscate.  If an item is identified as stolen or
evidence in a criminal case, the chief of police or chief's designee may:



      (1)   physically confiscate and remove the item from the
premises, pursuant to a written order from the chief of police or the chief's
designee, or



      (2)   place the item on hold indefinitely, in which case the
item may not be sold, refurbished, or removed from the premises without the
written order of the chief of police or the chief's designee.



      When an item is confiscated, the person doing so must provide
identification upon request of the licensee, and must provide the licensee
the name and phone number of the confiscating agency and investigator, and
the case number related to the confiscation. 



   d.   Termination of Order. When an order to hold/confiscate is no
longer necessary, the chief of police or chief's designee must terminate the
order and notify the licensee.



11.   Redemption; Non-redemption; Risk of Loss.



   a.    A person pledging, pawning, or depositing an item for security
must have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to redeem
the item before it may be forfeited, refurbished for resale, and sold, or in
the case of precious metal, melted down or dismantled.  During the 60 day
redemption period or any extensions of the pawn transaction, items may not be
removed from the premises or sold, except as provided in this section. A
person may redeem a pawned item 72 hours after the item was received by the
pawnbroker or precious metal dealer, excluding Sundays and legal holidays.
Licensees must redeem an item only to the original pledgor, to a person
identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property
signed by the pledgor, or to a person identified in writing by the pledgor at
the time of the initial transaction.  Written authorization for release of
property to persons other than the original pledgor must be maintained along
with the original transaction record in accordance with this section. The
deadline for redeeming an item must be a day on which the pawnbroker is open
for regular business.



   b.   An item sold to a licensee may not be sold or otherwise removed
from the premises for a minimum of 31 days after the date of the sale, unless
otherwise permitted by this section.



   c.   A pledgor has no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make a
payment on a pawn transaction.  Pledged goods not redeemed within at least
60 days of the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension will
automatically be forfeited to the pawnbroker, and qualified title to the
goods will automatically vest in the pawnbroker.



   d.   While the pledged goods remain in possession of the pawnbroker
and not sold to a third party, the pawnbroker’s title to the pledged goods
is qualified only by the pledgor’s right to redeem the goods by paying the
loan plus fees and interest accrued to the date of redemption.  If the goods
are lost or damaged while in possession of the pawnbroker, the pawnbroker
must compensate the pledgor, in cash or replacement goods acceptable to the
pledgor, for the fair market value of the lost or damaged goods.  Proof of
compensation is a defense to a prosecution or civil action.



12.   Inspection of Items.



   a.   Inspection by City.  The licensee must, at all reasonable
times during the term of the license, allow the police department to enter
the business premises and other premises where items purchased or received as
part of the business are stored.  The purpose of the visit will be to
inspect the premises and the merchandise to locate items suspected of being
stolen or otherwise improperly disposed of, and to verify compliance with
this section.



   b.   Inspection by Claimants.  Additionally, the items coming into
possession of the licensee must at all reasonable times be open to the
inspection of a person claiming to have been the owner of an item or to have
an interest in it, if the person is accompanied by a police officer.



13.   Label Required. Licensees must attach a label to every item at the
time it is pawned, purchased, or received into inventory from a reportable
transaction. Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name
that identifies the transaction in the licensee's records, the transaction
date, the name of the item and the description or the model and serial number
of the item as reported to the police department, whichever is applicable,
and the date the item can be sold, if applicable. Labels may not be re-used.



14.   Gambling.  A licensee must not keep, operate, or permit the keeping
or operation on the licensed premises of dice, slot machines, roulette
wheels, punchboards, blackjack tables, or pinball machines that return coins
or slugs, chips, or tokens of any kind, that are redeemable in merchandise or
cash.  A licensee must not keep or operate gambling equipment authorized
under Minn. Stat. §§ 349.11 through 349.61, and must not conduct raffles on
the licensed premises and adjoining rooms.  The purchase of lottery tickets
may take place on the licensed premises as authorized by the director of the
lottery pursuant to Minn. Stat. §§ 349A.01 through 349A.15.



15.   Storage of Items.  Items must be stored within the licensed
premises building, except the city may permit the licensee to designate one
locked and secured warehouse building within the city where the licensee may
store items.  No item may be stored in the designated warehouse building
that is not reported under subdivision 4 above.  The licensee must permit
immediate inspection of the warehouse at any time during business hours by
the city and failure to do so is a violation of this ordinance.  Items may
not be stored in parking lots or other outside areas.  All provisions in
this section regarding recordkeeping and reporting apply to items stored in
the approved off-site facility.items.



16.   Transfer of Items.  Items accepted by a licensee at a licensed
location in the city must be for pledge or sale through a licensed location
in the city.  No licensee under this section may sell an item that is
transferred from a nonlicensed facility or a licensed facility outside the
city.



17.   Restrictions on Weapons.



   a.   A licensee may not receive as a pledge, or accept for
consignment or sale, any firearm as defined in section 1025.005 of this code,
unless the licensee also maintains a federal firearms dealer's license.



   b.   A licensee may not receive as a pledge, or accept for
consignment or sale, any dangerous weapon as defined in section 1025.005 of
this code.



18.   Change in Required Information. Each licensee has the continuing
duty to properly notify the director of community development of any change
in the information or facts required to be furnished on the application for a
license.  This duty will continue throughout the period of the license.



19.   Change in Managers. For each new manager or assistant manager
employed after the license is issued, a licensee must make the offer of
employment contingent upon the city's approval. Each licensee must notify the
director of community development within ten days after any new manager or
assistant manager begins employment. This notification must include the
information required in section 610.035(4)(c). Failure to provide complete
and timely information will subject the licensee to the penalties provided in
this code and to potential denial of a renewed license. The director may
cause an investigation of the new managers and may disapprove the employment
of these personnel by notice to the licensee in writing. The licensee may
appeal this decision to the city council by placing a request in writing to
the city clerk within ten days after the issuance of the notice. A failure to
request an appeal waives the licensee's ability to contest the director's
decision. After the appeal period has expired without an appeal, or the city
council has upheld the director's decision upon an appeal, no manager who has
been disapproved may operate in that capacity upon the licensed premises.



20.   Licensed Premises, Change in Ownership. Each license is issued only
to the applicant and for the specific location on the premises that is
described in the application and that is approved by the city council.  No
business may be conducted outside of the licensed premises, except as
otherwise provided in this ordinance. No license may be transferred to
another person or place without application to the council in the same manner
as an application for a new license.  Transfer of 25 percent or more of the
stock of a corporation or of a controlling interest thereof, whichever is
less, is deemed a transfer of the license of a corporate licensee, except for
a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock exchange or which is
wholly owned by a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a stock
exchange. A new license must be obtained before the transfer takes place. 
Each day a licensee operates after a transfer has taken place without
complying with this ordinance is a separate violation subject to penalties.



21.   Permitted Charges.  A licensee may charge only interest rates and
fees allowed by Minn. Stat. Sec. 325J.07 and must post a schedule of charges
on the licensed premises in a place clearly visible to the general public.



22.   Pawning of Motor Vehicle Titles.



   a.   In addition to the other requirements of this section, a
pawnbroker who holds a title to a motor vehicle as part of a pawn transaction
must:



      (1)   be licensed as a used motor vehicle dealer under Minn.
Stat. § 168.27, and post such license on the pawnshop premises;



      (2)   verify that there are no liens or encumbrances against
the motor vehicle with the Minnesota department of public safety; and



      (3)   verify that the pledgor has automobile insurance on the
motor vehicle as required by law.
   b.   A pawnbroker may not sell a motor vehicle covered by a pawn
transaction until 90 days after recovery of the motor vehicle.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2011-16, adopted August
22, 2011; amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord.
#2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



610.065.  Prohibitions.



1.   A licensee and a clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee  must not:



   a.   make a false entry in the records of transactions;



   b.   falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of
business the records, books, or accounts relating to the licensee's
transactions;



   c.   refuse to allow the appropriate law enforcement agency, the
attorney general, or  other duly authorized state or federal law enforcement
officer to inspect the records or  goods in the person's possession during
the ordinary hours of business or other times acceptable to both parties;



   d.   fail to maintain a record of each transaction for four years;



   e.   accept a pledge or purchase property from a person under the
age of 18 years;



   f.   make an agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor
or seller, or waiving any provision of this section, or providing for a
maturity date less than one month after the date of the pawn transaction;



   g.   fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor or seller, or provide
compensation as set forth in section 610.60, upon payment of the full amount
due the pawnbroker unless either the date of redemption is more than 60 days
past the date of the pawn transaction, renewal, or extension and the
pawnbroker has sold the pledged goods pursuant to this section, or the
pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or a law enforcement
officer or agency;



   h.   sell or lease, or agree to sell or lease, pledged or purchased
goods back to the pledgor or seller in the same, or a related, transaction;



   i.   sell or otherwise charge for insurance in connection with a
pawn transaction;



   j.   remove pledged goods from the licensed premises or other
approved storage place at any time before unredeemed, pledged goods are sold
pursuant to section 610.060;



   k.   receive any goods from a person of unsound mind or who is
intoxicated; or



   l.   violate or fail to comply with any provision in this section.



2.   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or attempt to
pawn or sell goods with any licensee under this section.



3.   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit an
article of property with a licensee under this section if the property is:



   a.   not their own, whether or not the person has permission from
the purported owner; or



   b.   subject to a security interest.



4.   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit
an article of property with a licensee under this section may give or present
to the licensee a name, date of birth, residence address, telephone number,
proof of identification, or any other information required under this section
that is false, fictitious, or not his/her own.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.070.  Denial, Suspensions and Revocations of License.



1.   Grounds.  A license under this section may be denied, suspended, or
revoked for one or more of the following reasons:



   a.   violation of one or more provisions of this section;



   b.   violation of, or non-compliance with, any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of the Minnetonka city ordinances
or state law;



   c.   non-compliance with the Minnetonka zoning code;



   d.   impracticality or impossibility of conducting a background or
financial investigation due to the unavailability of information;



   e.   fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing or renewing a
license;



   f.   fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in the
application and investigation for a license, or in the course of a licensee's
business;



   g.   violation within the preceding five years of any law relating
to theft, damage or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or
operation of a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer's or secondhand dealer's
business; or



   h.   non-payment of real estate taxes, assessments or other
financial claims of the city or of the state for the business or premises
licensed or sought to be licensed under this section.  If an action has been
commenced under the provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter 278, questioning the
amount of validity of taxes, the council may on application by the licensee
waive strict compliance with this provision. No waiver may be granted for an
amount of taxes that remain unpaid for more one year after becoming due,
unless the extended period is through no fault of the licensee.



2.   Sanctions.



   a.   The council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke a
license or impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation
upon a finding that the licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee
failed to comply with an applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating
to the subject matter of section 610.  No suspension or revocation will take
effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing
under city code section 700.035, except the suspension provided for in
paragraph b, below.



   b.   A licensee’s conviction for theft, burglary, robbery,
receiving stolen property or another crime involving stolen property will
result in the immediate suspension  of the license by operation of this
ordinance, pending a hearing on revocation of the license.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-12,
adopted May 9, 2005)



610.075.  Penalty.



Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of
this section is subject to the penalties established in section 1310 of this
code.  A criminal fine or sentence imposed will not affect the right of the
city to suspend or revoke a license as the council deems appropriate.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



610.080.  [Repealed].



(Repealed by Ord. #2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



610.085. [Repealed].



(Repealed by Ord. #2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005)



SECTION 615.  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



615.005.  Purpose.



The purpose of this section is to prescribe licensing requirements for
sexually-oriented businesses to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare and to prevent criminal activity and the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases.



615.010.  Findings.



The Minnetonka city council makes the following findings regarding the effect
sexually-oriented businesses have on the character of the city’s
neighborhoods.  In making these findings, the city council accepts the
recommendations of a task force including staff from Minnetonka and two other
cities, that has studied the experiences of other urban areas where
sexually-oriented businesses have located.



1.   Sexually-oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in
criminal activity in the area in which such businesses are located,
increasing the demands on city crime-prevention programs and law enforcement
services.



2.   Sexually-oriented businesses can be used as fronts for prostitution
and other criminal activity.  The experience of other cities indicates that
proper management and operation of such businesses can minimize this risk.



3.   Sexually-oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure to
communicable diseases including acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS),
for which there is currently no cure.  Experiences of other cities indicate
that such businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by
virtue of the design and use of the premises, endangering not only the
patrons of such establishments but also the general public.



4.   Sexually-oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public health
problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food
or drink or both on the same premises.



5.   A licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this section can
facilitate the enforcement of the city’s “anti-blight” regulations in
section 300.33 of the zoning code and can aid in monitoring sexually-oriented
businesses for adverse secondary effects on the community.



6.   The risk of criminal activity and public health problems can be
minimized through a licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed below.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



615.015.  Definitions.



The following words and terms have the following meanings when used in this
section.



1.   "Sexually-oriented business" means:



   a.   a business that meets any of the following criteria, measured
on a daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly basis:



      (1)   has more than 25% of its inventory, stock in trade, or
publicly displayed merchandise in sexually-oriented materials;



      (2)   devotes more than 25% of its floor area (not including
storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business
not open to the public) to sexually-oriented materials; or



      (3)   derives more than 25% of its gross revenues from
sexually-oriented materials; or



   b.   a business that engages for any length of time in a
sexually-oriented use as defined in subdivision 3 below or any other use that
has an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



2.   "Sexually-oriented materials" means visual, printed, or aural
materials, and other objects or devices, that:



   a.   contain, depict, simulate or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas; or



   b.   are marketed for use in conjunction with, or are primarily used
only with or during, specified sexual activities; or



   c.   are designed for sexual stimulation.



3.   "Sexually-oriented use" means any of the following activities and
businesses, even if the activity exists for only a short-time:



   a.   "Adult body painting studio" means an establishment or business
that provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether
transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is
nude.



   b.   "Adult bookstore" means an establishment or business used for
the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures,
slides, records, audio tape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if it
meets the criteria established in paragraph 1. above.



   c.   "Adult cabaret" means a business or establishment that provides
dancing or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on: (1) the depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or (2) the presentation, display, or depiction of
matter that seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or
desire.



   d.   "Adult companionship establishment" means a business or
establishment that provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   e.   "Adult conversation/rap parlor" means a business or
establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   f.   "Adult health/sport club" means a health/sport club that is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   g.   "Adult hotel or motel" means a hotel or motel that presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



   h.   "Adult massage parlor/health club" means a massage parlor or
health club that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   i.   "Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater" means a business or
establishment with a capacity of less than 50 persons that as a prevailing
practice presents on-premises viewing of movies, motion pictures, or other
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



   j.   "Adult Modeling Studio" means a business or establishment that
provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display
specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon,
sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.



   k.   "Adult Motion Picture Arcade" means any place to which the
public is permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.



   l.   "Adult Motion Picture Theater" means a motion picture theater
with a capacity of 50 or more persons that as a prevailing practice presents
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.



   m.   "Adult Novelty Business" means an establishment or business
that has a variety of items for sale if it meets the criteria established in
paragraph 1a above.



   n.   "Adult Sauna" means a sauna that excludes minors by reason of
age, and that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose
of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   o.   "Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility" means a building or
portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the
building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if
the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



4.   "Specified anatomical areas" means:



   a.   less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
area, buttock, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola; and



   b.   human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether or
not completely and opaquely covered.



5.   "Specified sexual activities" means:



   a.   Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal
intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship; anilingus; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio;
necrophilia; pedophilia; piquerism; or zooerastia;



   b.   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal, or tumescence;



   c.   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus, or masturbation;



   d.   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, or female breasts, except touching the buttocks of a person
receiving a massage if done upon the person's request and only for medical
purposes such as relieving pain or muscle soreness;



   e.   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude,
who are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged
in the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other physical restraint
of any person;



   f.   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being; or



   g.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal
irrigation.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord.
#2002-15, adopted May 20, 2002)



615.020.  Exceptions.



This section does not regulate the following:



1.   material with significant literary content or social commentary;



2.   a business where sexually-oriented materials are sold, bartered,
distributed, leased, furnished, or otherwise provided for off-site use or
entertainment, if the sexually-oriented material on each item is blocked from
view by an opaque cover as required under Minn. Stat. § 617.293, and each
item is in an area accessible only by an employee of the business;



3.   a person or organization exempted under Minn. Stat. § 617.295;



4.   activity regulated under Minn. Stat. § 617.251;



5.   displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long
as no sexually- oriented materials are for sale, and the business does not
have a liquor license; and



6.   movies rated G, PG, PG13, NC-17, or R.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-15, adopted May 20, 2002)



615.025.  License Required.



No person may own or operate a sexually-oriented business within the city of
Minnetonka unless the person is currently licensed under this section.



615.030.  Persons Ineligible.



No license may be issued to a person who:



1.   is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;



2.   is a minor at the time the application is filed;



3.   has been convicted of a crime directly related to the licensed
occupation and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation
and present fitness to perform the duties of the owner, operator, or manager
of a sexually-oriented business under Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3, or a
person not of good moral character and repute;



4.   holds a liquor license under Minnetonka city code section 600;



5.   in the judgment of the licensing authority is not the real party in
interest or beneficial owner of the business operated under the license;



6.   has had a license for a sexually-oriented business or similar
business revoked anywhere within five years of the license application; or



7.   in the case of an individual, is not a resident of the twin cities;
in the case of a partnership, the managing partner is not a resident of the
twin cities; or in the case of a corporation, the manager is not a resident
of the twin cities.  The required residency must be established by the time
the license is issued and maintained throughout the existence of the license
and all renewals.  The time for establishing residency within the twin
cities may, for good cause, be extended by the licensing authority. For the
purposes of this paragraph, the twin cities means the seven-county
metropolitan area defined by Minn. Stat. § 473.121, subd. 2.



615.035.  Places Ineligible.



No license may be issued for:



1.   a place or a business ineligible for a license under city ordinance
or state law;



2.   operation in a zoning district where the business is not allowed
pursuant to section 300.33 of this code;



3.   a place or business that is currently licensed as a tattoo
establishment, pawnshop, massage business, or establishment that sells
alcoholic beverages; or



4.   operation on a premises on which taxes, assessments or other
financial claims of the city or other government agency are delinquent and
unpaid, unless the non-payment is not under the control of the applicant.



615.040.  License Application.



1.   The application for a sexually-oriented business license under this
section must be made on a form supplied by the city and must provide the
following information:



   a.   the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate;



   b.   the location of the business premises;



   c.   the legal description of the premises to be licensed including
a map of the area for which the license is sought, showing dimensions,
locations of buildings, street access and parking facilities;



   d.   whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are
due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not
paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;



   e.   whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business
and if not, who is;



   f.   whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name
other than his/her true name, and if so, what was the name, or names, and
information concerning dates and places where used;



   g.   whether the applicant is married or single.  If married, the
true name, place and date of birth and street address of applicant's spouse;



   h.   street address at which applicant and spouse have lived during
the preceding ten years;



   i.   kind, name and location of every business or occupation
applicant and spouse have been engaged in during the preceding ten years;



   j.   names and addresses of applicant's and spouse's employers and
partners, if any, for the preceding ten years;



   k.   whether the applicant or spouse has ever been convicted of a
violation of a state law or local ordinance, other than a non-alcohol related
traffic offense.  If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the
time, place and offense for which convictions were had;



   l.   whether the applicant or spouse has ever been engaged as an
employee or in operating a sexually-oriented business, massage business, or
other business of a similar nature.  If so, applicant must furnish
information as to the time, place and length of time;



   m.   whether the applicant has ever been in military service.  If
so, the applicant must, upon request, exhibit all discharges;



   n.   if the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all
partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a
single applicant as above.  A managing partner, or partners, must be
designated.  The interest of each partner, or partners in the business must
be submitted with the application and, if the partnership is required to file
a certificate as to trade name under the provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter
333, a copy of the certificate must be attached to the application;



   o.   if the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the
applicant must submit the following:



      (1)   name, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



      (2)   names and addresses of all officers;



      (3)   the name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in
charge of, or to be in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all
information about said person as is required in the case of a single
applicant; and



      (4)   a list of all persons who, single or together with their
spouse own or control an interest in said corporation or association in
excess of five percent or who are officers of said corporation or
association, together with their addresses and all information as is required
for a single applicant.



   p.   the amount of the investment that the applicant has in the
business, land, building, premises, fixtures, furniture, or stock in trade,
and proof of the source of the money;



   q.   a list of responsible persons, including the names of owners,
managers and assistant managers, who may be notified or contacted by state or
city employees in case of emergency.  These persons must be residents of the
twin cities metropolitan area as defined by Minn. Stat. § 473.121, subd. 2;



   r.   whether the applicant holds a current license for a
sexually-oriented business or similar business from another governmental unit;



   s.   whether the applicant has ever been denied a license for a
sexually-oriented business or similar business from another governmental
unit; and



   t.   other information that the city deems appropriate.



2.   No person may make a false statement or material omission in a
license application or investigation.  A false statement or material
omission is grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license.



3.   Each licensee has the continuing duty to properly notify the director
of community development of a change in the information or facts required to
be furnished on the application for a license.  This duty continues
throughout the period of the license.  Failure to comply with this section
will constitute cause for revocation or suspension of the license.



4.   The application for the renewal of an existing license must be made
at least 90 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and must
be made on the form which the city provides.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-15, adopted May 20, 2002)



615.045.  Fees.



1.   An applicant for a license must pay to the city the investigation fee
specified in section 710 of this code.  This fee will be for the purpose of
conducting a preliminary background and financial investigation of the
applicant.  If the city believes that the public interest so warrants, it
may require a similar investigation at the time of renewal of a license.  If
an investigation is ordered at the time of license renewal, the applicant
must pay the fee specified above, except that the fee will be the smaller of
the stated dollar amount or the actual cost of the investigation.  There
will be no refund of the investigation fee after the investigation has begun.



2.   The annual fees for a license are set forth in section 710.005 of
this code.



3.   Each license expires on December 31st of the year in which it is
issued.  Fees for licenses issued during the license year will be prorated
according to the number of months remaining in the year.  For this purpose
an unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a whole month having
elapsed.



4.   No refund of a fee will be made except as authorized by ordinance.



615.050.  Granting of Licenses.



1.   No license may be issued until the police department has conducted an
investigation of the representations set forth in the application, the
applicant's moral character, and the applicant's financial status.  All
applicants must cooperate with this investigation.



2.   No license, except for a renewed license, may be issued for a
sexually-oriented business until the council has held a public hearing.
Notice of the hearings must be made in the same manner as that specified in
section 300.09, subd. 3, for a zoning ordinance amendment affecting district
boundaries. The council must grant the license unless the applicant or the
location does not meet the requirements of the city code, the application was
incomplete, or the application contained false information or a material
omission. If the application is denied, the city must notify the applicant
with the reason(s) stated for denial. Notification must be sent certified,
United States mail, return receipt requested, to the address provided on the
license application. If the council fails to act on the application within 45
days after receipt of a complete application, the application will be deemed
approved. An applicant wishing to appeal the action of the city council may
seek review by a court of competent jurisdiction.



3.   The city council may issue a license before an investigation, notice
and public hearing for an applicant who:



   a.   had a license within the previous five years for the
establishment that is specified in the application and that is continuing to
operate under a license;



   b.   wishes to resume operation of the business without sufficient
time, through no fault of his or her own, to meet the normal procedural
requirements;



   c.   had no criminal license convictions, or license suspensions or
revocations during the prior licensed period; and



   In this situation, the city council may immediately issue an interim
license to the applicant for a period no longer than 90 days.  The applicant
must then proceed through the specified requirements for an investigation,
notice, and public hearing.  At the public hearing the council will decide
whether the license should continue in effect or be revoked.  The applicant
has no greater right to continuation of the license than he/she would have
had to issuance of a new license following the normal procedure without the
interim license.



4.   A license will be issued only to the applicant and for the premises
described in the application.  No license may be transferred to another
person or place without application in the same manner as an application for
a new license. Transfer of 25 percent or more of the stock of a corporation
or of a controlling interest of it, whichever is less, will be deemed a
transfer of the license.  If the licensee is a corporation that is wholly
owned by another corporation, the same provisions about the transfer of a
stock or a controlling interest will apply to that parent corporation, any
second parent corporation that wholly owns the parent corporation, and all
other similarly situated parent corporations up through the chain of
ownership.  Transfer of this amount of stock without prior council approval
is a ground for revocation or suspension of the license.  In addition, each
day the licensee operates under the license after a transfer has taken place
without obtaining council approval will be a separate violation of this
ordinance.



5.   In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative
of a licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90
days after the licensee's death.



(Amended by Ord. #2015-19, effective January 29, 2016; amended by Ord.
#2005-06, adopted February 28, 2005; amended by Ord. #2003-06, adopted March
17, 2003; 2002-15, adopted May 20, 2002)



615.055.  Conditions of License.



1.   A license is subject to the conditions in this section, all other
provisions of this ordinance, and of other applicable regulations, ordinance
or state law.



2.   A licensee is responsible for the conduct of his or her place of
business and the conditions of order in it.  The act of an employee of the
licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee
is liable for all penalties provided by this ordinance equally with the
employee, except criminal penalties.



3.   The license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for
which it is used.



615.060.  [Repealed].



(Repealed by Ord. #2002-15, adopted May 20, 2002)



615.065.  Restrictions and Regulations.



A sexually-oriented business is subject to the following restrictions and
regulations.



1.   No owner, manager, or employee may allow sexually-oriented materials
or entertainment to be visible or perceivable in any manner, including
aurally, at any time from outside of the business.



2.   No owner, manager, or employee may allow a person under the age of 18
to enter the business.



3.   No owner, manager, or employee may allow a person under the age of 18
to have access to sexually-oriented materials, whether by sight, purchase,
touch, or another means.



4.   No owner or manager may employ a person under the age of 18 on the
licensed premises.



5.   No owner, manager, or employee may have been convicted of a sex
crime, as identified in Minn. Stat. §§ 609.293 through 609.352, 609.746
through 609.749, 609.79, 518B.01, or related statute dealing with sexual
assault, sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity, or domestic abuse within the
past five years.



6.   No business may exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.



7.   No owner, manager, or employee may allow a patron, employee, or other
person on the premises to physically contact, in public view, a specified
anatomical area of himself or herself, or of another person, except that a
live performer may touch himself or herself.



8.   A live performer must remain at all times a minimum distance of 10
feet from members of the audience, and must perform on a platform intended
for that purpose, that must be raised at least two feet from the level of the
floor on which the audience is located.  No performer may solicit or accept
money, a tip, or other item from a member of the audience.



9.   No business may have booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room,
or individual rooms, except as follows:



   a.   restrooms are allowed as long as they are no larger than
reasonably necessary to serve the purposes of a restroom, no other activities
are provided or allowed in the rooms, and there are no chairs, benches, or
reclining surfaces in the rooms; and



   b.   storage rooms and private offices are allowed, if the storage
rooms and offices are used solely for running the business and no person
other than the owner, manager, and employees is allowed in them.



10.   A licensee must not be open for business to the public:



   a.   between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., on the days of Monday through
Saturday; and



   b.   between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, on Sundays.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-15, adopted May 20, 2002)



615.070.  Suspensions and Revocations of License.



1.   Delinquent Taxes.  The city council may suspend or revoke a license
issued under this chapter for operation on a premises on which real estate
taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are
due, delinquent, or unpaid, unless the non- payment is not under the control
of the licensee.  If an action has been commenced under Minn. Stat. chapter
278, questioning the amount of validity of taxes, the council may on
application by the licensee waive strict compliance with this provision; no
waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or a portion of them, that remain
unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due unless the one year
period is extended through no fault of the licensee.



2.   Violations.



   a.   The council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke a
license and impose a civil fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for a violation upon
a finding that the licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee has
failed to comply with an applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating
to the subject matter of section 615 or violated the statutes in subparagraph
2 below.  No suspension or revocation will take effect until the licensee
has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to Minn. Stat. §§
14.57 to 14.69, with the exception of the suspension provided for in
subparagraph (b) below.



   b.   Conviction of a sex crime, as identified in Minn. Stat. §§
609.293 through 609.352, 609.746 through 609.749, 609.79, 518B.01, or related
statute dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity,
or domestic abuse by the licensee will result in the immediate suspension
pending a hearing on revocation of a license issued under this chapter.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07; adopted June 25, 2012)



615.075.  Penalty.



Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of
this ordinance is subject to the penalties established in section 1310 of
this code.  A fine or sentence imposed does not affect the right of the city
to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee as the council deems
appropriate.



SECTION 620.  [REPEALED].



(Repealed by Ord. 2016-15, effective January 1, 2017)



SECTION 625.  TOBACCO SALES.



625.000.  Purpose.



The city finds that: smoking causes premature death, disability and chronic
diseases, including cancer, heart disease and lung disease; smoking-related
diseases result in excess medical care costs; and smoking initiation occurs
primarily in adolescence. The city desires to prevent young people from
starting to smoke, to encourage and assist smokers to quit, and to promote
clean indoor air through the adoption of tobacco licensing regulations.



(Adopted by Ord. 2018-13, effective Jan. 1, 2019)



625.005.  Definitions.



The following words and terms when used in this section have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.



1.   "Electronic delivery device" means any product containing or
delivering nicotine, lobelia, or any other substance intended for human
consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking in the delivery
of nicotine or any other substance through inhalation of vapor from the
product.  Electronic delivery device includes any component part of a
product, whether or not marketed or sold separately.  Electronic delivery
device does not include any product that has been approved or certified by
the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a
tobacco-cessation product, as a tobacco-dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is marketed and sold for such an approved purpose.



2.   “Movable place of business” means a retail business whose
physical location is not permanent or is capable of being moved or changed,
including, but not limited to, any retail business that is operated from a
kiosk, other transportable structure, or a motorized or nonmotorized vehicle.



3.   "Nicotine or lobelia delivery product" means a product containing or
delivering nicotine or lobelia intended for human consumption, or any part of
such a product, that is not a tobacco or electronic delivery device.



4.   “Person” includes natural persons, partnerships, firms,
corporations and associations.



5.   “Self-service merchandising” means a method of displaying
tobacco-related products so that they are accessible to the public without
the intervention of an employee of the license.



6.   “Tobacco” means cigarettes and any product containing, made, or
derived from tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed,
smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any
other means, or any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product
including but not limited to, cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques;
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready-rubbed, and other smoking tobacco;
fine cut and other chewing tobaccos; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and
twist tobaccos; shorts; refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweepings of
tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco. Tobacco excludes any tobacco
product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for such an approved purpose.



7.   "Tobacco-related devices" means cigarette papers or pipes for smoking
or other devices intentionally designed or intended to be used in a manner
which enables the chewing, sniffing, smoking, or inhalation of vapors of
tobacco or tobacco products.  Tobacco-related devices include components of
tobacco-related devices which may be marketed or sold separately.



8.   "Tobacco-related products" includes tobacco, tobacco-related devices,
electronic delivery devices and nicotine and lobelia delivery products.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-27; adopted December 15, 2014; amended by Ord. 2010-14,
adopted September 13, 2010)



625.010.  License Required.



No person shall, sell or offer to sell at retail, dispense, or give away in a
retail setting any tobacco related product at any place in the city, without
first obtaining a license from the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-14; effective Jan. 1, 2019)



625.015.  Application and Issuance.



Application for a new license or license renewal must be made to the
community development director on a form supplied by the city.  The
application must state the full name of the applicant, the location of the
building and the part intended to be used by the applicant under the license,
the kind of business conducted at the location, and the other information as
required by the application form.  The community development director has
the authority to determine whether or not a license will be issued or
renewed.  An applicant may appeal the director's decision to the city
council by submitting a written request to the city clerk within 10 days
after the decision.  A license may be denied or, if the license is
mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the
discovery that the person was ineligible for the license, for the following
reasons:



1.   the applicant is under the ages of 18 years;



2.   the applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any
violation of a federal, state, or local law, ordinance provision, or other
regulation relating to tobacco-related products;



3.   the applicant has had a license to sell tobacco-related products
revoked within the preceding twelve months of the date of application;



4.   the applicant fails to provide any information required on the
application, or provides false or misleading information; or



5.   The applicant is prohibited by federal, state, or other local law,
ordinance, or other regulation, from holding such a license.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-14; effective Jan. 1, 2019)



625.020.  Fees, Duration.



The application must be accompanied by the required license fee specified in
section 710.  Licenses are valid for a one year period or part thereof and
expire on December 31.



625.025.  License Display and Signage.



1.   Every license must be kept conspicuously posted at the place for
which the license is issued and must be exhibited to any person upon request.



2.   Notice of the legal sales age must be posted at each location where
tobacco-related products are offered for sale. The required signage must be
posted in a manner that is clearly visible to anyone who is or is considering
making a purchase.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-14; effective Jan. 1, 2019)



625.030.  Restrictions.



No license may be issued to a person not of good moral character.  No
license may be issued for the sale of tobacco-related products at a movable
place of business.  A separate license is required for the sale of
tobacco-related products at each place of business.  A license is not
transferable from one person to another.



625.035.  Mandatory Education.



Each licensee must have at least one representative attend all mandatory
tobacco license training seminars conducted by the city.  The representative
need not be the same person each time but must hold a position of
responsibility in either the ownership or management of the licensee.



625.040.  Prohibited Acts.



1.   A person must not sell, offer to sell, or give away any
tobacco-related product to any person below the age of 21 years.



2.   A person must not sell, dispense, or give away any tobacco related
product through the use of a vending machine or similar automated dispensing
device.



3.   A person must not sell, dispense or give away any tobacco-related
product through self-service merchandising, except in facilities where the
retailer ensures that no person younger than 21 years of age is present, or
permitted to enter, at any time.



4.   A person must not sell tobacco-related products outside the location
or area covered by a license.



5.   A person must not sell, offer for sale, give away, or otherwise deal
in flavored tobacco-related products or samples of such products. This
restriction does not apply to facilities where the retailer ensures that no
person younger than 21 years of age is present, or permitted to enter, at any
time.



6.   A person must not sell, offer for to sell or distribute liquid,
whether or not such liquid contains nicotine that is intended for human
consumption and use, in an electronic delivery device that is not contained
in child-resistant packaging as that term is defined in Code of Federal
Regulations, title 16, section 1700.15(b)(1) as in effect on January 1, 2015.



7.   A person must not sell, or offer to sell, give away, distribute or
display tobacco-related products in a manner prohibited by federal or state
law.



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-13; Ord. 2018-14, effective Jan. 1, 2019; Amended by
Ord. 2014-27, adopted December 15, 2014)



625.045.  Other Illegal Acts.



Unless otherwise provided, the following acts are a violation of this section.



1.   [repealed]



2.   Illegal Procurement. A person must not purchase, attempt to purchase,
or otherwise obtain any tobacco-related product on behalf of a person under
the age of 21 years. A person must not coerce or attempt to coerce a person
under the age of 21 years to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use
any tobacco related product. 



3.   False Identification.  A person must not attempt to disguise his or
her true age by the use of a false form of identification, nor possess a
false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another
person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered
with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person.

A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-13, effective 01-01-2019; Amended by Ord. 2003-02,
adopted January 27, 2003)



625.050.  Exceptions and Defenses.



Nothing in this section prevents the providing of tobacco- related products
to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual, or cultural
ceremony.  It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section for a
person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.



625.055.  Violations: Administrative Penalties.



Any person violating a provision of this section may be subject to the
administrative enforcement program contained in section 1310.015 through
1310.050 of this code.  In addition, upon finding that a licensee of any
license granted pursuant to this section has failed to comply with any
applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to the sale or use of
tobacco-related products, the council may either revoke the license or
suspend the license.



1.   Licensees.  Any licensee who has violated this section, or whose
employee has violated this section, will be charged an administrative fine of
at least $250.00 for a first violation of this section; at least $500.00 for
a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24-month period; and
at least $600.00 for a third or subsequent offense at the same location
within a 24-month period.  In addition, for the third offense, the license
will be suspended for not less than seven days.



2.   Other Adults.  Other adults who have violated this section will be
charged an administrative fine of at least $150.00.



3.   Minors.  Minors found in unlawful possession of, or who unlawfully
purchase or attempt to purchase, tobacco-related products, may be required to
participate in a youth diversion, tobacco free education, or other
alternative program selected by the chief of police.



4.   Judicial Review.  Any person aggrieved by a decision under
paragraphs 1 or 2 above may have the decision reviewed in the district court
in the same manner and procedure as provided in Minn. Stat. § 462.361.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-02, adopted January 27, 2003)



625.060.  Violations: Criminal Penalties.



Every person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids
or abets in the commission of any act constituting a violation of this
section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and every person who causes, coerces,
permits or directs another to violate any of the provisions of this section
is likewise guilty of a misdemeanor. Section 625.055 does not prohibit the
city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this
section.



SECTION 630.  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.



630.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words below are defined
for the purpose of this section as follows:



1.   “Peddler” includes a person who goes from place to place on
residential property exhibiting merchandise for sale, making sales, and
delivering articles to purchasers.



2.   “Solicitor” includes a person who goes from place to place on
residential property soliciting orders for the sale of merchandise or
personal services for future delivery or future performance, whether or not
the person has a sample of the merchandise or is collecting advance payments
for the orders. The word also includes activity that has as its ultimate
purpose the obtaining of orders even though it may not initially purport to
do so, but does not include soliciting donations for non-profit entities.



3.   “Regulated activity” means the activity of a peddler and
solicitor as defined above. The term only includes activities that involve
the sale of a product or service. It does not include activities that involve
only statements of opinion or belief or that request only a donation.



4.   “Licensee” means an individual, partnership, corporation or
association licensed within the city under this section and also includes a
person who is or will be conducting the regulated activity on behalf of the
licensee.



5.   "Person" has the same meaning as defined in section 1305.005.



6.   "Non-profit" means an organization that currently has tax-exempt
status from either the state or federal government and provides written
evidence of that status.



7.   "Occupant" means a person living, staying, or working at a residence,
including a guest.



630.010.  Regulation Established.



A person engaging in a regulated activity within the city must comply with
the provisions of this section. The person must also comply with any
applicable zoning and health regulations.



630.015.  License Required.



A person engaging in a regulated activity within the city must first obtain a
license and an identification card from the community development department.



630.020.  Exceptions.



A person engaging in the following activities is not required to obtain a
license and an identification card from the city:



1.   selling personal property at wholesale to dealers of the articles;



2.   selling newspapers;



3.   selling products of the farm or garden grown or raised by the seller,
including meat, but such activities must comply with applicable health
regulations;



4.   selling antiques, collectibles, or other products in a show or
festival which lasts for five days or less and which involves two or more
sellers or exhibitors;



5.   calling upon residents in connection with a regular route service for
the sale and delivery of perishable daily necessities of life such as bakery
products and dairy products. This exception does not relieve that person of
the duty to comply with other applicable city requirements; or



6.   soliciting money, donations or financial assistance for a political,
religious or non-profit tax-exempt organization, or selling or distributing
literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited on behalf
of such an organization.



630.025.  Ineligible People.



The following people are not eligible for a license and identification card
from the city:



1.   A person whose license or identification card for regulated activity
was revoked by the city or another governmental body within three years
before the application date;



2.   A person who has been denied a license for regulated activity by the
city or another governmental body because of circumstances that occurred
within three years before the application date;



3.   A person who has violated, or whose representative has violated, a
provision of this section within three years before the application date, or
who violates a provision of this section during the application period
pending issuance of the license;



4.   A person who has been convicted within three years before the
application date of a crime that adversely reflects on the person's ability
to honestly, safely, or lawfully conduct the regulated activities, unless the
individual can show sufficient evidence of rehabilitation as defined in Minn.
Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3; or



5.   A person who has falsified information, or omitted material
information, required by this section.



6.   A person who produces documentation of identification that is torn,
pasted, peeled, or otherwise damaged or altered.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



630.030.  Application.



Application for a license must be made at least five working days before the
regulated activity is proposed to begin and must include an accurate, sworn
statement in writing, on a form furnished by the city, that gives the
information listed below and includes the required supporting documentation:



1.   name and physical description of the applicant;



2.   complete home and local address of the applicant;



3.   a brief description of the proposed activity, its location, and the
merchandise or service involved;



4.   the dates and hours of the day during which the activity will be
conducted;



5.   name, address, and phone number of the person on whose behalf the
orders are solicited, together with credentials establishing the applicant's
relationship to the person;



6.   the source of supply of merchandise proposed to be sold, where the
goods are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery;



7.   whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime other
than petty traffic violations, the nature, time and location of the offense
and the punishment or penalty imposed;



8.   the last cities or other localities, not exceeding five, where the
applicant conducted the proposed activity immediately preceding the date of
the application and where within those areas the activity took place;



9.   make, model, year, color, and state license number of each motor
vehicle to be used in connection with the proposed activity;



10.   social security number, date of birth, and drivers license or state
or tribal identification card number;



11.   passport information and visa status if the applicant is not a
United States citizen;



12.   the name, address, and phone number of the person or company
employing the individual, if different from the information in sub-paragraph
5 above; and



13.   a copy of all documents to be used by the applicant in the regulated
activity.



630.035.  Photographs.



Each individual applicant and person who will be conducting the regulated
activity on behalf of the partnership or organizational applicant must submit
two copies of a recent photograph of themselves approximately 1½ inches by
1½ inches, showing the head and shoulders of the person in a clear and
distinguishable manner. An application is not complete until the required
photographs are supplied.



630.040.  Fees, Duration.



The application must be accompanied by the required license and
identification card fees specified in section 710. A license or
identification card is valid only for the calendar year in which it is
issued. The fees are for a one year period and will not be prorated for
periods less than one year. No fees are required of individuals taking orders
for the shipment of goods through interstate commerce.



630.045.  Investigation, Issuance, Denial.



1.   Within five working days after the application, the police department
and the community development department will conduct an investigation
regarding the information provided in the application and the eligibility for
a license and identification card. The community development director will
issue a license and identification card only to eligible people. Each
identification card will include a copy of the person's photograph.



2.   The community development director may not issue a license or
identification card if there are circumstances indicating that the intended
recipient may not honestly, lawfully, and safely conduct the proposed
regulated activity. The director must notify an applicant in writing of a
denial of a license or identification card, specifying the reasons. The
director must comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter 364 if the
denial is based in whole or in part upon prior criminal convictions. The
applicant may appeal the denial by submitting to the director a written
request within ten days after the denial asking to address the city council.
The city council may refer the matter to an independent hearing officer or
may consider the appeal itself.  The city council or hearing officer may
deny a license or identification card when such action will protect the
public health, safety, or welfare.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



630.050.  Standards of Conduct.



1.   Except for those people specified in section 630.020, a person may
conduct regulated activity in the city only if a valid city identification
card identifying the person has been issued, is prominently displayed by
attaching it to the front of the outermost clothing between the waist and
neck, and has not been revoked, suspended, or impounded.



2.   A licensee must not transfer its license or identification card to
another person.



3.   A person must not use a city identification card issued to someone
other than that person.



4.   A city identification card must be displayed only while conducting
regulated activity in the city and must be used for no other purpose and in
no other location.



5.   A person conducting regulated activity must not go onto private
property for that purpose when there are signs prominently posted indicating
that trespassing, solicitation or both is unwelcome or prohibited.



6.   A person must not be on a street, highway, or adjacent boulevard and
direct regulated activity toward the occupants of any motor vehicle in
transit and must not obstruct the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any public street, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way.



7.   A person must not conduct regulated activity in a manner that creates
a health or safety hazard.



8.   A person must conduct regulated activity in a reasonably courteous
manner at all times, must not engage in offensive, obscene, or abusive
language, must not push open a door not opened by an occupant, must not place
any portion of the person's body through an opened doorway without the
invitation of an occupant, and must not physically attempt to stop an
occupant from closing a door



9.   A licensee must immediately leave private property when requested to
do so by an occupant or owner and must leave immediately upon completion of a
transaction or an unsuccessful attempt to contact an occupant,



10.   A licensee entering onto residential property must go directly to a
door of the house, unless there is an adult present outside of the house or
in an open garage. At no time may a licensee go to a window or to the back
yard, unless invited to do so by the occupant.



11.   A person conducting regulated activity must not make untrue
statements to the people contacted regarding the purpose of the contact,
orders placed by the neighbors, or the goods and services offered.



12.   A licensee must not make statements to the people contacted
indicating or implying that the city identification card constitutes an
endorsement of their activities or products by the city.



13.   While conducting regulated activity, a licensee must not be
accompanied by a person who is not licensed or is not listed in the license
application.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



630.055.  Suspension; Revocation.



1.   The city may suspend or revoke an identification card or license,
using the procedure established in section 700.035, if the person who is the
subject of the card, a person acting on behalf of the licensee, or the
licensee has:



   a.   violated a provision of this section, or other local laws
governing the same activity, during the license period;



   b.   violated a criminal law during the license period that
adversely reflects on the ability to honestly, safely, or lawfully conduct
the regulated activity; or



   c.   submitted false information or omitted material information in
the licensing process required by this section.



2.   If a license is revoked or suspended, all identification cards issued
to people acting on behalf of the licensee are automatically revoked or
suspended.



3.   The identification card of any person convicted of violating a
provision of this section is automatically revoked. The license of the
organization on whose behalf the person was acting and all other
identification cards issued to people acting on behalf of that licensee are
also automatically revoked upon that conviction.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



630.060.  Penalty, Enforcement.



1.   A violation of a provision of this section is subject to the
penalties established in section 1310.



2.   The community development director, the chief of police, and their
designees are authorized to enforce this ordinance. They may impound an
identification card and license when a person has been found violating a
provision of this section, when cause exists for suspending or revoking the
identification card or license, or when the identification card or license
has been suspended or revoked. When impounding a card or license, the
official must send a notice to the licensee and the subject of the card at
the address on the application form, giving the parties ten days to submit a
written request for a hearing before the city council. Failure to timely
request an appeal, constitutes a waiver of that appeal and results in an
automatic suspension of the license or card for three years.



(Section amended by Ord. 2007-19, adopted May 21, 2007)



SECTION 635.  [REPEALED].



(Repealed by Ord. 2016-15, effective January 1, 2017)



SECTION 640.  PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT.



640.005.  License.



A person, firm or corporation must not operate a billiard parlor, pool hall,
bowling alley, roller skating rink, or motion picture theater in the city
without having a city license to do so.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-20, adopted November 6, 2006)



640.010.  Application.



An application for a license must be made to the community development
department and will be subject to the requirements of section 700, except
section 700.015(2).  The application must be accompanied by the fee
specified in section 710.



640.015.  License Transfer.



A license may be transferable to a new owner upon approval of the community
development director and payment of the regular license fee established in
section 710.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-20, adopted November 6, 2006)



640.020.  Duties of Licensee.



Each licensee must maintain an orderly establishment at all times and comply
with all state laws regarding the operation or conduct of the business and
all city ordinances.  A licensee may not permit a person under the age of 18
to purchase or use tobacco in any form, nor permit a minor as defined in
section 600 to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages, on the premises.



640.025.  Special Requirements for Theaters.



If a motion picture theater has more than one screen and the screens are
serviced by a common lobby or entrance area, the starting and completion of
the showings must be staggered to minimize the amount of patrons awaiting
admission.  To alleviate high amounts of congestion and provide adequate and
safe movement for patrons, a minimum of ten minute intermissions between
showings on any given screen must be provided.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-20, adopted November 6, 2006)



SECTION 645.  PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER SUPPLIERS



645.005.  Licensing of Suppliers.



1.   A person must not undertake the business of supplying for rent
portable storage containers, as defined in city code section 845.020, on
property that is improved as a single family or two family residence in the
city of Minnetonka without having in effect a current, valid license obtained
from the city.



2.   An applicant for a supplier's license must submit an application to
the community development director on the city's approved form, accompanied
by the license fee specified in section 710.  The application must
accurately state:



   a.    the name, address, and local telephone number of the
applicant; and



   b.   a description of the manner and kind of services to be rendered.



3.   Each applicant for a license must submit a bond in the amount of
$1,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of contracts and compliance
with this code.  The bond must be in the form prescribed by the city and
must be in favor of the city and everyone suffering damages because of the
breach of the bond conditions.



4.   Each license applicant must also submit a certificate of insurance
certifying that its business is currently insured by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota.  The certificate must be
in the form prescribed by the city.  The minimum limits of coverage for the
insurance are:



   a.   liability insurance:



      (1)   each claim, at least $100,000;



      (2)   each occurrence, at least $300,000; and



      (3)   property damage, at least $50,000.



   b.   workers' compensation:  statutory amounts.



The insurance must be kept in force during the term of the license and must
provide for notification to the city 10 days before termination or
cancellation.  A license will automatically be revoked upon notice of
termination or cancellation of this insurance and will remain revoked until
and unless other insurance is provided as required.



5.   A supplier's license will expire July 31 of each year.



645.010. Duties of Supplier.



1.   The supplier must comply with all of the requirements in city code
section 845.020;



2.   The supplier must comply with the provisions of city code section
845.020 and must remove portable storage containers before expiration of the
time periods required in that section. The supplier may not empty a container
onto the property before removing it; and



3.   The supplier must make its records regarding activities in the city
of Minnetonka available for city review during all reasonable business hours.



(Added by Ord. 2007-12, adopted April 9, 2007)



CHAPTER 7:  GENERAL
LICENSE PROVISIONS; FEES



Section



   700.   GENERAL PROVISIONS: LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   705.   GENERAL PROVISIONS: FEES.



   710.   GENERAL FEES AND CHARGES.



   715.   BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



SECTION 700.  GENERAL PROVISIONS: LICENSES AND PERMITS.



700.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words are defined for
the purpose of this chapter as follows.



1.   “Business” means any kind of vocation, occupation, profession,
enterprise, establishment and any other kind of activity and matter,
including all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used with it,
which is conducted directly or indirectly for private profit or benefit on
premises within the city.



2.   “Premises” means all lands, structures, places and also the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used with them in any business, and
also any personal property which is either affixed to or otherwise used in
connection with any business conducted on the premises.



700.010.  Compliance Required.



A person must not directly or indirectly conduct a business or non-profit
enterprise, or engage in any activity, for which a license is required by
this code without first obtaining the license and having it in effect at all
times.



700.015.  Applications.



Except as noted in the specific code sections applicable to each license, the
following provisions apply to all licenses issued by the city.



1.   All applications for licenses required by this code must be made
annually and must be properly completed by the applicant on forms provided by
the city.  Each application must be accompanied by the fee specified in
section 710. License fees submitted with an application for less than an
entire year may be prorated by the appropriate department director.



2.   Each applicant for a license must submit a bond in the amount of
$10,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of contracts and
compliance with this code.  The bond must be in the form prescribed by the
city and be in favor of the city and all people suffering damages because of
the breach of the bond conditions.



3.   A license will be renewable annually on or before December 31 of
every year and may be revoked or refused renewal for cause.  Adequate cause
includes any work or activity done in violation of this code or a licensee's
refusal to correct any defective work performed by the licensee, its agents
or employees.  There will be no refund of any license fee for a license
surrendered or revoked prior to the end of a complete one year term.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-18, adopted Sept. 25, 2006; amended by Ord. #2004-05,
adopted February 9, 2004)



700.020.  Insurance.



When required by the specific provisions of this code, the applicant must
also submit a certificate of insurance certifying that its business is
currently insured by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state of Minnesota.  The certificate must be in the form prescribed by the
city.  The minimum limits of coverage for the insurance are:



1.   liability insurance:



   a.   each claim, at least $500,000;



   b.   each occurrence, at least $500,000; and



   c.   property damage, at least $100,000.



2.   workers' compensation: statutory amounts.



The insurance must be kept in force during the term of the license and must
provide for notification to the city 10 days prior to termination or
cancellation.  A license will automatically be revoked upon notice of
termination or cancellation of this insurance and will remain revoked until
and unless other insurance is provided as required.



700.025.  Issuance.



Except when otherwise provided, the issuance of a license will be the
responsibility of the director of the department where the application is to
be filed.  A license can be denied for any reason which is contrary to the
public health, safety, or welfare, including such things as an incomplete
application, non-compliance with state or city requirements, false statement
or material omission in the license application, or inappropriate location
for the proposed activity.  A director's denial of a license application may
be appealed to the city council by filing a request in writing with the city
clerk within 10 days after the denial.



700.030.  General Standards of Conduct of Licensee.



Every license holder in the city must:



1.   permit all reasonable inspections of its premises for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with state law and this code;



2.   post and maintain the license upon the licensed premises in a
conspicuous place where it can be seen at all times; and



3.   not allow any person, other than authorized employees under its
control and direction, to use its license for doing any work covered by the
provisions of this code.



700.035.  Suspension, Revocation or Civil Penalty.



1.   Every license issued under this code is subject to the right of the
city council to suspend or revoke the license and to impose a civil penalty
of up to $2,000 for each violation if the holder, its agents, employees,
representatives or lessees, directly or indirectly, fail to comply with any
provision of state law or this code, or made a false statement or material
omission in the license application.



2.   Except where a different procedure is provided by ordinance or state
law, the following procedure applies to suspensions, revocations and
impositions of civil penalties.



   a.   Before the suspension or revocation of any license granted by
the city or the imposition of any civil penalty, written notice must be
mailed by certified mail to the licensee at the address listed in the
license.  The notice must contain:



      (1)   a statement of the alleged violation and any corrections
required by the city; or



      (2)   a statement of the grounds upon which a suspension,
revocation or civil penalty will be considered; and



      (3)   a statement that within 30 days after the date of the
notice the licensee may demand in writing a hearing and that the demand must
be delivered to the city clerk; and



      (4)   a statement that failure to request a hearing will be
cause for automatic suspension or revocation of the license or the imposition
of a civil penalty.



      If the notice described in subparagraph (1) above states
corrections required by the city, the notice must also state that failure to
comply with the corrections within 10 days after the date of the notice will
be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license or imposition of a
civil penalty.



   b.   If the licensee wishes to have a hearing on the matter, it must
demand the hearing in writing within 30 days after the date of the notice
described in subparagraph a, above.  The demand must be delivered to the
city clerk.  Failure to request a hearing will be cause for automatic
suspension or revocation of the license or imposition of a civil penalty.



   c.   If a hearing is requested, written notice of the date and time
of the public hearing must be sent to the licensee at least 10 days in
advance.  The hearing will be before an independent hearing officer selected
by the council, except that the city council may choose instead to have the
hearing held before the council.  At the hearing, evidence of any alleged
violation or grounds upon which a suspension, revocation, or civil penalty
would be based must be presented.  The licensee may be represented by
counsel and must be given the opportunity to be heard.  After conclusion of
the hearing, the hearing officer will prepare a written recommendation to the
city council, stating the reasons for the recommendation.



   d.   If a hearing officer has been used, the matter will be
scheduled for city council action after receiving the written recommendation,
with at least 10 days prior notice to the licensee.  No further evidence
will be taken by the council, and the council’s action must be based on the
hearing record.  The council’s decision must be in writing.  If the
council determines that proper grounds exist to take action, the council will
state those grounds in its decision and suspend or revoke the license, 
impose a civil penalty, or both. No suspension may be for longer than 60
days.  Action by the council does not prevent the city from bringing
criminal charges in connection with the same case.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



700.040.  Background Investigations.



1.   Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to establish
regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota's
computerized criminal history information for specified non-criminal purposes
of licensing background checks.



2.   Authority to Conduct. The Minnetonka police department is hereby
required, as the exclusive entity within the city, to do a criminal history
background investigation on the applicants for the following licenses:



   a.   liquor, including managers of the establishment;



   b.   charitable gambling, when the licensee will operate in the city;



   c.   pawnbroker and precious metal dealer;



   d.   sexually oriented business;



   e.   peddler and solicitor; and



   f.   massage business, including managers of the business.



In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to
screen license applicants, the police department is authorized to access data
maintained in the Minnesota bureau of criminal apprehension's computerized
criminal history information system in accordance with BCA policy.  Any data
that is accessed and acquired must be maintained at the police department
under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or
her designee.  A summary of the results of the computerized criminal history
data may be released by the police department to the licensing authority,
including the city council and city staff involved in the licensing process.



2.   Procedures. Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant
must authorize the police department by written consent to undertake the
investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of
state law, including Minn. Stat. Chap. 13, regarding the collection,
maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in
Minn. Stat. §364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for a license, or
deny the ability of a state licensed charitable gambling organization to
operate in the city, on the basis of the applicant's prior conviction unless
the crime is directly related to the license and the conviction is for a
felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.  If the city
rejects the applicant's request on this basis, the city must notify the
applicant in writing of the following:



a.   the grounds and reasons for the rejection;



b.   the applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minn.
Stat. § 364.06;



c.   the earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license or for
permission to operate within the city; and



d.   that all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon
reapplication.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-14; adopted October 8, 2012; added by Ord, 2009-11,
adopted September 14, 2009)



SECTION 705.  GENERAL PROVISIONS: FEES.



705.005.  Fees Authorized and Defined.



The fees for licenses, permits and municipal services are in the amounts
established in this section.  Reference in other portions of this code or in
other city ordinances to such terms as “required fee,” “established
fee,” “required license fee,” “license fee,” and “license fee in
the required amount,” means the fees specified in this section.



705.010.  Priority of Application.



If fees are specified in other parts of this code or in other city ordinances
but not in this section, then the fees specified shall be effective for all
purposes.  If there are amounts specified in this section as well as other
chapters or ordinances, then the amounts appearing in this section supersede
the others.



705.011.  Fee for Work Without License or Permit.



A person, firm or corporation that begins work without obtaining the
necessary license or permit is required to pay double the fee specified in
chapter 710 and is subject to the penalty provisions of this code. The
enforcement officer responsible for enforcing the applicable code provision
may waive this requirement if the enforcement officer believes that the work
was required by an emergency.



(Added by Ord. #2006-25, adopted December 18, 2006)



705.015.  Assessment of Delinquent Charges.



Fees and civil penalties imposed by the city, including late payment
penalties, constitute a lien against, and may be assessed against property
that was the subject matter, or related to the subject matter, of the fees
and penalties, or property that was the location of an activity, proposed
use, delivery of city service, or other circumstances that resulted in the
fees or penalties or both.  Before certifying such an assessment, the city
must send a bill to the taxpayer of record for the fee or civil penalty or
both.  If the bill, or any part of it, has not been paid within 30 days
after the date of the bill, the unpaid cost plus late payment penalties and
interest may be certified against the property to which the cost is
attributable.  The council may establish the appropriate rate of interest,
taking into consideration such market conditions as the prime rate of
interest generally charged by the major twin cities banks.  Before
certification against the property, reasonable notice of the impending
certification and an opportunity to be heard by the council must be given to
the taxpayer of record.  Failure of the taxpayer to receive the notice does
not invalidate the certification.  After city council approval, the unpaid
cost may be certified to the county auditor for collection as a special
assessment along with current taxes in the following year or in such annual
installments, not exceeding 10, as the council may determine.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2009-01, adopted
January 26, 2009)



SECTION 710.  GENERAL FEES AND CHARGES.



710.005.  Licenses and Permits.



The fees for licenses and permits, and the applicable conditions are as set
forth below:



 

para. no.
 
description
 
amount
 
code section




1.
 
animals
 
 
 
 


 
 
   dangerous animal registration
 
$50.00
 
925.105


 
 
   commercial kennel license
 
 
 
925.065


 
 
   per year or portion thereof
 
$70.00
 
 


 
 
   multiple animal permit
 
$35.00
 
925.065


 
 
   veterinary hospital license
 
$125.00
 
925.070


 
 
   impounding fee
 
 
 
925.035


 
 
      first time
 
$35.00
 
 


 
 
      second time (in one year)
 
$60.00
 
 


 
 
      third time (in one year)
 
$110.00
 
 


 
 
      each subseq. impound in one year
 
$110.00
 
 


 
 
   wild animal display permit
 
$20.00
 
925.095


2.
 
billiard parlor or pool hall license
 
 
 
640.010


 
 
   per table
 
$15.00
 
 


 
 
   minimum
 
$55.00
 
 


3.
 
body art license
 
$340.00
 
820.015


 
 
   investigation fee 
 
$300.00
 
 


 
 
   plus health plan review fees in paragraph 12
 
 
 
 


 
 
   plus license late fees in paragraph 16
 
 
 
 


4.
 
bowling alley license - per alley
 
$25.00
 
640.010


5.
 
building permits - general
 
 
 
500.010


 
 
   total valuation
 
fee
 
 


 
 
      $1 to $1,100
 
$50.00
 
 


 
 
      $1,101 to $2,000
 
$50.00 for first $1,100 plus $3.60 for each additional $100 or fraction
thereof
 
 


 
 
      $2,001 to $25,000
 
$80.00 for first $2,000 plus $16.00 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof
 
 


 
 
      $25,001 to $50,000
 
$450.00 for first $25,000 plus $11.75 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof
 
 


 
 
      $50,001 to $100,000
 
$738.25 for first $50,000 plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000 or fraction
thereof
 
 


 
 
      $100,001 to $500,000
 
$1,139.50 for first $100,000 plus $6.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof
 
 


 
 
      $500,001 to $1,000,000
 
$3,707.25 for first $500,000 plus $5.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof
 
 


 
 
      $1,000,001 and up
 
$6,430.00 for first $1,000,000 plus $4.50 for each additional $1,000 or
fraction thereof
 
 


 
 
   plan review fee
 
65% of building permit fee
 
 


 
 
   re-inspection fee
 
$77.00
 
 


 
 
   additional plan review required due to applicant changes/additions
 
$52.00/hour
 
 


 
 
   raze or demolish building permit
 
$52.00
 
500.030


6.
 
contractor licenses
 
 
 
 


 
 
   gas piping: 1-year
 
$65.00
 
515.010


 
 
         2-year
 
$110.00
 
 


 
 
         3-year
 
$145.00
 
 


 
 
   mechanical contractor license
 
 
 
515.010


 
 
   Class A (warm air, refrigeration, steam/hot water):
 
 
 
 


 
 
         1-year
 
$65.00
 
 


 
 
         2-year
 
$110.00
 
 


 
 
         3-year
 
$145.00
 
 


 
 
   Class B (accessory - fireplace):
 
 
 
 


 
 
         1-year
 
$55.00
 
 


 
 
         2-year
 
$90.00
 
 


 
 
         3-year
 
$125.00
 
 


7.
 
electrical, fire, gas piping, mechanical, plumbing or sewer/water permit
 
 
 
505.020
510.020
515.020
910.010


 
 
contract price
 
percent of contract price
 
 


 
 
   $1 to $1,300
 
minimum: $50.00
 
 


 
 
   $1,301 to $5,000
 
$50.00 plus 2.98% of amount over $1,300
 
 


 
 
   $5,001 to 10,000
 
$162.00 plus 2.70% of amount over $5,000
 
 


 
 
   $10, 001 to $25,000
 
$297.50 plus 2.35% of amount over $10,000
 
 


 
 
   $25,001 to $50,000
 
$651.00 plus $2.14% of amount over $25,000
 
 


 
 
   $50,001 and up
 
$1,186.50 plus 1.80% of amount over $50,000
 
 


 
 
in addition, the following flat-rate fees are charged:
 
 
 
 


 
 
   plan review
 
15% of permit fee only if valuation is over $30,000
 
 


 
 
   re-inspection fee
 
$77.00
 
 


8.
 
engineering and street items
 
 
 
 


 
 
   driveway permit
 
 
 
1105.035


 
 
      residential approach
 
$23.00
 
 


 
 
      all other approaches
 
$30.00
 
 


 
 
   right of way permit
 
 
 
1120.055


 
 
      administrative fee
 
$50.00
 
 


 
 
      excavation within street
 
$50.00/hole
 
 


 
 
      excavation within boulevard
 
$30.00/hole
 
 


 
 
      open cut trench
 
$50.00 for first 100 linear feet, plus $0.50/foot over 100 feet
 
 


 
 
      small wireless facility
 
$500.00/
location
 
 


 
 
Rent to occupy space on a city-owned wireless support structure
 
$150.00/
facility/yr
 
 


 
 
Maintenance associated with space occupied on a city-owned wireless support
structure
 
$25.00/facility/
yr
 
 


 
 
Electricity used to operate a small wireless facility if not purchased
directly from a utility
 
$73.00/facility/mo/radio node less than or equal to 100 max watts
OR actual costs, whichever is greater
 
 


 
 
Electricity used to operate a small wireless facility if not purchased
directly from a utility
 
$182.00/
facility/mo/
radio node over 100 max watts
OR actual costs, whichever is greater
 
 


 
 
   subdivision inspections engineering inspection fee
 
 
 
1100.035


 
 

infrastructure project value

 

fee

 
 


 
 
      $1 to $150,000
 
$4,000.00
 
 


 
 
      $150,000 to 300,000
 
$4,000.00 for first $150,000 plus 1.5% of each additional dollar
 
 


 
 
      $300,000 and above
 
$6,250 for first $300,000 plus 0.5% of each additional dollar
 
 


 
 
   subdivisions - street signs
 
 
 
 


 
 
      street name signs
 
$130.00
 
 


 
 
      all other signs
 
$120.00
 
 


9.
 
food establishment licenses
 
 
 
815.020


 
 
   Class A: supper clubs, sit-down, drive-in, delivery, take-out
restaurants; or similar facility
 
$830.00
 
 


 
 
   Class B: mobile food vendor, limited food vendor, mobile food cart, or
similar facility
 
$250.00
 
 


 
 
   Class C: grocery, meat market, bakery, deli, rental kitchen, limited
food service, or similar facility
 
$665.00
 
 


 
 
   Class D: snack stands, push carts or similar facility
 
$480.00
 
 


 
 
   Class E: limited grocery, retail potentially hazardous foods, bulk foods
 
$335.00
 
 


 
 
      non-potentially hazardous foods
 
$280.00
 
 


 
 
   Class G: prepackaged, non-perishable, candy, or coffee (no
refrigeration needed)
 
$180.00
 
 


 
 
   additional facilities - more than one of any type or types of any
operation listed within the classes
 
$290.00
 
 


 
 
   food vehicles - per vehicle
 
$130.00
 
 


 
 
   school kitchen inspection fee
 
$700.00
 
 


 
 
   special event food stands
 
 
 
 


 
 
      first day
 
$80.00
 
 


 
 
      application received within 5 business days of the event
 
$120.00
 
 


 
 
      each additional consecutive day
 
$25.00
 
 


 
 
      each day, existing license holder
 
$25.00
 
 


 
 
      maximum - each license
 
$170.00
 
 


 
 
   special food handling establishment - day care center
 
 
 
 


 
 
      full service
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
      limited service
 
$265.00
 
 


 
 
   temporary food service (less than 6 months)
 
$170.00
 
 


 
 
   vending machines
 
$25.00
 
 


 
 
   plus health plan review fees in paragraph 12
 
 
 
 


 
 
   plus license late fees in paragraph 16
 
 
 
 


 
 
   second reinspection
 
25% of license fee
 
 


 
 
   third or more reinspection
 
50% of license fee
 
 


10.
 
health plan review fee
 
 
 
 


 
 
   Hazard Analysis Critical Control Plan (HACCP) Plan Review
 
$150.00
 
 


 
 
   new establishment
 
100% of license fee
 
 


 
 
   remodel
 
50% of license fee
 
 


11.
 
housing moving permit
 
 
 
520.015


 
 
   each application
 
$300.00
 
 


 
 
   dwelling inspection
 
$95.00
 
 


12.
 
incinerators license
 
$6.00
 
835.045


13.
 
land use applications
 
 
 
 


 
 
   conditional use permits
 
 
 
300.06


 
 
      home occupations, public buildings, grading permits, accessory
apartments, accessory buildings, and transient sales
 
$450.00
 
 


 
 
      all other land uses
 
$850.00
 
 


 
 
   extension of land use approvals
 
 
 
300 & 400


 
 
      single family
 
$100.00
 
 


 
 
      all others
 
$200.00
 
 


 
 
   grading permit   (less than 1,000 cubic yards per acre)
 
 
 
300.28
(16)


 
 
      up to 500 yards
 
$150.00
 
 


 
 
      501 to 999 yards
 
$450.00
 
 


 
 
   guide plan amendments
 
$850.00
 
300.03


 
 
   interim use permits
 
$450.00
 
300.06


 
 
   non-conforming use expansion permit
 
 
 
300.29


 
 
      single or double dwelling
 
$450.00
 
 


 
 
      all others
 
$850.00
 
 


 
 
   project revision or delay fee:
 
Fee is ½ of the original application fee
 
 


 
 
      applicant requested project delay or pull from agenda after 3
public meetings. delays created by the city staff, council, or commissions do
not qualify.
 
 
 
 


 
 
   rezoning
 
$1,050.00
 
300.03


 
 
   signs
 
 
 
325


 
 
      permit fees
 
 
 
 


 
 
         permanent
 
$100.00
 
 


 
 
         temporary
 
$50.00
 
 


 
 
         sign plan
 
$300.00
 
 


 
 
      retrieval fees
 
 
 
 


 
 
         less than 5 square feet
 
$25.00
 
 


 
 
         over 5 square feet
 
$50.00
 
 


 
 
site plan, master plan or major amendment to master plan
 
 
 
300.22
300.27


 
 
   administrative site plan review
 
$300.00
 
 


 
 
   other site plan review
 
$1,050.00
 
 


 
 
   site plan extension
 
$1,050.00
 
 


 
 
   subdivision or lot division
 
 
 
400.015


 
 
      administrative lot division
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
      preliminary plat (new public roadways)
 
$1,050.00
 
 


 
 
      preliminary plat (no new public roadways) or lot division
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
   final plat
 
$1,050.00
 
400.035


 
 
   variances
 
 
 
300.07


 
 
      single or double dwelling
 
$450.00
 
 


 
 
      all others
 
$850.00
 
 


 
 
   wetland, floodplain, or shoreland alteration permit
 
$850.00
 
300.03


 
 
   consolidated development  (a single development requiring more than
one land use application)
 
 
 
 


 
 
      2 applications
 
$1,700.00
 
 


 
 
      3 - 5 applications
 
$3,200.00
 
 


 
 
      6 or more applications
 
$4,100.00
 
 


 
 
   zoning letter
 
$100.00
 
 


 
 
complexity surcharge based on building square footage
 
multiplier times base fee
 
 


 
 
   0 - 25,000
 
1.0
 
 


 
 
   25,001 - 50,000
 
2.5
 
 


 
 
   50,001 - 100,000
 
3.0
 
 


 
 
   100,001 - 200,000
 
4.0
 
 


 
 
   200,001 - 300,000
 
5.0
 
 


 
 
   300,001 and above
 
6.0
 
 


14.
 
license late fee
 
 
 
 


 
 
   10 - 29 days
 
25% of license fee
 
 


 
 
   30 days
 
100% of license fee
 
 


15.
 
liquor licenses
 
 
 
600


 
 
   intoxicating liquor
 
 
 
 


 
 
      club, on-sale
 
 
 
 


 
 
         under 200 members
 
$300.00
 
 


 
 
         between 201 and 500 members
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
         between 501 and 1000 members
 
$650.00
 
 


 
 
         between 1001 and 2000 members
 
$800.00
 
 


 
 
         between 2001 and 4000 members
 
$1,000.00
 
 


 
 
         between 4001 and 6000 members
 
$2,000.00
 
 


 
 
         over 6000 members
 
$3,000.00
 
 


 
 
      consumption & display
 
$550.00
 
 


 
 
      culinary class
 
$100.00
 
 


 
 
      off-sale
 
$380.00
 
 


 
 
      off-sale microdistillery
 
$250.00
 
 


 
 
      off-sale small brewer or brew pub
 
$380.00
 
 


 
 
      on-sale
 
$8,600.00
 
 


 
 
      on-sale 2:00 a.m. closing
 
$200.00
 
 


 
 
      on-sale brewer's taproom and Sunday license
 
$600.00
 
 


 
 
      on-sale brew pub
 
$8,600.00
 
 


 
 
      on-sale microdistillery cocktail room
 
$600.00
 
 


 
 
      Sunday license
 
$200.00
 
 


 
 
   nonintoxicating malt liquor
 
 
 
 


 
 
      off-sale
 
$130.00
 
 


 
 
      on-sale
 
$580.00
 
 


 
 
   temporary license
 
$25.00
 
 


 
 
   temporary amendment processing fee
 
$200.00
 
 


 
 
   wine - on-sale
 
$2,000.00
 
 


 
 
   investigation fee
 
 
 
 


 
 
      in state
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
      out of state (actual cost of investigation not to exceed)
 
$10,000.00
 
 


16.
 
lodging establishment license
 
$220.00
 
830.015


 
 
   plus per room
 
$8.00
 
 


 
 
   plus health plan review fees in paragraph 12
 
 
 
 


 
 
   plus license late fees in paragraph 16
 
 
 
 


17.
 
massage license
 
 
 
810.030


 
 
   business license
 
$320.00
 
 


 
 
   investigation fee
 
$300.00
 
 


 
 
   plus health plan review fees in paragraph 12
 
 
 
 


 
 
   plus license late fees in paragraph 16
 
 
 
 


18.
 
parking overnight
 
 
 
930.032


 
 
   new permit
 
no charge
 
 


 
 
   replacement permit
 
$25.00
 
 


19.
 
pawnbroker license
 
$4,000.00
 
610.040


 
 
   investigation fee
 
$1,500.00
 
 


 
 
   transaction fee
 
$1.50 per billable transaction
 
 


20.
 
peddler, solicitor, and canvasser license
 
$75.00
 
630.040


21.
 
pet shop license
 
$100.00
 
825.015


 
 
   plus health plan review fees in paragraph 12
 
 
 
 


 
 
   plus license late fees in paragraph 16
 
 
 
 


22.
 
portable storage container supplier
 
$100.00
 
645.005


23.
 
precious metal or secondhand dealer license
 
$500.00
 
610.040


 
 
   investigation fee
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
   transaction fee
 
$1.50 per billable transaction
 
 


24.
 
request for miscellaneous council action not specifically listed
 
$300.00
 
 


25.
 
re-submission or postponement of application by the applicant for any
license, permit, or other city approval due to incomplete or improper
application information, in addition to original fee set set forth herein.
 
$10.00
 
 


 
 
   (This fee may be waived by the department director upon good cause
shown by the applicant.)
 
 
 
 


26.
 
roller skating rink license
 
$110.00
 
640.010


27.
 
sanitary sewer surcharges
 
 
 
1200.095


 
 
   Inspection not allowed
 
 
 
 


 
 
      Single family
 
$150.00
 
 


 
 
      Non-single family
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
   Correction not made
 
 
 
 


 
 
      Single family
 
$150.00
 
 


 
 
      Non-single family
 
$500.00
 
 


 
 
   Prohibited re-connection made
 
 
 
 


 
 
      Single family
 
$300.00
 
 


 
 
      Non-single family
 
$1000.00
 
 


28.
 
sexually-oriented businesses license
 
$1,000.00
 
615.045


 
 
   investigation fee
 
$1,000.00
 
 


29.
 
swimming pool license, public
 
 
 
805.030


 
 
   indoor
 
$430.00
 
 


 
 
   outdoor
 
$430.00
 
 


 
 
   additional pool, same location
 
$275.00
 
 


 
 
   second reinspection
 
25% of license fee
 
 


 
 
   third or more reinspection
 
50% of license fee
 
 


 
 
   plus license late fees in paragraph 16
 
 
 
 


30.
 
temporary structure - per unit
 
$10.00
 
845.020
(3)(f)


31.
 
theater license- indoor motion picture seating capacity/screen
 
$300.00
 
640.015


32.
 
tobacco sales license, retail
 
$235.00
 
625.020


33.
 
trailers, camper RVs and temporary family health care dwelling units - 3
month permit
 
$100.00
 
855.015


34.
 
water and sanitary sewer
 
 
 
 


 
 
   meter test deposit
 
$50.00
 
1200.045


 
 
   on or off service charge - minimum
 
 
 
1200.025


 
 
      at the request of the owner
 
$10.00
 
 


 
 
      stop box level change fee
 
$20.00
 
 


 
 
   turn off charge, nonpayment of bill, etc.
 
$20.00
 
1200.025


 
 
   turn on charge, after payment of bill, etc.
 
$20.00
 
1200.030


35.
 
vacation of street, alley, easement or public ground
 
$800.00 plus costs
 
1140.010


36.
 
waste and recycling collector license
 
 
 
835.035


 
 
   first vehicle
 
$150.00
 
 


 
 
   each add'l vehicle
 
$75.00
 
 


 
 
   re-inspection
 
$45.00
 
 


 
 
   plus license late fees in paragraph 16
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-01, effective April 9, 2018; Amended by Ord. 2017-18,
effective January 1, 2018; Amended by Ord. 2017-03, effective January 23,
2017; Amended by Ord. 2016-15, effective January 1, 2017; Amended by Ord.
2016-08, effective May 23, 2016; Amended by Ord. 2016-01, effective February
13, 2016; Amended by Ord. #2015-18, adopted November 9, 2015; amended by Ord.
2015-13, adopted July 27, 2015; amended by Ord. 2014-25, adopted December 1,
2014; amended by Ord. 2014-19, adopted August 4, 2014; amended by Ord.
2014-14; adopted May 5, 2014; amended by Ord. 2013-19, adopted November 18,
2013; amended by Ord. 2012-16, adopted October 8, 2012; amended by Ord.
2011-23, adopted October 24, 2011; amended by Ord. 2011-19, adopted August
22, 2011; amended by Ord. 2011-12, adopted June 20, 2011; amended by Ord.
2010-17, adopted October 25, 2010; amended by  Ord. 2010-13, adopted
September 13, 2010; amended by Ord. 2010-11, adopted August 16, 2010, amended
by Ord. 2009-09; adopted July 13, 2009; amended by Ordinance 2009-08, adopted
July 13, 2009; amended by Ordinance 2008-36, adopted November 10, 2008;
amended by Ordinance 2008-29, adopted October 13, 2008; amended by Ordinance
2008-22, adopted August 25, 2008; amended by Ord. 2007-36, adopted November
5, 2007; amended by Ord. 2007-18, adopted May 21; amended by Ord. 2007-12,
adopted April 9, 2007; amended by Ord. 2007-01, adopted January 22, 2007;
amended by Ord. 2006-22, adopted November 6, 2006; amended by Ord. 2006-21,
adopted November 6, 2006; amended by Ord. 2006-17, Sept. 25, 2006; amended by
Ord. 2005-18, adopted November 14, 2005; Ord. 2005-12, adopted May 9, 2005;
amended by Ord. 2005-06, adopted February 28, 2005; amended by Ord. 2004-33,
adopted November 8, 2004; amended by Ord. 2003-30, adopted December 15, 2003;
amended by Ord. 2003-26, adopted November 24, 2003; amended by Ord. 2002-27,
adopted October 28, 2002; amended by Ord. 2001-26, adopted October 22, 2001;
amended by Ord. 2000-14, adopted July 10, 2000)



SECTION 715.  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.



715.005.  Fees.



The fees for issuing building permits, reviewing proposed plans and
specifications, and making inspections of work as required by this code are
set forth in section 710.



715.010.  Valuation.



1.   The amount of building permit fees and plan-checking fees will be
based on the value of the proposed work.  The value will be determined by
the community development director and will be the total value of all
construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work,
painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
elevators, fire extinguishing systems and other permanent work or permanent
equipment.



2.   When used to determine a permit fee, the terms “contract price”
or “estimated cost” means the sum of all materials, equipment, labor,
profit and installation costs necessary for the complete installation of the
system and components involved.  When materials, equipment, labor, profit or
installation are furnished by another party, the reasonable market value of
those items will be added to the estimated cost or contract price for permit
fee purposes.



3.   The contract price or estimated cost is subject to review by the
community development department.  If the contract price or estimated cost
is not deemed to reflect the true cost of the work to be done, it will be
revised and the applicant must pay the permit fee based upon that revision.



4.   If the actual cost of the work done exceeds the estimated cost by
$500.00 or more, the permittee must report the actual cost to the community
development department within 30 days after completion of the work, and the
permit fee for that work will be revised.  The permittee must then pay an
additional fee computed on the basis of the actual cost.



715.015.  Plan-Checking Fee.



When a plan is required to be submitted for a building permit, a
plan-checking fee must be paid at the time of submitting the plans and
specifications.  The plan-checking fee is set forth in section 710.



715.020.  Reinspection Fee.



When reinspection is necessary because of uncompleted work or corrections
orders that are not the subject of an administrative or court appeal, the
community development department may charge a reinspection fee as specified
in chapter 710.



(Amended by Ord. #2004-05, adopted February 9, 2004)



715.025.  Renewal Fee.



If a permit has expired, it may be renewed as long as no changes have been or
will be made to the original plans for the work.  The fee for renewal is 50
percent of the original permit fee applicable to the work uncompleted.



715.030.  Late Payment of Fees.



When work requiring a building or construction permit is started before
obtaining the permit, the permit fee will be doubled. The payment of the
double fee does not relieve any person from fully complying with the code
requirements in executing the work or from any other applicable penalties.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



715.035.  Contractor Responsibility.



When an installation, addition, or alteration of construction work involves
more than one contractor, each contractor is responsible for obtaining a
permit and paying the fee for its proportionate share of the work.



CHAPTER 8:  PUBLIC HEALTH;
PUBLIC NUISANCES



Section



   800.   BOARD OF HEALTH; HEALTH AUTHORITY.



   805.   SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS.



   810.   MASSAGE SERVICES.



   815.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.



   820.   BODY ART.



   825.   PET SHOPS AND CONTROL OF DISEASED ANIMALS.



   830.   LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS.



   835.   WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL; RECYCLING.



   840.   CONTROL OF DUTCH ELM AND OAK WILT DISEASE.



   845.   PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   846.   CLEAN-UP OF CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES.



   850.   NOISE REGULATIONS.



   855.   TRAILERS.



SECTION 800.  BOARD OF HEALTH; HEALTH AUTHORITY.



800.005.  Board of Health.



The city of Minnetonka board of health is established under Minn. Stat.
chapter 145A.



800.010.  Members and Term.



The board of health consists of the mayor and council members. No
compensation will be paid to the members for their service.



800.015.  Health Officer.



The city’s health officer or health authority is the city’s environmental
health supervisor, or other person appointed by the city council.



800.020.  Powers and Duties.



The board of health and health officer or health authority have the powers
and duties conferred upon local boards of health by state law.



SECTION 805.  SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS.



805.005.  Short Title.



This ordinance will be known as the swimming pool ordinance of the city of
Minnetonka.



805.010.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words are defined for
the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   “Swimming pool” means a permanent structure, basin, chamber, or
tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving or
recreational bathing, more than 75 square feet in area or over 24 inches in
depth.



2.   “Public swimming pool” means a swimming pool other than a private
single family residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by
numbers of people for swimming or bathing, regardless of whether a fee is
charged for use.  Included in this definition are swimming pools located in
or adjacent to apartment buildings, condominiums, townhouses and other
multiple dwelling residential complexes, public and private schools, public
and private recreational sports facilities, and commercial property unless
used only for the purpose of sales or display or both.



3.   “Private single family residential swimming pool” means a
swimming pool that is located on private property zoned and being used for
single family residential use and that is being used for swimming or bathing
only by the residents of the property or their invited guests.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-20, adopted December 3, 2012; amended by Ord. 2012-07,
adopted June 25, 2012)



805.015.  Permit; Plans and Specifications.



1.   A person must not construct, alter or reconstruct a swimming pool
without first obtaining a permit from the city to do so.  The application
for a permit must be on forms prescribed by the city.  The application must
be accompanied by the permit fee established in chapter 710, two sets of
plans and specifications prepared by a registered architect or engineer, and
other supporting data that may be required for proper review of the plans.



2.   The plans must be drawn to scale, accompanied by sufficient
specifications to permit a comprehensive review of the plans, and must
include:



   a.   plan and sectional views with all necessary dimensions of both
the pool and surrounding area;



   b.   a piping diagram showing pertinent elevation data and all
appurtenances including treatment facilities in sufficient detail to permit a
hydraulic analysis of the system; and



   c.   details on all treatment equipment, including catalog
identification of pumps, chlorinators, and related equipment.



3.   A permit is valid only for the work and location specified in the
permit.  A permit authorizes construction of appurtenances to the pool, with
the exception of the electrical and gas piping work, which require additional
permits.



4.   A person must obtain a permit required by this chapter either before
or during the day that work starts, or on the next succeeding business day
when work starts on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday.  If the person fails to
do so, he/she will be required to pay double the fee specified in chapter 710
and will be subject to the penalty provisions of this code.



5.   A permit issued expires upon completion of the work or one year from
the date of issuance, whichever is sooner. If a permit has expired, it may be
renewed for an additional one-year period as long as no changes have been or
will be made to the original plans for the work.  The fee for renewal is 50
percent of the original permit fee applicable to the work uncompleted.



6.   A permit may be revoked or worked stopped following the procedure in
the city building code.



805.020.  Construction Requirements.



1.   New and existing outdoor swimming pools must be completely enclosed
by a fence or wall.  Openings or points of entry into the pool area
enclosure must be equipped with gates.  The wall or fence and gates must be
at least 5 feet in height.  A fence must be constructed of at least a number
eleven gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material or other materials
approved by the building inspector.  Gates must be equipped with
self-closing and self-latching devices capable of being locked, placed on top
of the gate or another place inaccessible to small children.  Fence posts
must be decay- or corrosion-resistant and must be set in concrete bases or
other suitable material.  The opening between the bottom of the fence and
the ground or other surface may not be more than three inches.



2.   Swimming pools must be located on the premises in compliance with the
zoning ordinance requirements.



3.   A swimming pool and its appurtenances must be located at least 10
feet from an existing portion of a sewage system.  The water supply line for
a swimming pool must be at least 15 feet from an existing portion of a sewage
system.



4.   The pool and related facilities must be built in accordance with
plans approved by the city, except as otherwise approved by the city.  The
pool may not be placed in operation until city inspections show compliance
with the requirements of this section and a license has been issued to its
operator under this section if required.



805.025.  Inspection.



A person who does or causes to be done any of the work covered by this
section must notify the city at specific predetermined stages of construction
and at the time of completion to permit adequate inspection of the pool and
related equipment.  The city must be notified before any portion of the work
is connected with a building, and must be given reasonable time and
opportunity to inspect the work before it progresses to a point where it can
no longer be inspected.  No work may be covered until it has been inspected
and accepted by the city inspector.  This includes all underground piping
conduits, grounding of electrical materials, grounding of mesh in concrete
and grounding of pool structure.



805.030.  Public Swimming Pools - Licenses.



1.   A person wishing to operate a public swimming pool must first make an
application to the city, pay the required fee, and receive approval from the
city for a license to operate and from the Minnesota department of health for
plan review.  A license issued expires on December 31 of each year unless
otherwise revoked for cause.  A license applicant and licensee must comply
with this section and applicable Minnesota department of health rules in
order to receive and retain a license.  A license is valid only for the
person to whom it is issued, and no licensee may transfer or attempt to
transfer its license to another person.



2.   The fee for a license to operate and maintain a public swimming pool
is specified in section 710.  No fee is required for the operation of a
public swimming pool by the city, schools, YMCA, YWCA, or another non-profit
organization, except those operating pools at multiple dwelling facilities.



3.   A license is subject to the requirements of section 700 of this code,
except section 700.015(2).



(Amended by Ord. 2009-10; adopted August 3, 2009; amended by Ord. #2006-20,
adopted November 6, 2006)



805.035.  Public Swimming Pools - Health and Safety.



1.   A person having a communicable disease must not be employed or work
at a public swimming pool.  A person suspected of having an infectious
disease must be excluded from the swimming pool and its immediate area
including locker or changing rooms.



2.   Appropriate facilities must be provided for the safety of bathers as
may be required by the city.  These include lifesaving equipment, safety
devices, lifebuoys, lifehooks, first aid kits, and telephone.



3.   A public swimming pool must be under the supervision of the licensee
who is responsible for compliance with this section.



4.   When the swimming pool is not open for use, access to the pool must
be prohibited.



5.   No more than the maximum designed bather load may be permitted in a
public swimming pool at any time.



805.040.  Public Swimming Pools - Operation.



1.   The licensee of each public swimming pool must keep a daily record of
operational information including disinfectant residuals, pH, maintenance
procedures, recirculation, and other data as may be required by the city. 
This data must be kept on file by the licensee for six months and must be
made available for review by the city upon request.



2.   The pumps, filter, disinfectant and chemical feeders, and related
appurtenances must be kept in operation whenever the public swimming pool is
in use and for such additional periods as needed to keep the pool water clear
and of satisfactory bacterial quality.  For swimming pools having a capacity
of 200,000 gallons or more, this equipment must be continually operated
during periods of regular use.



3.   When any of the following conditions are found, a public swimming
pool must be immediately closed when ordered by the city and placarded to
indicate that it has been closed:



   a.   the proper number of safety equipment units are not provided;



   b.   the water clarity is such that a black disc, 6 inches in
diameter, is not readily visible when placed on a white field at the deepest
point of the pool;



   c.   the disinfectant residual is found to be below the acceptable
levels established in the Minnesota department of health rules; or



   d.   another condition which endangers the health, safety, or
welfare of the public.



   The pool must remain closed until the conditions are corrected and this
has been verified by the city.



805.045.  Public Swimming Pools - Inspections.



The city has the right of entry at any reasonable hour to inspect the
swimming pool, its related equipment, and the adjacent areas to ensure
compliance with all provisions of this section.



805.046.   Additional Provisions.



1.   The provisions contained in Minn. Stat. section 144.1222, except
subdivisions 1 and 1a, and the provisions contained in Minnesota Rules parts
4717.0150 through 4717.3975, including all future revisions of them, are
adopted by reference as part of this ordinance.



2.   The provisions of Minn. Stat. section 157.20, including all future
revisions of them, are adopted by reference as part of this ordinance.



(Added by Ordinance #2009-10, adopted August 3, 2009)



805.050.  Installer's License Required.



1.   A person must not engage in the business of installing, altering,
repairing, or extending a swimming pool, whirlpool, hot tub, or similar
recreational or health facilities without first obtaining an installer's
license from the city and paying the fee required in section 710.



2.   Each license application and license is subject to the requirements
of section 700 of this code.



805.055.  Drainage.



A person who drains, allows or causes the drainage of water from a public or
private swimming pool, including an accumulation of precipitation or runoff,
must do so only across the person's own property to the edge of the public
street pavement immediately adjacent to the property or to the nearest storm
sewer inlet, unless otherwise required or approved by the city engineer. 
The person who drains a swimming pool must regulate the volume and rate of
the discharge to prevent damage to public or private property. Swimming pools
operated on a year-round basis may be drained to the public sanitary sewer
system if approved by the public works director.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-15, adopted October 26, 2009)



805.060.  Enforcement.



The community development director and his/her agents are authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



SECTION 810.  MASSAGE SERVICES.



810.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words below are defined
for the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   “Operate” means to own, manage or conduct.



2.   “Within the city” includes physical presence as well as telephone
referral situations, such as a “phone-a-massage” type operation, in which
the business premises, although not actually located within the city, serves
as a point of assignment of employees who respond to requests for services
from within the city.



3.   "Massage" means the method of treating the superficial parts of the
human body, excluding the genitalia, pubic areas, and female breast, by
rubbing, pressing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or
stimulating with the hands or an instrument for no other purpose than
physical fitness, health-care referral, healing, relaxation, or
beautification.



4.   “Sanitary” means free from pathogenic microorganisms.



5.   “Adequate” or “approved” means acceptable to the health
authority following his/her determination as to conformance with public
health practices and standards.



6.   “Massage business” means the offering of massage services to the
general public, regardless of whether the offer is limited only to select
invitees or organizational members.



7.   “Health care facility” means a person, association, business,
organization or institution providing medical, surgical, dental,
chiropractic, osteopathic or physical therapy services where practitioners
are licensed by the state of Minnesota.



8.   “Massage therapist” means a person administering massage who has
completed either:



   a.    a minimum of 500 hours of class credits from a massage therapy
school (1) that is currently in good standing and accredited by the
accrediting bureau of health education schools, accrediting commission of
career schools and colleges, accrediting council for independent colleges and
schools, commission on massage therapy accreditation, higher learning
commission, or national accreditation commission of cosmetology arts and
sciences or (2) that is currently a school member in good standing of the
associated bodywork and massage professionals, American massage therapy
association, or national certification board for therapeutic massage and
bodywork, or



   b.   at least two years of full-time experience working as a massage
therapist at a licensed massage business that is not an adult massage parlor
as defined in city code section 615.015.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord #2006-17,
adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.010.  Massage Business License Required.



1.   A person must not operate a massage business within the city unless
the business is currently licensed under this section.



2.   A massage business license may be granted only to an applicant that
has insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for personal liability in the
practice of therapeutic massage, which provides coverage for all massage
therapists working on the business premises. A massage business may satisfy
this requirement by requiring each massage therapist working on the business
premises to provide that person's own insurance coverage of at least
$1,000,000 for personal liability in the practice of therapeutic massage.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord #2006-17,
adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.015.  License Exceptions.



1.   The following people and businesses are exempt from the provisions of
this ordinance while performing activities covered by their professional
licenses or professional affiliations:



   a.   a person licensed by the state of Minnesota as a medical or
dental professional under chapters 147, 148, or 150A of state law, and a
person who is hired or employed by, and exclusively provides treatment on the
premises of, such licensed professional;



   b.   athletic trainers, certified by the National Association of
Athletic Trainers (NAAT), when working with an amateur, semiprofessional or
professional athlete or athletic team;



   c.   beauty culturists and barbers licensed by the state of
Minnesota who do not hold themselves out to give massages, other than that
customarily given in the field and limited to the face, neck and scalp for
beautification purposes only; and



   d.   health care facilities.



2.   A person or organization providing temporary massage services such as
"chair massage" is not required to obtain a massage business license if the
following requirements are met:



   a.   the massage is provided in a place of business where the
massage can easily be seen by any employee or visitor on the premises;



   b.   the location does not hold a license to sell alcoholic
beverages;



   c.   massages are offered at the location no more than ten days per
calendar year;



   d.   each recipient of a massage remains in an upright position,
either sitting or standing; and



   e.   each recipient of a massage remains in the normal, daytime
attire worn when entering the business and does not remove any clothing
except outerwear such as a coat or jacket.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-09, adopted August 6, 2012; Ord #2006-17, adopted Sept.
25, 2006)



810.020.  License Application.



1.   An application for a massage business license under this section must
be filed with the community development department.  The application must be
made on a form supplied by the city and contain the following information:



   a.   whether the applicant is a natural person, a corporation, a
partnership, or other form of organization;



   b.   if the applicant is a natural person:



      (1)   the true name, place and date of birth, resident address
and phone number of the applicant;



      (2)   whether the applicant has ever used or has been known by
a name other than his/her true name; and if so, what was such name or names
and information concerning dates and places where used;



      (3)   the name of the business if it is to be conducted under
a name other than the applicant’s name; in which case, a copy of the
certificate required by state law must be attached to the application;



      (4)   the street address at which applicant has lived during
the preceding five years;



      (5)   the kind, name and location of every business or
occupation the applicant has been engaged in during the preceding five years;



      (6)   the names and addresses of the applicant's employer(s)
and partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years;



      (7)   whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony or other crime.  If so, the applicant must furnish information as to
the time, place and offense for each conviction;



      (8)   the applicant’s physical description; and



      (9)   whether the applicant has training or experience in
performing massage services.



   c.   if the applicant is a partnership:



      (1)   the names and addresses of the partners and for each
partner all information that is required of an individual applicant in
subparagraph b, above;



      (2)   the name of the managing partner(s) and the interest of
each partner in the business; and



      (3)   a true copy of the partnership agreement.  If the
partnership is required to file a certificate for a trade name under state
law, a copy of that certificate must also be attached.



   d.   if the applicant is a corporation or other organization:



      (1)   the name; and if incorporated, the state of
incorporation;



      (2)   a true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement, and by-laws.  If a
foreign corporation, a certificate of authority to do business in Minnesota
must also be attached; and



      (3)   the name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in
charge of the business to be licensed and all information concerning this
person(s) as is required in subparagraph b, above.



   e.   for all applicants:



      (1)   whether the applicant is licensed in other communities
to run similar businesses, and if so, where;



      (2)   the names of the people providing massage who are or
will be working for the applicant in the city of Minnetonka and certification
that each meets the minimum requirements of a massage therapist contained in
the definitions in section 810.005;



      (3)   whether the applicant has had an interest in, as an
individual or as part of a corporation, partnership, association, enterprise,
business or firm, a massage license that was denied (either initially or upon
renewal), revoked, or suspended within the last ten years;



      (4)   the location of the business premises;



      (5)   proof of the insurance required in section 810.010; and



      (6)   other information as the city may require.



2.   A licensee must promptly notify the director of community development
of a change in the information or facts required to be furnished on the
application for a license, even after the license has been issued.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord #2006-17,
adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.025.  Execution of Application.



An application for a license must be signed and sworn to.  If the applicant
is a natural person, the application must be signed and sworn to by that
person; if a corporation, by an officer of the corporation; if a partnership,
by one of the partners; and if an unincorporated association, by the manager
or managing officer of the association. The applicant must also submit a
signed and notarized acknowledgement that the applicant has read and
understands the requirements of this section 810.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord #2006-17,
adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.026.  Plans and Specifications.



1.   An application for a license must be accompanied by one set of plans
and specifications for the establishment.



2.   The plans must be drawn to scale, accompanied by sufficient
specifications to permit a comprehensive review of the plans, and must
include:



   a.   the proposed layout, mechanical schematics, construction
materials, and finish schedules;



   b.   the proposed products and equipment to be used; and



   c.   other information that may be required for the proper review of
the proposed application.



(Added by Ord #2006-17, adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.030.  Application Fees.



1.   An application for a license must be accompanied by the license fee
specified in section 710.  If an application is rejected, the city will
refund the license fee paid.  No other refunds will be made.



2.   An initial application for a license must be accompanied by the
investigation and plan review fees specified in section 710.  No
investigation or plan review fee will be refunded.



(Amended by Ord #2006-17, adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.035.  Persons Ineligible for a License.



No license may be issued to an applicant who:



1.   is under 18 years of age;



2.   has been convicted of a crime directly related to the occupation and
has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present
fitness to perform the duties and responsibilities of a licensee as required
by Minn. Stat. § 364.03, subd. 3.



3.   is not a citizen of the United States, unless the person is a
resident alien or holds a valid work permit;



4.   had an interest in, as an individual or as part of a corporation,
partnership, association, enterprise, business or firm, a massage license
that was denied (either initially or upon renewal), revoked, or suspended
within the last ten years;



5.   is not of good moral character or repute;



6.   owes taxes, assessments, or other financial claims to a governmental
agency that are due and delinquent; or



7.   is not the real party in interest of a massage business.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011)



810.040.  Locations Ineligible for a License.



No massage business may be located on property that:



1.   is zoned as a classification of residential property under the zoning
ordinance, except that the community development director may allow a person
with a disability as defined by the federal Americans with Disability Act to
offer massage services from a separate office in the person's home, subject
to appropriate conditions and subject to compliance with zoning provisions; or



2.   is subject to taxes, assessments, or other financial claims from a
governmental agency that are due and delinquent, except if a suit has been
commenced and is being diligently prosecuted to question the amount or
validity of taxes.



(Amended by Ord #2007-02, adopted Jan. 22, 2007)



810.045.  Granting of Licenses.



1.   Application process.



   a.   An application for a massage business license will be referred
to the police department for investigation of the facts set forth in the
application.  The police department must prepare a written recommendation
regarding issuance of the license.  The community development director may
conduct additional investigation as he/she deems necessary.



   b.   The community development director will make the determination
whether to approve or deny the license.  A denial must be communicated to
the applicant in writing specifying the reasons for denial.  The applicant
may appeal this denial to the city council within 10 days of the date of the
denial by submitting a request in writing.



   c.   Applications for license renewals must be submitted to the
community development director at least 30 days before the license
expiration.  The director will decide whether to approve or deny the license
renewal.  A denial must be communicated to the applicant in writing
specifying the reasons for denial.  The applicant may appeal the denial
following the procedure in section 700.025 of this code.



2.   Grounds for denial.  A license may be denied for any of the
following reasons:



   a.   fraud or deception in the license application;



   b.   history of violations of laws and ordinances that apply to
health, safety or moral turpitude;



   c.   bad repute;



   d.   convictions of crimes or offenses involving sexual misconduct;



   e.   ineligibility for a license under section 810.035;



   f.   failure to comply with any provision of this section 810; and



   g.   other matters deemed to be relevant by the community
development director or city council.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord #2006-17,
adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.050.  License Not Transferable.



1.   A license is issued to the applicant only and is not transferable to
another holder.  No licensee may loan, sell, give or assign a license to
another holder.



2.   The license issued for a massage business is only effective for the
compact and contiguous space specified in the approved license application. 
If the licensed premises is to be enlarged, altered, or extended, the
licensee must inform the issuing authority and receive approval before doing
so.



810.055.  Conditions of Licenses.



1.   A massage business must not employ or use a person as a massage
therapist on the licensed premises unless that person meets the definition of
a massage therapist in section 810.005.



   a.   When hiring or contracting with a massage therapist, the
licensee must (1) document that the person meets the definition of a massage
therapist in section 810.005, (2) obtain from each massage therapist a signed
and notarized acknowledgement that he or she has read and understands the
requirements of this section 810, and (3) obtain a list of any convictions
that the massage therapist has that are related to prostitution or violations
of massage regulations. The licensee must maintain this information in its
records and must provide the information for all massage therapists to the
city whenever it is requested and as part of its annual license renewal. 
Failure to provide complete and timely information will subject the licensee
to the penalties provided in this code and to potential denial of a renewed
license.



   b.   The director may cause an investigation of a massage therapist
and may disapprove the employment of, or contracting with, the person by
notice to the licensee in writing.



   c.   The licensee may appeal the director's decision to the city
council by placing a request in writing to the city clerk within ten days
after the issuance of the notice.  A failure to request an appeal waives the
licensee's ability to contest the director's decision.  After the appeal
period has expired without an appeal, or the city council has upheld the
director's decision upon an appeal, no massage therapist who has been
disapproved may operate in that capacity upon the licensed premises.



2.   A massage business must have its license or a true copy of it,
displayed in a prominent place on the licensed premises.



3.   A massage business must not discriminate on grounds of race, color,
creed, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, disability, sexual
orientation, and status with regard to public assistance in performing
services offered by the licensed establishment.



4.   The person who is receiving the massage must at all times have
his/her buttocks, anus and genitals covered with an appropriate
non-transparent covering.



5.   A male performing massages must at all times have his anus, buttocks
and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.



6.   A female performing massages must at all times have her breasts,
buttocks, anus and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.



7.   A person providing massage must not fondle or touch the genitals,
pubic regions, penis, scrotum, mons veneris, vulva, vaginal area or female
breasts of the person receiving the massage. A person providing massage must
not touch the buttocks of the person receiving the massage, except upon the
person's request and only for medical purposes, such as relieving pain or
muscle soreness.



8.   A licensee, or any employee of the licensee, must not solicit
business or perform massage services, and must not allow, encourage or direct
his/her employee to solicit business or perform massage services, while the
license is under suspension or revocation.



9.   A licensee must not permit the possession or consumption of alcoholic
beverages or illegal controlled substances on the licensed premises.



10.   The exterior windows of the licensed premises must not be covered
during hours that the licensed premises is open for business, except for
windows in massage rooms and restrooms.



11.   Advertising for the massage business must not appear in publications
or on websites, or subsections of publications or web sites, where 25% or
more of the number of advertisements advertise sexually-oriented businesses,
sexually-oriented uses, or specified sexual activities, as those terms are
defined in city code section 615.



12.   A licensee and its employees and agents must comply with all of the
provisions of this section 810. A licensee is strictly responsible for the
conduct of the massage business, including the actions of any employee,
independent contractor, or agent of the licensee on the licensed premises.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-11, adopted April 7, 2014; amended by Ord. 2011-25,
adopted December 19, 2011; Ord #2006-17, adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.060.  Suspension or Revocation of License.



The community development director may suspend, revoke, or not renew a
license upon a showing that the licensee, its owner, manager, employee,
independent contractor, or agent has engaged in any of the following conduct:



   a.   failure to comply with city ordinances or state law;



   b.   control or possession of alcoholic beverages or illegal
controlled substances on the premises;



   c.   conviction of any ordinance or state statute, arising on the
licensed premises;



   d.   conviction of  prostitution or another crime involving moral
turpitude;



   e.   failure to promptly notify the community development director
of a change in the information required to be submitted in a license
application.



   f.   fraud, deception or misrepresentation in connection with
securing the license;



   g.   other rational reasons related to public health, safety, or
welfare.



2.   Before taking action, the director must notify the licensee in
writing by certified mail ten days in advance of his/her intended action
stating the reasons for it and giving the licensee an opportunity to present
evidence related to the matter. The director must notify the licensee of the
final decision in writing by certified mail.



3.   A licensee may appeal the community development director's action by
submitting an appeal in writing to the city clerk within ten days after the
date of the director's action. A hearing on the appeal must be conducted in
accordance with section 700.035, subd. 2(c) and (d) of this code.



4.   A license is automatically revoked if the licensee does not respond
to a charge of violating a provision of this section 810 within the time
established by the district court. The community development director must
notify the licensee of this automatic revocation by certified mail.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011)



810.065.  Duration of License.



1.   Licenses issued under this chapter expire on July 31 of each year.



2.   When a licensee applies for renewal license with the required fee by
the deadline for submission, the licensee is authorized to operate until the
license is either renewed or denied.



(Amended by Ord #2006-17, adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.070.  Construction and Maintenance of Premises.



1.   Massage rooms, restrooms, bathrooms, janitor rooms, laundry
facilities, and similar facilities used in connection with the massage
business must be constructed of smooth and easily cleanable materials that
are resistant to wear, moisture, bacteria, mold or fungus growth.  The floor
to wall and wall to wall joints must be constructed to provide a sanitary
cove with a minimum radius of one inch.



2.   Restrooms used in connection with the massage business must be
provided with mechanical ventilation with 2 cfm per square foot of floor
area, a minimum of 20 foot candles of illumination, a hand-washing sink
equipped with hot and cold running water under pressure, single-use paper
towels or other approved drying device and a soap dispenser.



3.   A massage business must have a janitor's closet for the storage of
cleaning supplies.  This closet must have mechanical ventilation with 2 cfm
per square foot of floor area and a minimum of 20 foot candles of
illumination.  The closet must include a mop sink.



4.   Floors, walls, other structures, and equipment in massage rooms,
restrooms and bathrooms used in connection with the massage business must be
kept in a state of good repair and sanitary at all times.  Linens and other
materials must be stored at least 6 inches off the floor in areas protected
from contamination.  Sanitary towels, wash cloths, cleaning agents and
toilet tissue must be made available for each customer.



5.   Individual lockers must be made available for use by patrons.  These
lockers must have separate keys for locking.  Instead of individual lockers,
massage therapist businesses may provide secure areas designated for storage
of personal items belonging to employees and patrons while on the premises.



6.   Doors on massage rooms must not have locks, latches or other devices
that can secure a door to prevent its being opened.  Massage rooms must be
constructed with air space between partitions and the ceiling, and be clearly
identified by signs.  The requirement for an air space does not apply to
massage therapist businesses.



7.   A separate hand-sink must be accessible and used by a massage
therapist before administering massage on each patron and when hands are
soiled.



8.   The furniture upon which the patron reclines while receiving a
massage must either be covered with approved linen or be washed after each
use with a cleaning agent sufficient to prevent the spread of disease. 
Linens and towels must be changed after each use and laundered by a
commercial cleaning establishment or in approved laundry facilities on the
premises.  Single-use linens must be discarded after each use.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011)



810.075.  Submission of Plans and Specifications.



A person who constructs, remodels or converts a building for use as a massage
business must comply with this code.  The person must submit plans and
specifications for the layout, arrangement, and plumbing, and construction
schedules to the community development department. A building permit may not
be issued for such construction, remodeling or alteration until the permit
has been approved by the health authority.



810.080.  Inspection of Premises.



Because of the high risk of illegal conduct in an establishment that provides
massages, massage businesses must be open to inspection without a warrant by
city health, building and license inspectors and police officers during
business hours.  The business records of the licensee, including income tax
returns, must be available for inspection upon request. Upon demand by a
health inspector or police officer, a person engaged in providing services in
a licensed premises must identify himself/herself giving his/her true legal
name and his/her correct address.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-25, adopted December 19, 2011)



810.085.  Hours of Operation.



No customers or patrons may be allowed to enter the licensed premises after
9:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. daily.  No customers or patrons may be
allowed to remain on the licensed premises after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00
a.m. daily.



(Amended by Ord #2006-17, adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



810.090.  Penalty.



A person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to commit or aids or
abets in the commission of an act constituting a violation of this ordinance,
whether individually or in connection with one or more other persons or as
principal, agent, or accessory is guilty of a misdemeanor.  A person who
falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully induces, causes, coerces,
permits or directs another to violate a provision of this ordinance is guilty
of a misdemeanor.



SECTION 815.  FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.



815.005.  Purpose and Objectives.



The purpose of this section is to establish standards protecting the health,
safety and general welfare of the public under powers granted by Minn. Stat.
§§ 145A.03 through 145A.14, as amended.



The general objectives of this section are to, among other things:



   1.   prevent food-borne illness;



   2.   correct and prevent conditions that may adversely affect people
using food establishments;



   3.   provide minimum standards for the design, construction,
operation and maintenance of food establishments; and



   4.    meet consumer expectations for the quality and safety of food
establishments.



815.010.  Scope.



This section applies to food establishments where food, meals, beverages or
similar items are stored, prepared, transported, served, vended, offered for
sale or otherwise provided with or without charge for consumption on or off
the premises. This section does not apply to food establishments conducted in
a house of worship when the food service is not advertised to the public and
is primarily limited to preparation, service or consumption by and to the
members of the house of worship.



815.015.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words are defined for
the purpose of this section as follows:



1.   The definitions contained in Minn. Stat. section 157.15, including
all future revisions of them, are adopted by reference as part of this
ordinance.



2.   "Health authority" means the supervisor of the city of Minnetonka
environmental health division or his/her designated agent. The health
authority is the local regulatory authority under the Minnesota food code,
Minnesota rule 4626.0020, Subp. 70.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-10, adopted August 3, 2009)



815.020.  License Administration.



1.   License required. A person wishing to operate a food establishment
must first make an application to the city, pay the required fee, and receive
approval from the city for a license to operate, including plan review
approval. A person who operates a food establishment must have a valid and
current food establishment license of the correct type from the city. An
additional facility license is required when a food establishment has a
service or operation that is physically or operationally separate from the
main food or beverage services.



2.   Application and issuance.



   a.    An applicant must submit an application for a food
establishment license on forms provided by the city. The application must
describe the general nature of the business, the location, and other
information that the city requires. The issuance, maintenance, termination
and administration of licenses are governed by section 700.



   b.   Each application for license must be accompanied by the fee
established in section 710.



3.   Fee exemption. Government agencies, charitable institutions, and
houses of worship that operate a food establishment must obtain a license and
meet all requirements of this section but will not be charged a fee.



4.   Transfer and display of license.



   a.   Only a person who complies with the requirements of this
section is entitled to receive a food establishment license. A license is
only valid for the person and place named in the license and is not
transferable. A license must be conspicuously displayed to the public on the
licensed premises.



   b.   A food vehicle must have the name, city, and telephone number
of the licensee displayed on both sides of the vehicle in a conspicuous place
approved by the health authority.



5.   License expiration. Licenses expire on December 31 of each calendar
year. The license holder must submit license renewal information and fees by
January 1 of each year.



6.   License suspension and revocation.



   a.   License suspension. The health authority may immediately
suspend a food establishment license by following the procedure in section
815.40.



   b.   License revocation. The city may otherwise suspend or revoke a
food establishment license by following the procedure in section 700.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-10, adopted August 3, 2009)



815.021.  Inspections; Orders.



The provisions of Minn. Stat. section 157.20, including all future revisions
of them, are adopted by reference as part of this ordinance.



(Added by Ord. 2009-10, adopted August 3, 2009)



815.025.  Self-Inspection Program.



1.   A food establishment licensee that is required to employ a certified
food manager must prepare and implement a program of periodic 
self-inspection to ensure that food safety policies and procedures are
followed.



2.   Documentation of the self-inspection program must be available for
review by the health authority. The health authority may require revisions to
the program.



(Amended by Ord. 2014-21, adopted September 15, 2014)



815.030.  Correction of Violations.



Upon notification of one or more violations, the person-in-charge or licensee
must correct each violation within the specified time noted on the inspection
report or indicated by the health authority. Each failure to correct a
violation within the specified time will constitute a separate violation of
this section.



815.035.  Gas Cylinders.



Carbon dioxide and bottled gas cylinders must be secured by chains or other
types of restraint.



815.040.  Emergency Closure of Licensed Food Establishments.



1.   Basis for closure. The health authority may require immediate
cessation of food establishment operations when the health authority
determines an imminent health hazard exists. The food establishment must
cease all business operations when ordered by the health authority, and may
not resume operations until notified by the health authority that the
immediate health hazard no longer exists. The health authority may summarily
close food establishment when one of the following conditions exists on, or
results from, the operation of the licensed premises:



   a.   failure to possess a license required by this ordinance;



   b.   evidence of a sewage backup in a food preparation, storage or
utensil area;



   c.   lack of potable hot or cold water under pressure to the extent
that hand-washing, utensil washing, food preparation, or toilet facilities
are not operational;



   d.   lack of electricity or gas service to the extent that
hand-washing, utensil washing, food preparation, lighting, or toilet
facilities are not operational;



   e.   evidence of an ongoing food-borne illness caused by the
establishment's operation;



   f.   lack of adequate cold or hot holding facilities;



   g.   lack of an accessible hand-washing facility;



   h.   infestation of insect, rodents, or other vermin;



   i.   lack of an approved ware-washing facility or sanitizing agent
in the establishment; or



   j.   any other condition that endangers the health or safety of the
public.



2.   Procedure for emergency closure.



   a.   Order. If the health authority determines, after an on-site
inspection, that any of the grounds for emergency closure exist in a licensed
food establishment, the health authority may issue an order for immediate
closure. The order must identify the licensed food establishment, describe
the specific grounds upon which the closure is based, direct the immediate
closure of the establishment and removal of consumers, list the corrective
actions needed to re-open the establishment, and state the procedure for
requesting a hearing. The order must be served on the owner or
person-in-charge of the premises. The owner or person-in-charge of the
premises must immediately close the premises, ensure that all consumers
vacate the premises, and ensure that no consumers enter the premises. If the
person receiving the order fails to close the establishment, the city may
order all people to vacate the premises. The establishment must remain closed
until the health authority has determined that the condition(s) giving rise
to the emergency closure have ben satisfactorily corrected, or until
otherwise directed after a hearing.



   b.   Hearing. The licensee may request a hearing on the immediate
closure order by submitting a written request to the community development
director or health authority. A hearing to consider whether the establishment
may re-open and to establish any conditions for the re-opening must be
commenced no later than three business days after receipt of the written
request. The hearing must be held before an independent hearing officer
provided by the city. The hearing officer must issue a written decision
within two business days after the end of the hearing.



3.   Violations. A violation of any of the following requirements is
punishable as a misdemeanor:



   a.   After service of an order for emergency closure, the owner or
person-in-charge must immediately close the licensed food establishment and
keep it closed, must promptly remove the patrons from the establishment, and
must prevent patrons from entering the establishment.



   b.   After notice of the emergency closure, a patron must promptly
leave, and a potential patron must not enter, the food establishment that is
subject to an emergency closure order.



815.045.  Standards Adopted.



1.   Minnesota food code. The Minnesota food code, Minnesota rules
4626.0010 through 4626.1870 and all future revisions of them, is adopted by
reference as part of this ordinance.



2.   Food managers. The Minnesota rules governing certification of food
managers, Minnesota rules 4626.2000 through 4626.2025 and all future
revisions of them, are adopted by reference as part of this ordinance.



(Former section repealed and new section added by Ord. #2001-7, adopted March
19, 2001; amended by Ord. #2003-07, adopted March 17, 2003)



815.050.  Enforcement.



   If work has started before plans required under the food code have been
approved, the health authority may issue orders to halt construction or to
remove construction already done, if reasonably necessary to determine
compliance with required standards.



(Added by Ord. #2003-07, adopted March 17, 2003)



SECTION 820.  BODY ART.



820.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words are defined for
the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   "Aftercare" means written instructions given to a client, specific to
the procedure rendered, on caring for the body art and surrounding area.
These instructions must include information on when to seek medical treatment.



2.   "Antiseptic" means an agent that destroys disease-causing
microorganisms on human skin or mucosa.



3.   "Body art" or "body art procedures" means physical body adornment
using, but not limited to, tattooing and body piercing. Body art does not
include practices and procedures that are performed by a licensed medical or
dental professional if the procedure is within the professional's scope of
practice.



4.   "Body art establishment" or "establishment" means any structure or
venue, whether permanent, temporary, or mobile, where body art is performed.
Mobile establishments include vehicle-mounted units, either motorized or
trailered, and readily moveable without dissembling and where body art
procedures are regularly performed in more than one geographic location.



5.   "Body piercing" means the penetration or puncturing of the skin by
any method for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other objects in or
through the body. Body piercing also includes branding, scarification,
suspension, subdermal implantation, microdermal, and tongue bifurcation. Body
piercing does not include the piercing of the outer perimeter or the lobe of
the ear using a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system.



6.   "Branding" means an indelible mark burned into the skin using
instruments of thermal cautery, radio hyfrecation, and strike branding.



7.   "Contaminated waste" means any liquid or semiliquid blood or other
potentially infectious materials; contaminated items that would release blood
or other potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semiliquid state if
compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially
infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during
handling; and sharps and any wastes containing blood and other potentially
infectious materials, as defined in Code of Federal Regulations, title 29,
section 1910.1030, known as "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne Pathogens."



8.   "Director" means the community development director.



9.   "Equipment" means all machinery, including fixtures, containers,
vessels, tools, devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas,
sinks, and all other apparatus and appurtenances used in the operation of a
body art establishment.



10.   "Guest artist" means an individual who performs body art procedures
according to the requirements under state law.



11.   "Hand sink" means a sink equipped with potable hot and cold water
held under pressure, used for washing hands, wrists, arms, or other portions
of the body.



12.   "Hot water" means water at a temperature of at least 110 degrees
Fahrenheit.



13.   "Jewelry" means any ornament inserted into a pierced area.



14.   "Liquid chemical germicide" means a tuberculocidal disinfectant or
sanitizer registered with the Environmental Protection Agency.



15.   "Microdermal" means a single-point perforation of any body part
other than an earlobe for the purpose of inserting an anchor with a step
either protruding from or flush with the skin.



16.   "Micropigmentation or cosmetic tattooing" means the use of tattoos
for permanent makeup or to hide or neutralize skin discolorations.



17.   "Operator" means any person who controls, operates, or manages body
art activities at a body art establishment and who is responsible for the
establishment's compliance with these regulations, whether or not the person
actually performs body art activities.



18.   "Procedure area" means the physical space or room used for
conducting body art procedures.



19.   "Procedure surface" means the surface area of furniture or
accessories that may come into contact with the client's clothed or unclothed
body during a body art procedure and the area of the client's skin where the
body art procedure is to be performed and the surrounding area, or any other
associated work area requiring sanitizing.



20.   "Scarification" means an indelible mark fixed on the body by the
production of scars.



21.   "Sharps" means any object, sterile or contaminated, that may
purposefully or accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa including,
but not limited to, presterilized single-use needles, scalpel blades, and
razor blades.



22.   "Sharps container" means a closed, puncture-resistant, leak-proof
container, labeled with the international biohazard symbol, that is used for
handling, storage, transportation, and disposal.



23.   "Single use" means products or items intended for onetime use which
are disposed of after use on a client. This definition includes, but is not
limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, disposable razors, piercing
needles, tattoo needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective
gloves.



24.   "Sterilization" means a process resulting in the destruction of all
forms of microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial spores.



25.   "Subdermal implantation" means the implantation of an object
entirely below the dermis.



26.    "Supervision" means the physical presence of a technician licensed
under this chapter while a body art procedure is being performed.



27,   "Suspension" means the suspension of the body from affixed hooks
placed through temporary piercings.



28.   "Tattooing" means any method of placing indelible ink or other
pigments into or under the skin or mucosa with needles or any other
instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of
the skin or mucosa. Tattooing also includes micropigmentation and cosmetic
tattooing.



29.   "Technician" or "body art technician" means any individual who is
licensed by the state of Minnesota as a tattoo technician or as a body
piercing technician or as both.



30.   "Tongue bifurcation" means the cutting of the tongue from the tip to
the base, forking at the end.



(Amended by Ord. 2010-13, adopted September 13, 2010)



820.010.  License Required.



1.   A person must not maintain, own, or operate a body art establishment
without being licensed under this chapter.



2.   An individual performing body art procedures in a licensed
establishment must be licensed as a body art technician or a guest artist by
the state of Minnesota, unless excepted by state law.



(Amended by Ord. 2010-13, adopted September 13, 2010)



820.015.  Licensing Procedure.



1.   Applications for body art establishment licenses must be filed with
the community development department.  Applications must be accompanied by
the license, investigation, and plan review fees specified in section 710,
and one set of plans and specifications for the establishment. If an
application is rejected, the city will refund the license fee paid.  No
other refunds will be made.



2.   Applications must be signed by the owners of the proposed
establishment and contain the names of the owners, if individuals, the names
of partners, if a partnership, and if a corporation, the names of the
principal officers of the corporation, together with the names of the
operators, if different from the owners, and a brief description of the
general nature of the business and the location where the business is to be
conducted. The applicant must also submit verification of compliance with all
applicable local and state codes.



3.   An application for a body art establishment license will be referred
to the police department for investigation of the facts set forth in the
application.  The police department must prepare a written recommendation
regarding issuance of the license.  The community development director may
conduct additional investigation as he/she deems necessary.



4.   The plans must be drawn to scale, accompanied by sufficient
specifications to permit a comprehensive review of the plans, and must
include:



   a.   the proposed layout, mechanical schematics, construction
materials, and finish schedules;



   b.   the proposed products and equipment to be used; and



   c.   other information that may be required for the proper review of
the proposed application.



5.   Applicants must comply with the requirements of section 700 of this
code, including the requirement for insurance, but are not required to post a
bond.



6.   Applications will be considered and acted upon by the community
development director. Appeal of the director's decision may be made in
accordance with section 700.025



(Amended by Ord. 2010-13, adopted September 13, 2010; amended by Ord.
#2006-18, adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



820.020.  Expiration of Licenses.



Licenses issued under this section expire on July 31 of each year.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-18, adopted Sept. 25, 2006)



820.025.  Grounds for Denial of an Establishment License or Emergency
Closure.



1.    If any of the following conditions exist, the community development
director may order the owner or operator of a licensed body art establishment
to discontinue all operations, may refuse to grant or renew a license, or may
suspend or revoke a license:



   a.   evidence of a sewage backup in an area of the body art
establishment where body art activities are conducted;



   b.   lack of potable, plumbed, or hot or cold water to the extent
that handwashing or toilet facilities are not operational;



    c.   lack of electricity or gas service to the extent that
handwashing, lighting, or toilet facilities are not operational;



   d.   significant damage to the body art establishment due to
tornado, fire, flood, or another disaster;



    e.   evidence of an infestation of rodents or other vermin;



    f.   evidence of any individual performing a body art procedure
without a license as required under this chapter;



   g.   evidence of existence of a public health nuisance;



    h.   use of instruments or jewelry that are not sterile;



   i.   failure to maintain required records;



    j.   failure to use gloves as required;



    k.   failure to properly dispose of sharps, blood or body fluids,
or items contaminated by blood or body fluids;



    l.   failure to properly report complaints of potential bloodborne
pathogen transmission to the commissioner;



   m.   evidence of a positive spore test on the sterilizer if there is
no other working sterilizer with a negative spore test in the establishment;
or



   n.   evidence that the applicant or licensee is not of good moral
character.



2.   Prior to license approval or renewal or the reopening of the
establishment, the establishment must submit to the director satisfactory
proof that the problem condition causing the need for the license action or
emergency closure has been corrected or removed by the operator of the
establishment. A body art establishment may not reopen without the written
approval of the director and a valid establishment license.



(Amended by Ord. 2010-13, adopted September 13, 2010)



820.030.  License Restrictions.



1.   A license is issued to a specific person and location and is not
transferable. A licensee must not operate the body art establishment at a
place other than that described in the license.



2.   A place used for a body art establishment must not be used or
occupied for living or sleeping quarters, or for a purpose other than body
art procedures, and must not be located in premises zoned or used for a
residential purpose.



3.   The license must be prominently displayed in a public area of the
establishment.



4.   Only body art technicians and guest artists licensed by the state of
Minnesota are allowed to perform body art procedures in the licensed
establishment.



5.   The following information must be kept on file for three years on the
premises of the establishment and must be made available for inspection upon
request by the city:



   a.   a description of all body art procedures performed by the
establishment;



   b.   copies of the spore tests conducted on each sterilizer; and



   c.   the following information for each technician or guest artist
employed or performing body art procedures in the establishment: (i) name;
(ii) home address; (iii) home telephone number; (iv) date of birth; (v) copy
of an identification photo; and (vi) license number or guest artist license
number.



6.   At least once a year, the director must conduct an inspection of each
licensed body art establishment and a review of any records necessary to
ensure that the standards required under this chapter are met. Refusal to
permit an inspection during reasonable business hours constitutes valid
grounds for license denial or revocation.



(Amended by Ord. 2010-13, adopted September 13, 2010)



820.035.  Health and Safety Standards.



1.   Establishment standards. The body art establishment must meet all of
the following health and safety standards before a licensed technician may
conduct body art procedures at the establishment:



   a.   The establishment must have at least 150 square feet of floor
space and must be lighted and ventilated to comply with standards approved by
the health authority.



   b.   Every place where body art procedures are performed must be
equipped with conveniently located and approved sewer and water-connected
toilet and lavatory facilities. These facilities must be maintained in good
working order at all times, must be kept free from flies, insects and
offensive odors, and must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (1)   Toilet fixtures and seats must be of a sanitary open
front design and readily cleanable.  All toilet rooms must have self-closing
doors.  Easily cleanable, covered receptacles must be provided for waste
materials.



      (2)   The lavatory must be supplied with hot and cold running
water under pressure tempered by means of a mixing valve or combination
faucet.  All self-closing, slow- closing or metered fixtures must be
designed to provide a flow of water for at least 15 seconds.  Every lavatory
facility must be provided with an adequate supply of hand cleansing compound
and single service sanitary towels or hand-drying devices.



   c.   The procedure area must be separated from any other area that
may cause potential contamination of work surfaces.



   d.   For clients requesting privacy, at a minimum, a divider,
curtain, or partition must be provided to separate multiple procedure areas.



   e.   All procedure surfaces must be smooth, nonabsorbent, and easily
cleanable.



   f.   The establishment must have an accessible hand sink that is not
in a public restroom equipped with:



      (1)    liquid hand soap;



      (2)    single-use paper towels or a mechanical hand drier or
blower; and



      (3)    a nonporous washable garbage receptacle with a
foot-operated lid or with no lid and a removable liner.



   g.   All ceilings in the body art establishment must be in good
condition.



   h.   All walls and floors must be free of open holes or cracks and
be washable and no carpeting may be in areas used for body art procedures
unless the carpeting is entirely covered with a rigid, nonporous, easily
cleanable material.



   i.   All facilities within the establishment must be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition and in good working order.



   j.   No animals may be present during a body art procedure, unless
the animal is a service animal.



2.   Standards for equipment, instruments, and supplies.  Equipment,
instruments, and supplies must comply with the following health and safety
standards before a licensed technician may conduct body art procedures:



   a.   A licensee must provide to its customers a sufficient number of
individually pre-packaged, pre-sterilized and disposable single-use towels or
wipes.  These towels or wipes must be kept in a closed dustproof
container.  These towels must be dispensed in a manner that precludes
contamination and disposed of in a nonporous washable garbage receptacle with
a foot-operated lid or with no lid and a removal liner.



   b.   Tables, chairs, operating furniture, and other procedure
surfaces that may be exposed to blood or body fluids during the body art
procedure must be constructed of stainless steel and must be sanitized after
each client with a liquid chemical germicide.



   c.   The equipment, including needles, stencils, razors and razor
blades, must be stored clean and dry in a dustproof glass case when not in
use.



   d.   Needles and operating instruments must be individually
pre-packaged, pre-sterilized and disposable.  Each piece of this equipment
must be used on no more than one customer, and must be discarded in a safe
and sanitary manner after its first use.



   e.   Sterilizing solutions may be used for the purpose of
sterilizing instruments other than needles when the sterilizing solutions are
approved by the health authority.



   f.   Bandages and surgical dressings used in connection with body
art procedures must be individually pre-packaged, pre-sterilized and
disposable and stored in a clean, closed nonporous container.



   g.   Jewelry used as part of a body art procedure must be made of
surgical implant-grade stainless steel, solid 14-karat or 18-karat white or
yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum, or a dense low-porosity plastic.
Use of jewelry that is constructed of wood, bone, or other porous material is
prohibited.



   h.   Jewelry used as part of a body art procedure must be free of
nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and must be properly sterilized
before use.



   i.   Reusable instruments must be thoroughly washed to remove all
organic matter, rinsed, and sterilized before and after use.



   j.   Needles must be single-use needles and sterilized before use.



   k.   Sterilization must be conducted using steam heat or chemical
vapor.



   l.   All sterilization units must be operated according to the
manufacturer's specifications.



   m.   At least once a month, but not to exceed 30 days between tests,
a spore test must be conducted on each sterilizer used to ensure proper
functioning. If a positive spore test result is received, the sterilizer at
issue may not be used until a negative result is obtained.



   n.   All inks and other pigments used in a body art procedure must
be specifically manufactured for tattoo procedures.



   o.   Immediately before applying a tattoo, the ink needed must be
transferred from the ink bottle and placed into single-use paper or plastic
cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, the single-use cups and their contents
must be discarded.



   p.   All equipment and instruments must be maintained in good
working order and in a clean and sanitary condition.



   q.   Single-use disposable barriers or a chemical germicide must be
used on all equipment that cannot be sterilized as part of the procedure as
required under this section including spray bottles, procedure light fixture
handles, and tattoo machines.



3.   Standards for body art procedures. All body art procedures must
comply with the following health and safety standards:



   a.   The skin area subject to a body art procedure must be
thoroughly cleaned with soap and water, rinsed thoroughly, and swabbed with
an antiseptic solution. Only single-use towels or wipes may be used to clean
the skin.



   b.   Whenever it is necessary to shave the skin, a new disposable
razor or a stainless steel straight edge must be used. The disposable razor
must be discarded after use. The stainless steel straight edge must be
thoroughly washed to remove all organic matter and sterilized before use on
another client.



   c.   No body art procedure may be performed on any area of the skin
where there is an evident infection, irritation, disease, or open wound or on
a person who has an apprent communicable disease.



   d.   Single-use nonabsorbent gloves of adequate size and quality to
preserve dexterity must be used for touching clients, for handling sterile
instruments, or for handling blood or body fluids. Nonlatex gloves must be
used with clients or employees who request them or when petroleum products
are used. Gloves must be changed if a glove becomes damaged or comes in
contact with any nonclean surface or objects or with a third person. At a
minimum, gloves must be discarded after the completion of a procedure on a
client. Upon leaving the procedure area, hands and wrists must be washed
before putting on a clean pair of gloves and after removing a pair of gloves.



4.   Standards for technicians. Technicians must comply with the following
health and safety standards:



   a.   A technician must wear clean, light-colored washable outer
garments when performing body art procedures.



   b.   A technician must wash his or her hands thoroughly with soap
and water and then dry them with a clean towel before and after each body art
procedure.  The customer's skin must also be thoroughly cleansed with soap
and water and disinfected by an antiseptic solution approved by the health
authority before the use or application of a body art instrument or equipment.



   c.   Pigments used in body art must be sterile and free from
bacterial and noxious agents and substances.  The pigments used from stock
solutions for each customer must be placed in a single-service receptacle,
and the receptacle and remaining solution must be discarded in a safe and
sanitary manner after use on a customer.



   d.   Technicians must scrub their hands and wrists thoroughly before
and after performing a body art procedure, after contact with the client
receiving the procedure, and after contact with potentially contaminated
materials.



   e.   A technician may not smoke, eat, or drink while performing body
art procedures.



   f.   A technician may not perform a body art procedure if the
technician has a communicable disease or has any open sores visible or in a
location that may come in contact with the client.



5.   Contamination standards. All body art establishments must comply with
the following contamination standards:
   a.   Infectious waste and sharps must be managed according to Minn.
Stat. sections 116.76 to 116.83 and must be disposed of by an approved
infectious waste hauler at a site permitted to accept the waste, according to
Minnesota rules, parts 7035.9100 to 7035.9150. Sharps ready for disposal must
be disposed of in an approved sharps container.



   b.   Contaminated waste that may release liquid blood or body fluids
when compressed or that may release dried blood or body fluids when handled
must be placed in an approved red bag that is marked with the international
biohazard symbol.



   c.   Contaminated waste that does not release liquid blood or body
fluids when compressed or handled may be placed in a covered receptacle and
disposed of through normal approved disposal methods.



   d.   Storage of contaminated waste onsite must not exceed the period
specified by Code of Federal Regulations, title 29, section 1910.1030.



(Added by Ord. 2010-13; adopted September 13, 2010)



820.040.    Professional Standards.



1. Standard practice.



   a.   A technician must require proof of age before performing a body
art procedure on a client. Proof of age must be established by one of the
following methods: (1)   a valid driver's license or identification card
issued by the state of Minnesota or another state that includes a photograph
and date of birth of the individual; (2) a valid military identification card
issued by the United States Department of Defense; (3) a valid passport; (4)
a resident alien card; or (5) a tribal identification card.



   b.   Before performing a body art procedure, the technician must
provide the client with a disclosure and authorization form that indicates
whether the client has: (1) diabetes; (2) a history of hemophilia; (3) a
history of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to soap or
disinfectants; (4) a history of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy;
(5) any condition that requires the client to take medications such as
anticoagulants that thin the blood or interfere with blood clotting; or (6)
any other information that would aid the technician in the body art procedure
process evaluation.



   c.   The form must include a statement informing the client that the
technician will not perform a body art procedure if the client fails to
complete or sign the disclosure and authorization form, and the technician
may decline to perform a body art procedure if the client has any identified
health conditions.



   d.   The technician must ask the client to sign and date the
disclosure and authorization form confirming that the information listed on
the form is accurate.



   e.   Before performing a body art procedure, the technician must
offer and make available to the client personal draping, as appropriate.



2.   Informed consent. Before performing a body art procedure, the
technician must obtain from the client a signed and dated informed consent
form. The consent form must disclose: (a) that a tattoo is considered
permanent and may only be removed with a surgical procedure and that any
effective removal may leave scarring; or (b) that body piercing may leave
scarring.



3.   Client record maintenance. For each client, the body art
establishment operator must maintain proper records of each procedure. The
records of the procedure must be kept for three years and must be available
for inspection by the director upon request. The record must include the
following: (1) the date of the procedure; (2) the information on the required
picture identification showing the name, age, and current address of the
client; (3) a copy of the authorization form signed and dated by the client
required under subdivision 1, paragraph (b); (4) a description of the body
art procedure performed; (5) the name and license number of the technician
performing the procedure; (6) a copy of the consent form required under
subdivision 2; and (7) if the client is under the age of 18 years, a copy of
the consent form signed by the parent or legal guardian as required under
section 820.045.



4.   Aftercare. A technician must provide each client with verbal and
written instructions for the care of the tattooed or pierced site upon the
completion of the procedure. The written instructions must advise the client
to consult a health care professional at the first sign of infection.



5.   State, county, and municipal public health regulations. An operator
and technician must comply with all applicable state, county, and municipal
requirements regarding public health.



6.   Notification. The operator of the body art establishment must
immediately notify the local health authority of any reports they receive of
a potential bloodborne pathogen transmission.



(Added by Ord. 2010-13; adopted September 13, 2010)



820.045.    Prohibitions.



1.   A technician may perform body piercings on an individual under the
age of 18 if the individual's parent or legal guardian is present and a
consent form and the authorization form under section 820.040, subdivision
1(b) is signed by the parent or legal guardian in the presence of the
technician, and the piercing is not prohibited under subdivision 3.



2.   No technician may tattoo an individual under the age of 18 regardless
of parental or guardian consent.



3.   No nipple or genital piercing, branding, scarification, suspension,
subdermal implantation, microdermal, or tongue bifurcation may be performed
by a technician on an individual under the age of 18 regardless of parental
or guardian consent.



4.   No technician may perform body art procedures on an individual who
appears to be under the influence of alcohol, controlled substances as
defined in Minn. Stat. section 152.01, subdivision 4, or hazardous substances
as defined in rules adopted under Minn. Stat. chapter 182.



5.   No technician may perform body art procedures while under the
influence of alcohol, controlled substances as defined under Minn. Stat.
section 152.01, subdivision 4, or hazardous substances as defined in the
rules adopted under Minn. Stat. chapter 182.



6.   No technician may administer anesthetic injections or other
medications.



(Added by Ord. 2010-13; adopted September 13, 2010)



820.050.    Disciplinary Action.



1.   A license issued pursuant to this section may be subject to
disciplinary action in accordance with the procedure in section 700.035.



2.   The city council may take disciplinary action against a license upon
proof that an operator of an establishment, or a technician or guest artist
operating at the establishment, has:



   a.   intentionally submitted false or misleading information to the
city;



   b.   failed, within 30 days, to provide information in response to a
written request by the city;



   c.   violated any provision of this section;



   d.   failed to perform services with reasonable judgment, skill, or
safety due to the use of alcohol or drugs, or other physical or mental
impairment;



   e.   aided or abetted another person in violating any provision of
this section;



   f.   been or is being disciplined by another jurisdiction, if any of
the grounds for the discipline are the same or substantially equivalent to
those under this section;



   g.   advertised in a manner that is false or misleading;



   h.   engaged in conduct likely to deceive, defraud, or harm the
public;



   i.   demonstrated a willful or careless disregard for the health,
welfare, or safety of a client;



   j.   obtained money, property, or services from a client through the
use of undue influence, harassment, duress, deception, or fraud;



   k.   failed to refer a client to a health care professional for
medical evaluation or care when appropriate; or



   l.   been convicted of a felony-level criminal sexual conduct
offense. "Conviction" means a plea of guilty, a verdict of guilty by a jury,
or a finding of guilty by a court.



3.   If the city council finds that an operator of an establishment should
be disciplined according to subdivision 2, the council may take any one or
more of the following actions:



   a.   refuse to grant or renew the license;



   b.   suspend the license for a period not exceeding one year;



   c.   revoke the license;



   d.   take any reasonable lesser action against an individual upon
proof that the individual has violated this chapter; or



   e.   impose, for each violation, a civil penalty not exceeding
$2,000.



4.   Upon the suspension or revocation of a license, the establishment
must cease to (a) perform body art procedures and (b) represent to the public
that the establishment is licensed by the city.



(Added by Ord. 2010-13, adopted September 13, 2010)



SECTION 825.  PET SHOPS AND CONTROL OF DISEASED ANIMALS.



825.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words below are defined
for the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   “Department” means the Minnetonka community development
department.



2.   “Pet shop” means a place kept or maintained for the exhibition,
sale or purchase of live dogs, cats, hamsters, or other small animals, or
birds, reptiles, or fish.



825.010.  License Required.



A person must not operate a pet shop in the city unless the business is
currently licensed under this section.



825.015.  Application.



1.   A person wishing to operate a pet shop must file a written
application for a pet shop license with the department.



2.   The application must contain:



   a.   the required license fee set forth in chapter 710;



   b.   the applicant’s full name and place of residence;



   c.   the location of the pet shop;



   d.   the full name and address of the people who own the pet shop
location;



   e.   the number and types of animals proposed to be handled on the
licensed premises; and



   f.   other reasonable information that the city may require.



3.   In addition, the applicant must submit a current detailed plan and
description of the premises and structures where the pet shop is to be
operated.  If the application is for a renewal license and no changes in the
premises and structures have been made or are contemplated, no new plan or
description is required.  However, the completeness and accuracy of the
existing plan must be certified.



4.   The license applicant is subject to the requirements of chapter 700
of this code, except section 700.015(2).



5.   Upon review of the application and plans by the department and health
authority, the department director may grant or deny the license.



825.020.  Expiration Date.



The expiration date of all pet shop licenses is December 31 of each year.



825.025.  Diseased Animals.



1.   A person must not bring into a pet shop or into the city, or have in
his/her possession, an animal afflicted with infectious or contagious
disease.  Such diseased animals must be destroyed in a humane manner unless
the disease is curable and the animal is under the care and treatment of a
licensed veterinarian.



2.   A person must not bring into a pet shop or into the city, have in
his/her possession, or sell an animal that is capable of transmitting rabies
to humans or other animals and that cannot be inoculated to prevent rabies.



825.030.  Conditions of License.



The following requirements apply to the premises used for a pet shop under a
pet shop license issued by the city:



1.   The structures, areas, appurtenances, floors, walls and ceilings must
be designed to facilitate frequent and easy cleaning and must be kept clean,
sanitary and in good repair.



2.   Floors must be constructed of non-absorbent and easily cleanable
materials.



3.   Adequate and safe sewer and water connections, plumbing, and plumbing
fixtures must be provided.  All plumbing fixtures must be kept clean,
sanitary and in good repair.



4.   A room of sufficient size for storing the janitorial supplies and
equipment used to maintain the premises in a sanitary manner must be
provided.  The room must contain an approved sink with hot and cold running
water under pressure.



5.   Rooms must be illuminated with a minimum of 20 foot candles of light.



6.   Rooms must be mechanically ventilated with a minimum of 15 air
changes per hour.  A negative pressure must be maintained to prevent odors
and organisms from entering the adjacent businesses or departments. 
Provisions must be made for pre-heated replacement air.



7.   Doors, windows and other openings must be screened from May 1 to
October 1.



8.   Cages, pens, benches, boxes or receptacles in which the animals are
confined must be of metal or equal construction, must be clean, sanitary and
in good repair, and must be of sufficient size to humanely confine the
animals.  Cages and pens must be mounted on casters or six inch metal legs
to facilitate cleaning.



9.   Show or display cases, windows, counters and shelves used in handling
the animals must be kept clean, sanitary, free from dust and dirt, and in
good repair.



10.   Utensils used in the preparation of food and the feeding of the
animals must be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair.  Utensils may not
be used if they are badly worn, rusted or corroded, or in a condition so that
they cannot be rendered clean and sanitary.



11.   Animals must be handled and treated in a humane manner.  Licensees,
their employees and agents may not deprive the animals of necessary food,
water or shelter or perform, authorize or permit an act of cruelty to the
animals or an act tending to produce cruelty.



12.   Animals must be kept entirely within an enclosed building, and no
animal may be kept or maintained outside.



13.   Animals must be kept in a manner that prevents contact with the
public.



14.   Animals subject to distemper and infectious hepatitis must have been
inoculated before delivery to the pet shop, by a veterinarian licensed to
practice in the state of Minnesota.  Monkeys must have a yearly tuberculin
test.



15.   Animals subject to distemper and infectious hepatitis must be
individually caged to reduce the spread of disease to healthy animals.



16.   Delivery vehicles must be kept clean.



17.   Refuse and other wastes must be removed frequently and stored and
disposed in accordance with this code.



825.035.  Exceptions.



1.   The provisions of this section do not apply to persons or places
selling only frogs, fish, worms or reptiles for use as live bait for fishing.



2.   The provisions of this section do not apply to veterinary hospitals
or kennels where only occasional sales are made.



SECTION 830.  LODGING ESTABLISHMENTS.



830.005.  Definition.



For the purpose of this section, “lodging establishment” means a hotel,
motel, resort, or lodging establishment, as defined in Minn. Stat. § 157.15.



830.010.  License Required.



A person wishing to operate a lodging establishment must first make an
application to the city, pay the required fee, and receive approval from the
city for a license to operate, including plan review approval.  A license
can be obtained and retained only by persons, corporations and other
operating entities who comply with this section and Minnesota department of
health rules regulating lodging establishments.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2009-10, adopted August
3, 2009)



830.015.  Application.



1.   A person desiring to keep or maintain a lodging establishment must
submit a license written application to the community development
department.  The application must be accompanied by the fee specified in
section 710.



2.   The application must contain the information deemed necessary by the
health authority to make a determination of whether or not the applicant is
in compliance with this section and applicable Minnesota department of health
rules.



830.020.  Expiration Date.



A lodging establishment license will terminate on December 31 of each year.



830.025.  Conditions of License.



A lodging establishment must be maintained in a manner that complies with
this section and Minnesota Rules Chapter 4625, including all future revisions
of it, which is adopted by reference as a part of this ordinance.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-10, adopted August 3, 2009; amended by Ord. 2007-16,
adopted May 7, 2007.)



830.030.  Inspections; Orders.



The provisions of Minn. Stat. section 157.20, including all future revisions
of them, are adopted by reference as part of this ordinance.



(Added by Ord. 2009-10, adopted August 3, 2009)



SECTION 835.  WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL; RECYCLING.



835.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words are defined for
the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   “Collector” means a person holding a valid license from the city
for the purpose of collecting recyclables, waste or both.



2.   “Commercial establishment” means the premises that is occupied
and used for a non- residential purpose, including a commercial or industrial
enterprise, club, church, or school.



3.   “Garbage” means animal and vegetable wastes, whether resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking, service and consumption of food or
otherwise.



4.   “Generator” means a person who generates waste.



5.   “Hazardous waste” has the meaning contained in Minn. Stat. §
116.06, subd. 13.



6.   “Incinerator” means a device used for the destruction of refuse,
rubbish or waste material by fire.



7.   “Mixed municipal solid waste” or “waste” means garbage,
refuse, and other solid waste generated from residential, commercial,
industrial, and community activities, that is generally collected together. 
It does not include abandoned or junk motor vehicles, street sweepings, ash,
construction debris, mining waste, sludges, tree and agricultural wastes,
tires, lead acid batteries, used oil, and other materials generally
collected, processed, and disposed of as separate waste streams.



8.   “Multiple dwelling” means a building used for residential
purposes consisting of more than four dwelling units with individual kitchen
facilities for each.



9.   “Recyclable materials” or “recyclables” means materials that
are separated from mixed municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling.



10.   “Recycling” means the process of collecting and preparing
recyclable materials and using the materials in their original form or using
them in manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of
recyclable materials in a manner that precludes further use.



11.   “Recycling collection” means the collection of recyclable
materials from a residential dwelling in the manner specified by the city.



12.   "Recycling container" means a receptacle designated by the city for
the accumulation and collection of recyclable materials at a residential
dwelling.



13.   “Refuse” means that part of mixed municipal solid waste that
normally results from the operation of a household or commercial
establishment, except garbage.  It does not include industrial wastes,
hazardous wastes, or other wastes managed as waste streams separate from
mixed municipal solid waste.



14.   “Residential dwelling” means a single building consisting of
four or less dwelling units with individual kitchen facilities for each.



15.   “Waste container” means a receptacle used for the accumulation
and collection of mixed municipal solid waste.



16.   “Yard waste” means material that may be composted, such as
leaves, grass clippings and other similar forms of organic material, but
excludes brush, bushes, branches, trees, or similar large material.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



835.010.  Disposal of Waste.



1.   Every owner or occupant of a residential dwelling unit, or the owner,
manager or occupant of a multiple dwelling or commercial establishment must
dispose of waste in the manner required in this section.  All people must
dispose of waste within the city by using one of the following means:



   a.   collection by a licensed collector;



   b.   incineration in a incinerator that complies with the
requirements of this section; or



   c.   delivery to a storage or disposal site that has been approved
by all governmental agencies with regulatory authority.



2.   Disposal of waste must occur at least once each week from residential
dwellings and multiple dwellings.  Disposal of waste at a commercial
establishment must be at least once each week, and at more frequent intervals
if the city orders that it is necessary to protect the public health.



835.015.  Preparation of Waste for Collection.



Waste must be prepared for disposal in compliance with the following
requirements.



1.   Except as otherwise provided, waste accumulated on a property must be
drained of liquids, wrapped or bagged, and placed and kept in containers for
collection by a licensed collector.  Grass clippings, leaves, and other yard
waste must be placed in bags or bundles not exceeding three feet in any
dimension and securely fastened to avoid spillage.



2.   No explosives, highly inflammable material, or hazardous waste may be
placed in waste containers for normal waste collection.  Explosive and
highly inflammable materials must be disposed of as directed by the fire
marshal, at the owner's or possessor's expense.  Hazardous waste must be
disposed of in accordance with state and federal law.



3.   Unless the collector agrees to another location on the premises,
waste must be deposited for collection adjacent to the street or alley that
the collector will use.  It must be in one place at ground level and off the
traveled roadway .  Waste may not be deposited next to the roadway or alley
before sunset of the day before collection.  Waste may not remain adjacent
to a street or alley for a period longer than 24 hours if not collected and
must be removed by the tenant, lessee, owner or occupant.



4.   Multiple dwellings must be provided with waste containers and
collection service by a licensed collector, or with a commercial incinerator
complying with the requirements of the Minnesota pollution control agency and
licensed by the city.  Waste containers that are provided must comply with
section 835.020, below.  The person owning or operating a multiple dwelling
must provide for collection from the containers and must not permit garbage
or refuse to accumulate on the premises except in the containers.



5.   The person owning or managing a commercial establishment, or another
property that produces a volume of waste that requires collection more
frequently than once each week, must also provide waste containers that
comply with the requirements of section 835.020, below.  The person owning
or managing a premises used as an office, warehouse or industrial building
must provide waste containers inside the structure in sufficient size and
number to store accumulations of waste resulting from each working day.



6.   A person must not deposit waste into a waste container owned by
another without the other's prior permission.



7.   Waste, yard waste, recyclables, waste containers, and recycling
containers must be located so that they are out of the public view except on
the day of collection.



8.   A person must not permit waste to accumulate on property under that
person's control if it constitutes a nuisance by reason of appearance, odor,
sanitation, or fire hazard.



835.020.  Waste Containers.



1.   Waste containers used in the city must be:



   a.   made of metal or other suitable material that is not easily
corrodible or combustible;



   b.   watertight, insect and rodent-proof;



   c.   kept tightly covered when containing waste;



   d.   placed in a manner to prevent them from being overturned; and



   e.   maintained in a sanitary and safe condition, free of a
substance on the exterior that attracts or breeds flies, other insects, or
rodents, and free of ragged or sharp edges or other defects that may impede
or injure the person collecting the contents.



2.   In addition, waste containers for residential dwellings must be:



   a.   equipped with suitable handles and tight fitting covers;



   b.   a size and weight that can be handled by one person; and



   c.   no larger than 32 gallons in capacity or 75 pounds in weight
when filled, except that containers with up to 90 gallons in capacity may be
used if they have been approved by the city and if collection is provided by
automated equipment.



3.   In addition, waste containers for multiple dwellings and commercial
establishments must be:



   a.   at least one cubic yard in capacity;



   b.   conveniently located with respect to the residential units or
establishment; and



   c.   placed in an enclosure complying with the requirements of
paragraph 4 below.



4.   Waste containers for multiple dwellings and commercial establishments
must be kept in an enclosure that conceals them from public view.  The
enclosure must have a raised concrete floor and be kept in good repair at all
times.  The enclosure must be constructed, or the containers must be located
in the enclosure, so that the contents of the containers are inaccessible for
at least three feet above the base of the enclosure.



5.   Containers not complying with the requirements of this section must
be promptly repaired or replaced with ones that do comply upon notice by the
city or the collector.  Whenever a container is in poor condition, the
collector must tag the container with a notice of the defects and the
requirement to repair or replace the container.  A copy of the notice must
be given to the city, and if on the next collection date the container has
not been repaired or replaced, the collector must notify the city and
discontinue collections from the premises.



835.025.  Public Nuisance.



The accumulation of waste that does not comply with provisions of this
section, that is not stored in containers that comply with this section, or
that has remained for more than one week, is a public nuisance and may be
abated by the procedure established in section 850.



835.030.  Recycling.



1.   A person who conducts recycling and recycling collection in the city
must obtain a collector's permit from the city and comply with the
requirements applicable to collectors.



2.   Recyclable materials remain the property of the generator until they
are either disposed off-site by the generator or until they are collected by
a licensed collector from the generator's site.



3.   No person may take recyclables accumulated by a generator or placed
by the generator for recycling collection, except a licensed collector with
the responsibility for recycling collection at that location.



4.   Each multiple dwelling building owner, either directly or through a
property manager or owners’ association, must provide residents of the
building with the opportunity to recycle certain solid waste materials. 
Materials to be recycled include, at a minimum, newspaper, cans, glass
containers, corrugated cardboard, and plastic bottles.  Other recyclable
materials must be added upon direction by the city to do so.  The collection
of recyclables must occur at least monthly.  If multiple dwelling buildings
are included in the city’s curbside recycling program, the requirements of
this paragraph do not apply.  Buildings of up to eight units may be included
in the city’s program, at the city’s discretion.



835.035.  Licensing of Collectors.



1.   A person must not undertake collection of recylables or waste in the
city of Minnetonka without first obtaining a license to do so and paying the
required license fee specified in section 710.



2.   An applicant for a collector's license must submit an application to
the community development director on a form prepared by the city.  The
application must accurately state:



   a.    the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;



   b.   a description of the manner and kind of services to be rendered
and the collection schedule;



   c.   the routes or area to be served;



   d.   the proposed charges for collection; and



   e.   a description of each motor vehicle to be used for collection,
including its license number.



3.   Each license applicant must also submit a certificate of insurance
certifying that its business is currently insured by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state of Minnesota.  The certificate must be
in the form prescribed by the city.  The minimum limits of coverage for the
insurance are:



   a.   liability insurance:



      (1)   each claim, at least $100,000;



      (2)   each occurrence, at least $300,000; and



      (3)   property damage, at least $50,000.



   b.   workers' compensation:  statutory amounts.



The insurance must be kept in force during the term of the license and must
provide for notification to the city 10 days before termination or
cancellation.  A license will automatically be revoked upon notice of
termination or cancellation of this insurance and will remain revoked until
and unless other insurance is provided as required.



4.   A collector's license will expire July 31 of each year.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-22, adopted October 3, 2011)



835.040.  Duties of Collector.



1.   Each person hauling or conveying waste over city streets must use a
vehicle provided with a tight cover.  The vehicle must be operated and
maintained to prevent offensive odors escaping, and recyclables or waste
blowing, dropping or spilling, from the vehicle.  A collection vehicle may
not be allowed to stand on a street, alley, or other place longer than is
reasonably necessary to collect recyclables or waste.  A collection vehicle
must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, as free from offensive odors
as possible, and must be thoroughly disinfected at least once each week,
unless it has not been used since the last disinfection.



2.   Garbage, refuse, refuse bags, wrappings, cans and disposable
containers deposited for collection must be emptied and collected by the
licensed collector so that no items are left, expect hazardous wastes or
other unacceptable wastes.  After collection, the collector must return
reusable waste and recycling containers to the place where they were
deposited for collection.



3.   A collector may not collect recyclables or waste from residential
units or from areas within 400 feet of residential units, after 10:00 p.m. or
before 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday.



4.   A vehicle not listed in the license application must not be used for
collection, except that an alternate vehicle may be used in an emergency
period not exceeding three days.  A vehicle not listed in the license
application may be used beyond an emergency period only after the licensee
notifies the city of its intended use and the city inspects the vehicle. 
Each vehicle included within a license is subject to inspection by the city
at all reasonable times.  While operated in the city, each vehicle must have
the name of the licensee clearly printed on both sides and carry a copy of
the license issued by the city.



5.   Collection vehicles operated under a license are exempt from the
seasonal weight restrictions placed upon city roads, except:



   a.   when the gross weight on a single axle exceeds 18,000 pounds; or



   b.   where special postings specifically prohibit collection
vehicles.



   During a period of weight restrictions, each collector must provide for
operation in conformance with the restrictions, as modified by this
paragraph, so that service is not interrupted.



6.   When a collector cancels service to a premises, written notice must
be served upon or mailed to the occupant, manager or owner of the premises,
and a copy of the notice mailed to the community development department.



7.   No licensed collector acquires a vested right in a city license. 
The city council may decide at any time to establish other means of recycling
or waste collection.



8.   A licensed collector must dispose of recyclables or waste only at a
site for the storage or disposal of those materials that has been approved by
all governmental agencies with regulatory authority and that is operated in
compliance with the applicable  regulations of the Minnesota pollution
control agency.



9.   Nothing in this section may be construed to prohibit a person from
disposing of recyclables or waste by delivering it to an approved storage or
disposal site.



10.   Each licensed collector providing residential refuse collection
service must separately collect and dispose of yard waste during a period not
to exceed eight weeks each spring and fall as designated by the city manager
or authorized representative.  Within two weeks after notification from the
city, each licensed collector providing residential refuse collection service
must give the city a detailed description of:



   a.   the manner by which the collector intends to separately collect
and dispose of yard waste;



   b.   the manner by which the collector intends to account for the
amount of yard waste collected; and



   c.   the manner by which the collector will inform customers of the
yard waste collection program.



   During the designated yard waste collection period, each collector must
take the yard waste to a disposal site, approved by the city manager or
authorized representative, for subsequent composting.  Each licensed
collector must keep an accurate accounting of the amount of yard waste
collected and must, within 30 days of the end of the collection period,
submit a written report to the city detailing the amount of yard waste
collected and disposed of for composting during each week of the period.



   The city council may, by resolution, establish a reimbursement for
those refuse collectors providing yard waste collection during the designated
collection period, to offset extraordinary costs incurred by the collectors
for the yard waste collection.  The resolution must state the amount and
rate of reimbursement to be paid to the collectors.  If reimbursement is
authorized, a collector must not charge a customer an additional amount for
the required yard waste collection.



11.   Each licensed collector providing a dumpster to property improved as
a single-family or two family residence must comply with city code section
845.020 and must remove a dumpster before expiration of the time periods
required in that section. The licensed collector may not empty a dumpster
onto the property before removing it.



(Amended by Ord. #2007-12, adopted April 9, 2007.)



835.045.  Incinerators.



1.   A person must not operate an incinerator within the city for the
burning of garbage or refuse unless the incinerator complies with the
requirements of the Minnesota pollution control agency.  A person must not
operate an incinerator, except one for a residential dwelling, unless a
license for the operation has been obtained from the city as provided in this
section.



2.    Application for an incinerator license must be made to the community
development director.  The application must state the name and address of
the owner of the property on which the incinerator is located, the name and
address of the proposed operator if different from the property owner, a
description of the type of incinerator, and, except in renewal applications,
a plan showing that the incinerator will comply with applicable regulations
of the city and the Minnesota pollution control agency.



3.   The application and license are subject to the requirements of
section 835.035.



4.   The city council may grant an incinerator license if the incinerator
meets the requirements of the Minnesota pollution control agency and the city
ordinances.  The city council may deny the application if it appears that
city regulations regarding health, safety, building or otherwise, are not
being met on the premises concerned.



SECTION 840.  PLANT PEST CONTROL.



840.005.  Declaration of Policy.



The city council finds that trees and plant species provide numerous
environmental, economic and scenic benefits to the public. The council also
finds that certain plant pests are likely to cause economic or environmental
harm or harm to human health through their impact on trees and plants. The
loss of  tree and plant species growing upon public or private property due
to plant pests would substantially depreciate the value of property within
the city and impair the safety, good order and general welfare of the
public.  The council intends to manage, control and prevent the impacts
caused by harmful plant pests by the adoption of the following regulations.



840.010.  City Forester.



The city forester will coordinate all of the city's activities relating to
the management, control and prevention of plant pests that are likely to
cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health.  The forester
will recommend to the council the details of a program for the control of
plant pests in the city and perform the duties incident to a control program
adopted by the city council.



840.015.  Plant Pest Program.



1.    The city council intends to conduct a program of plant pest control
pursuant to the authority granted by Minn. Stat. § 18G.13.  This program is
directed specifically at the prevention, control and elimination or
management of oak wilt disease, Dutch elm diseases, the emerald ash borer
beetle, and other plant pests that may be identified in the future as likely
to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health.



2.    After a public hearing, the city council may adopt a resolution to
establish or amend a written program for plant pest control, management and
prevention. The program must include the following elements:



   a.  identification of plant pests that the council finds may cause
significant damage or harm to the city's economy, environment, or to human
health;



   b.  a description of the methods for controlling, preventing, or
managing each identified plant pest, and the circumstances under which a
given method is appropriate based on the particular plant pest, time of the
year, the prevalence of the plant pest within the city, or other factors.
Methods to be utilized may include injection, installation of a root graft
barrier, quarantine of the plant product, or destruction and proper
sanitation of the plant or plant product;



   c.  the circumstances under which the city will perform the prescribed
method of control, prevention or management at the city's cost; and



   d.    the circumstances under which a private property owner must
either (i) perform a prescribed method of control, prevention or management
at the property owner's cost or (ii) reimburse the city for the cost of
control, prevention or management work performed by the city.



3.    The council may amend the plant pest program from time to time as
appropriate based upon then-current technical and expert opinions as may be
designated by the commissioner of agriculture, and as approved by other
appropriate state agencies.



4.   The city forester will act as coordinator between the commissioner of
agriculture and the council in the conduct of this program.



840.020.  Nuisances Declared.



1.   The following things are public nuisances, whether located on public
or private property:



   a.   any plant, conveyance or article that is infected or infested
with plant pests identified in the adopted plant pest program;



   b.   any living or dead red oak tree, or part of it, including logs,
branches, stumps, or firewood, infected to any degree with oak wilt disease
fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;



   c.   any living or dead elm tree, or part of it, including logs,
branches, stumps, or firewood, infected to any degree with the Dutch elm
disease fungus Ophiostoma novo-ulmi or any tree or elm wood which harbors any
of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus, Scolytus schevyrewi or
Hylurgonipus rufipes; and



   d.   any living or dead ash tree, or part of it, including logs,
branches, stumps or firewood found to harbor the emerald ash borer beetle,
Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire.



2.   A person must not permit any public nuisance as defined in
subdivision 1 above to remain on premises owned or controlled by the person
within the city.  The nuisance may be abated in the manner prescribed by
this chapter.



840.025.  Inspection and Investigation.



1.   The forester or authorized representatives may inspect all premises
and places within the city as often as appropriate to determine if any
condition described in section 840.020(1) exists.  The forester will
investigate all reported incidence of infestation by oak wilt fungus, Dutch
elm fungus, elm bark beetles, emerald ash borer beetles, or other plant pests
identified in the adopted plant pest program.



2.   The forester or authorized representatives may enter upon private
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the
duties assigned to them under this ordinance.



3.   The forester or authorized representatives must identify diseased or
infested trees by generally accepted field symptoms such as wilting,
yellowing of leaves, D-shaped exit holes or staining of wood.  Laboratory
confirmation by the Minnesota department of agriculture or University of
Minnesota will be used only when it is necessary.



840.030.  Abatement of Plant Pest Nuisances.



1.   Whenever the forester or authorized representative determines that a
nuisance exists on public or private property, the forester will cause the
nuisance to be abated in the manner prescribed by the adopted plant pest
program.



2.   For abating a nuisance on private property, the forester must follow
the procedures specified in section 845.045 of this code. The written
notification to the property owner must provide reference to the adopted
plant pest program.



3.   The city's costs in abating a nuisance on private property shall be a
lien on the property and may be collected in the manner provided in section
845.045 of this code.



840.045.  Transporting Diseased Wood.



The transportation of diseased trees or wood must comply with the standards
set forth in the plant pest program.



840.050.  Interference Prohibited.



A person must not prevent, delay or interfere with the Forester or
representatives while they are engaged in the performance of the duties
imposed by this chapter.



840.055.  Penalty.



A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with state law.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-07, effective July 28, 2018)



SECTION 845.  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



845.005.  Public Nuisances Affecting Health.



The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public health:



1.   a pond or pool of stagnant water;



2.   decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public;



3.   a privy vault and garbage can that is not fly-tight;



4.   the effluence from any cesspool, septic tank, drain field or sewage
disposal system discharging upon the surface of the ground;



5.   an accumulation of manure, rubbish, tin cans or other debris;



6.   noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation on public or
private property;



7.   dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders in quantities
sufficient to make the occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of
ordinary sensibilities; and



8.   breeding sites of the aedes triseriatus (tree hole mosquito),
including unused tires (not mounted on wheels), pots, pans, cans, pails,
bottles and other containers left outdoors in which water or debris may
accumulate.



845.010.  Public Nuisances Affecting Peace, Safety and General Welfare.



The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace, safety and
general welfare:



1.   interfering with, obstructing or rendering dangerous for passage, a
public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public;



2.   leaving or displaying anything for sale on public or private
property, except that an owner of an item for sale may display it on property
that the person owns or otherwise controls;



3.   trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions that prevent persons
from having a clear view of traffic approaching an intersection;



4.   piling, storing or keeping of old machinery, junk, furniture,
household furnishings or appliances or component parts of them or other
debris;



5.   placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk, or other public property
of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substances that may injure a
person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire;



6.   depositing of, permitting or failing to remove, garbage, trash,
rubbish, bottles, cans and other refuse on any property, including large
quantities of organic debris and materials that accumulated by other than
natural means, except neatly maintained compost piles;



7.   property that has been disturbed by construction, grading, or other
activity and is not seeded, sodded, or otherwise planted with a ground cover
within 240 days, unless the 240 days expires between November 1 and May 15,
in which case the ground cover must be established by the following July 15,
unless the city approves a time extension;



8.   the accumulation of any piles of wood that are not:



   a.   neatly stacked; or



   b.   stacked or secured in a stable manner to avoid collapse.



9.   a structure, or a portion of a structure, located in a residential
zoning district, if the exterior is not completed in accordance with
city-approved construction plans within 180 days after the date that the city
building permit was issued;



10.   construction materials, including piles of dirt, sand, and sod, left
in the open on property more than 60 days after construction has been
completed or a certificate of occupancy has been issued, whichever occurred
first;



11.   a truck or other vehicle whose wheels or tires deposit mud, dirt,
sticky substances, litter or other material on any street or highway;



12.   discarded construction material or other litter at a construction
site that is not placed in an adequate waste container or that is allowed to
blow around or off the site;



13.   reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding
five-tenth footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where
the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel and one
footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel;



14.   the placement of mailboxes and other delivery receptacles on public
right of way, except those that comply with the following:



   a.   must be in compliance with united states postal service
requirements for location and type;



   b.   must be installed as far back from the street pavement as
reasonably practical to avoid snow plowing damage;



   c.   must be located within four feet of the intersection of a side
property line with the street, or located in front of, and on the same side
of the street as, the building it serves; and



   d.   must be located as a group in one place within four feet of a
side property line and as close to the beginning of a cul-de-sac bulb as
possible if the mailboxes and delivery receptacles serve buildings fronting
and on the circular portion of a cul-de-sac endpoint, also known as a bulb.



15.   any violation of section 300.28, subdivisions 15 through 18;



16.   erosion or stockpiling of any material onto a public street that is
not part of a public improvement; or erosion or drainage from a property when
it is causing, or has the likelihood of causing, serious harm to neighboring
property or to natural resources such as significant trees, water bodies,
wetlands, and wetland buffers.  Serious harm includes actual damage as well
as interference with reasonable use of the property;



17.   the intentional discharge of items such as leaves, grass clippings,
pet feces, solvents, antifreeze, oil, fireplace ashes, paint, and cement
rinsate into a street, storm sewer system, or water resource such as a
wetland, creek, pond or lake;



18.   depositing of, or permitting the depositing of, pet feces upon
frozen lakes, ponds, wetlands or creeks or upon any public right-of-way,
public trail easement area, or publically owned or controlled property;



19.   gravel driveways maintained in such a manner that the gravel erodes
into, or is placed in,  a public street or a water resource such as a
wetland, creek, pond or lake;



20.   encroachments onto publicly-owned property or tax-forfeited property
under public control without a legal right or permission from the public
owner, such as the placement of buildings or other objects, the dumping of
organic materials, the storing of privately-owned items, and the undertaking
of activities affecting the physical nature of the property such as mowing,
vegetation removal, or the application of fertilizer, pesticides, or
herbicides; or



21.   a tree located on private property that the city forester has
determined: (a) has defects in its structure, roots or branches that are
likely to cause the tree or part of the tree to fail, and (b) is likely to
damage public property or improvements when the tree or part of the tree
fails.



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-07, effective July 28, 2018; Amended by Ord. 2011-30,
adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord. #2005-07, adopted March 21, 2005;
amended by Ord. #2003-12, adopted April 14, 2003; amended by Ord. #2002-10,
adopted May 6, 2002)



845.015.  Special Provisions - Building Maintenance and Appearance.



1.   Declaration of nuisance.  Buildings, fences, and other structures
that have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and
appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be
public nuisances because they (a) are unsightly, (b) decrease adjoining
landowners' and occupants' enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and
(c) adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.



2.   Standards.  A building, fence, or other structure is a public
nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements.



   a.   No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes,
breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.



   b.   Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as
paint applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the
finish.  No wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked,
chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20 percent of:



      (1)   any one wall or other flat surface; or



      (2)   all door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and
similar projections on any one side or surface.



   c.   No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be
broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.



   d.   Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an
operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.



   e.   Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows, and
similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and
defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.



   f.   Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit
water.  All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.



   g.   Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections
must be structurally sound and in good repair.  These projections must be
secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.



   h.   Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.



845.020.  Special Provisions - Outside Parking and Storage.



1.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following words have
the meanings specified below.



   a.   “Vehicle” or “vehicles”  means a motor vehicle or
trailer as defined in Minn. Stat. § 169.01, including pioneer, classic
collector and street rod vehicles, but excluding the following:



      (1)   small trailers that are clearly designed to be used for
general yard and garden purposes and not for travel on the roadways;



      (2)   snowmobiles; and



      (3)   all-terrain vehicles as defined in Minn. Stat. § 84.92,
subd. 8.



   b.   “Front yard area” means all that area between the front
property line and a line drawn along the front face or faces of the principal
structure on the property and extended to the side property lines.  The
front side of the property will be determined as specified in the zoning
ordinance.



   c.   “Outside” means to be outside of an enclosed storage
facility and visible from any other property.



   d.   "Dumpster" means a unit that is intended to be used primarily
for the disposal of waste material, that is owned by a contractor licensed
for disposal services, and that has a capacity larger than 100 gallons.



   e.   "Portable storage container" means a unit that is constructed
to make it portable and capable of movement from one site to another, that
can be or is used for the storage of personal property of any kind, that is
located outside of an enclosed building, that is larger than 40 cubic feet,
and that is not a permanent accessory building or shed complying with all
building codes and zoning requirements.



   f.   "Temporary structure" means a structure or unit over 120 square
feet in size, consisting of a frame that is covered at any time with a
covering made of plastic, fabric, canvas, metal, fiberglass or similar
material, that does not require a building permit, that is not intended for
human occupancy, and  that is intended or used to provide storage for
vehicles, boats, recreational vehicles, or other personal property, whether
fully or partially covered. "Temporary structure" includes structures
commonly known as hoop houses, canopy-covered carports and tent garages, but
does not include structures that are in place for less than five days,
structures that have been constructed pursuant to a building permit issued by
the city, and boat lifts and canopies that are placed in public waters.



2.   Declaration of nuisance.  The outside parking and storage on
residentially-zoned property of portable storage containers, dumpsters, large
numbers of vehicles, and vehicles, materials, supplies or equipment not
customarily used for residential purposes in violation of the requirements
set forth below is declared to be a public nuisance because it (a) obstructs
views on streets and private property, (b) creates cluttered and otherwise
unsightly areas, (c) prevents the full use of residential streets for
residential parking, (d) introduces commercial advertising signs into areas
where commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited, (e) decreases
adjoining landowners and occupants' enjoyment of their property and
neighborhood, and (f) otherwise adversely affects property values and
neighborhood patterns.



3.   Unlawful parking and storage.



   a.   A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or
storage of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar
non-permanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the
front-yard area of residentially-zoned property unless more than 100 feet
back from the front property line.



   b.   No outside storage of personal property is allowed, except as
otherwise permitted by this section 845 and except  items to be used in
conjunction with normal outdoor residential activities on the property, such
as outdoor furniture and cooking equipment, recreational equipment, and
construction and landscaping material and equipment that is used or intended
to be used on the property in a period no longer than three months or in
connection with a building permit on the property.



   c.   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside
parking and storage of vehicles on residentially-zoned property unless it
complies with the following requirements.



      (1)   No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may
be parked or stored anywhere outside on R-l and R-2 zoned property, except as
otherwise permitted or required by the city because of non-residential
characteristics of the property.  This maximum number does not include
vehicles of occasional guests who do not reside on the property.



      (2)   Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the
front-yard area must be on a paved or graveled parking or driveway area.



      (3)   Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside
on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that
property.  Students who are away at school for periods of time but still
claim the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on
the property.



      (4)   No recreational vehicle or vehicle for sale may be
parked on the portion of private property and undeveloped public right-of-way
that is within ten feet of the paved portion of a public street, except on a
driveway that is shorter than 40 feet long measured from the street pavement.



   d.   A person owning, driving or in charge of a vehicle with a
weight classification G through T inclusive, as specified in Minn. Stat. §
168.013, subd. 1e, must not cause or permit that vehicle to be parked outside
or to stand continuously for more than two hours on any property or public
street within a residential zone in the city.



   e.   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the
placement or existence of a dumpster outside on property that is improved as
a single family or two family residence, unless it complies with the
following requirements:



      (1)   A dumpster must be placed only on a paved or graveled
parking or driveway area as far away from the public street as reasonably
possible, or on another area approved by the community development director;



      (2)   A dumpster may not be on the paved portion of a public
street;



      (3)   A dumpster must be used only  in connection with (a)
construction activity that has been properly permitted by the city, in which
case it may remain no longer than 180 days in any twelve-month period, or (b)
the clean-up of property, in which case it may remain for no longer than 30
days in any twelve-month period;



      (4)   There can be no more than one dumpster per parcel; and



      (5)   A dumpster must be maintained in a reasonably sound
condition, with no holes and little rust or pealing paint.



   f.   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the
placement or existence of a portable storage container outside on property
that is improved as a single family or two family residence unless it
complies with the following requirements:



      (1)   A portable storage container must be placed only on a
paved or graveled parking or driveway area as far away from the public street
as reasonably possible, or on another area approved by the community
development director;



      (2)   A portable storage container may not be on the paved
portion of a public street;



      (3)   A parcel of land may have any portable storage container
on it no longer than 30 consecutive days. A new period of 30 days may begin
after 15 days have elapsed. There can be no more than three 30-day periods on
one parcel in any twelve-month period;



      (4)   A portable storage container may remain on the parcel
longer than 30 days if it is being used in conjunction with remodeling or
other construction on the site but only for no longer than 180 days in any
twelve-month period;



      (5)   The portable storage container must have attached to it
a placard on a form to be provided by the city that includes the container
identification number, the date of placement on the property, the date that
removal is scheduled to occur, and the local telephone number of the owner of
the container;



      (6)   The total size of all portable storage containers
simultaneously on a parcel of land cannot exceed 2000 cubic feet;



      (7)   A portable storage container must be maintained in a
reasonably sound condition, with no holes and little rust or pealing paint;
and



      (8)   A portable storage container may only be provided by a
person or organization that is licensed by the city to conduct this kind of
business.



   g.   A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the
placement or existence of a temporary structure outside on property that is
improved as a single family or two family residence unless it complies with
the following requirements:



      (1)   The person must have in effect a current and valid
annual permit obtained from the city after submitting an application on the
city's approved form and paying the annual permit fee specified in section
710;



      (2)   The structure may be in place no longer than six months
in any twelve-month period, and when not in place, the component parts of the
structure must be stored where they cannot be viewed from any other property;



      (3)   The structure must meet the setback requirements for an
accessory structure and be located behind the front line of the principal
structure as extended to the sides of the property. The applicant is
responsible for establishing the location of the property lines;



      (4)   There can be no more than one temporary structure per
parcel, the structure may not exceed 600 square feet, and the structure is in
addition to the accessory structures and storage shed allowed by the zoning
ordinance;



      (5)   The structure must be sufficiently anchored to withstand
overturning, uplifting, or sliding from a 90-mile-an-hour wind; and



      (6)   The structure must be able to withstand a snowload of 40
pounds per square foot if the structure will be in place at any time during
the months of November, December, January, February, March, or April.



4.   Exceptions.  The prohibitions of this section do not apply to the
following:



   a.   a motor truck, pickup truck or similar vehicle being used by a
public utility, moving company, or similar company, that is actually being
used to service a residence not belonging to or occupied by the operator of
the vehicle; and



   b.   a vehicle that is actually making a pickup or delivery at the
location where it is parked.  Parking for any period of time beyond the
period of time reasonably necessary to make the pickup or delivery and in
excess of the two hour limit is unlawful.



5.   Abatement.  A police officer or other authorized person may order a
vehicle constituting a public nuisance under subparagraphs 3c and 3d above to
be immediately removed and impounded. The impounded vehicle will be
surrendered to the owner by the towing contractor only upon payment of the
required impound, towing and storage fees.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2007-18, adopted May
21, 2007; Ord. 2007-12, adopted April 9, 2007; Ord. #2005-19, adopted
November 28, 2005; Amended by Ord. #2002-10, adopted May 6, 2002)



845.025.  Special Provisions - Abandoned or Inoperable Motor Vehicles.



1.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following words have
the meanings specified below.



   a.   “Abandoned vehicle” means a motor vehicle that has remained
for a period of more than 48 hours on public property illegally or lacking
vital component parts, or that has remained  in an inoperable condition for
a period of more than 48 hours on private property with or without consent of
the person in control of the property, unless it is kept in an enclosed
garage or storage building.  It also means a motor vehicle voluntarily
surrendered by its owner to the city or to a towing contractor hired by the
city for its removal.



   b.   “Junk vehicle” means a motor vehicle that is in an
inoperable condition, that is partially dismantled, that is used for sale of
parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, or
that is kept for scrapping, dismantling, or salvage of any kind, unless the
vehicle is kept in an enclosed garage or storage building.  A junk vehicle
is also an abandoned vehicle for the purpose of this ordinance.



   c.   “Inoperable condition” means that the vehicle has no
substantial potential use consistent with its usual function, and  includes
a vehicle that (1) has a missing or defective part that is necessary for the
normal operation of the vehicle, (2) is stored on blocks, jacks or other
supports, or (3) has not had a current vehicle license for at least six
months.



   d.   “Motor vehicle” or “vehicle” has the meaning contained
in Minn. Stat. § 169.01.



   e.   “Vital component parts” means those parts of the motor
vehicle that are essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle,
including, but not limited to, the motor, drive train, and wheels.



   f.   “Outside” has the same meaning as in city code section
845.020(1)(c).



2.   Vehicles constituting a public nuisance.



   a.   Abandoned and junk vehicles are a public nuisance creating a
hazard to the health and safety of the public because they invite plundering,
create fire hazards, attract vermin, and present physical dangers to the
safety and well-being of children and other citizens.  The accumulation and
outside storage of these vehicles is in the nature of rubbish, litter, and
unsightly debris and is a blight on the landscape and a detriment to the
environment.



   b.   A vehicle, whether occupied or not, that is found stopped,
standing, or parked in violation of a ordinance or state statute; that is
reported stolen; or that is found impeding firefighting, snow removal or
plowing or the orderly flow of traffic, is a public nuisance.



   c.   A vehicle that is impeding public road or utility repair,
construction or maintenance activities if reasonable notice of the proposed
activities was given to the vehicle owner or user at least 12 hours in
advance, is a public nuisance.



3.   Abatement.



   a.   Impounding.  A police officer or other authorized person may
order a vehicle constituting a public nuisance to be immediately removed and
impounded.  The impounded vehicle will be surrendered to the owner by the
towing contractor only upon payment of the required impound, towing and
storage fees.



   b.   Sale.  Notice and sale of a vehicle impounded under this
ordinance will be conducted in accordance with Minn. Stat. chapter 168B,
governing the sale of abandoned motor vehicles.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



845.030.  Special Provisions - Lawn Maintenance.



1.   Preamble.  The city council finds that there are a variety of
landscapes in the city that add diversity and a richness to the quality of
life.    Certain areas in the city have been left, or allowed to go,
unmaintained.  These have been accepted by the vast majority of the city
residents as appropriate and as part of the unique quality of life in this
community.  There are community expectations, however, that once an area has
been disturbed, landscaped, or otherwise maintained, that area will continue
to be maintained in a consistent manner.  When vegetation in that area is
not continually maintained, it becomes aesthetically unpleasing and violates
community standards.  Property that appears neglected may decrease the value
of adjacent properties.  In addition, if vegetation is not properly
maintained, there may be the following adverse impacts on public health,
safety, and welfare:



   a.   undesirable vegetation such as common buckthorn, quackgrass,
and other weeds may invade and threaten to supplant other more desirable
vegetation;



   b.   vegetation that causes allergic reactions, such as ragweed, may
develop; and



   c.   tall vegetation along driveways and public roads may impair
visibility when entering or exiting public roads.



   The city council also finds that it is in the public interest to allow
citizens to choose the type of landscaping on their properties and to make
changes in that vegetation.  As a protection for the larger community,
however, this change in vegetation must be properly managed and maintained
and the length of the transition period must be minimized.



   The council finds that the establishment of prairie and meadow plant
communities is an acceptable landscape treatment in the city.  This requires
special consideration, however, because weeds will grow during the first few
years of transition before the new vegetation predominates and will appear
like neglect.  Therefore, the council finds that this type of vegetation is
acceptable if it is properly maintained to shorten the transition period and
if notice is given of the intended result.



   In contrast, the transition to trees and other woody species does not
require special consideration because untended grass or weeds are not a
necessary part of that transition period.  Rather, the transition period is
shortened by eliminating competition around the seedlings through such
techniques as organic mulch.



   The city council enacts this ordinance to balance the public interest
in a variety of vegetation with the public need to ensure proper maintenance
of that vegetation.  The council finds that establishing a height limitation
for certain vegetation is in the best interest of the public health, safety,
and welfare as outlined above and is a reasonable maintenance standard.



2.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following words have
the meanings specified below.



   a.   “Meadow vegetation” is grasses and flowering broad-leaf
plants that are native to, or adapted to, the state of Minnesota, and that
are commonly found in meadow and prairie plant communities, except weeds.



   b.   “Noxious weeds” are those plants so designated by the state
of Minnesota under Minn. Stat. § 18.171, subd. 5.



   c.   “Regularly cut” means mowing or otherwise cutting the
vegetation so that it does not exceed 10 inches in height.



   d.   “Turf grasses” are grasses commonly used in regularly cut
lawn areas, such as bluegrass, fescue and rye grass blends, and non-woody
vegetation interspersed with them.



   e.   “Weeds” include all noxious weeds, buffalobur, burdock,
common cocklebur, crabgrass, dandelions, jimsonweed, quackgrass, common and
giant ragweed, field sandbur, velvetleaf, and wild sunflower.  Weeds also
include anything that is horticulturally out of place.  For example, a tree
seedling is a weed in a vegetable garden.  A property owner may establish
that a plant or plants are not horticulturally out of place by providing a
written landscape plan for the area in question, complete with a listing and
locations of plant species.  The plants specifically listed above may not be
included within the landscape plan.  Vegetation that does not comply with
this plan are weeds.



3.   Maintenance standard.  The maintenance standard in this section
applies to property that has been developed with a building as defined in the
building code, including vacant property combined with developed property for
tax purposes, and a parcel of property that has been completely or partially
disturbed by demolition, grading or other means in preparation for
development or redevelopment.



   a.   All turf grasses and weeds must not exceed a height of 10
inches, measured from the base at ground level to the tip of each stalk,
stem, blade, or leaf.



   b.   This requirement does not apply to the following:



      (1)   a wetland or floodplain designated in the zoning
ordinance and required wetland buffers or those voluntarily created by a
private land owner when compatible with the character of the neighborhood and
the intent of the wetland ordinance, Section 300.23;



      (2)   a drainage pond or ditch that stores or conveys
stormwater;



      (3)   a pasture that is (a) currently being used only for the
exercise or feeding of domestic hoofed animals, (b) physically surrounded by
a permanent fence that separates the pasture from property used for other
purposes, (c) at least one-half acre in size, and (d) undeveloped with any
habitable buildings;



      (4)   an area in which the land and vegetation appears not to
have been graded, landscaped, mowed, or otherwise disturbed by human or
mechanical means at any time.  Determination of what constitutes this type
of area will be based on a reasonable judgment of the present appearance of
the area.  The recent history of the area may be relevant to this
determination; and



      (5)   an area established with meadow vegetation if:



         (a)   the prior vegetation is eliminated and the meadow
vegetation is planted through transplanting or seed by human or mechanical
means;



         (b)   the area is cut at least once per year to a height
of no more than 10 inches, if weeds cover more than 25 percent of the area;
and



         (c)   a sign is posted on the property in a location
likely to be seen by the public, advising that a meadow or prairie is being
established.  This sign is required only if the meadow vegetation is in an
area likely to be seen by the public.  This sign must be in addition to any
sign permitted by the sign ordinance but must be no smaller than ten inches
square, no larger than one square foot, and no higher than three feet tall. 
The sign is no longer required when weeds cover 25 percent or less of the
area.



4.   Declaration of public nuisance.  The following are public nuisances
subject to abatement under this chapter:



   a.   noxious weeds;



   b.   vegetation that does not meet the maintenance standard
specified in paragraph 3 above; and



   c.   vegetation that violates the sight-distance standards in
section 300.15, subd. 9(e) and section 300.28, subd. 20 of this code.



(Amended by Ord. #99-28, adopted November 8, 1999)



845.035.  Public Nuisances Affecting Lakes or Other Body of Water.



1.   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section “public waters”
has the meaning given in Minn. Stat. § 103G.005, subd.15.



2.   A violation of any of the following prohibitions is a public nuisance
affecting the waters of any lake or other body of water.



   a.   A person must not interfere with, obstruct, or partially
obstruct these waters or otherwise cause them to be dangerous for passage or
use.



   b.   A person must not erect or maintain a dock or structure that
interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct the use of those waters or
that causes the use of those waters to be dangerous.



   c.   A person must not operate motorized watercraft powered by
non-electric motors, upon or in such waters except for Grays Bay and Libbs
Lake, and except as permitted on Shady Oak Lake under paragraph d, below. 
This prohibition applies to the portions of Minnehaha Creek within the city
that are (1) Minnehaha Creek from Grays Bay to a point on the southerly right
of way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad approximately 830 feet west
of County Road 73, (2) Minnehaha Creek from a point on the northerly
extension of the centerline of Atwater Street approximately 1,420 feet north
of the centerline of County Road 5 to the easterly line of Section 13,
Township 117, Range 22, and (3) Minnehaha Creek between the Gray’s Bay Dam
and Interstate Highway 494.



   d.   A person must not operate on Shady Oak Lake motorized
watercraft that are powered by non-electric motors with a designed or actual
horsepower over 25.  Nevertheless, operation of such watercraft during
public events may be allowed by a temporary permit issued by the city council.



   e.   A person must not participate in water-skiing on Libbs Lake and
Shady Oak Lake, except that a temporary permit for public water-skiing events
may be obtained for Shady Oak Lake from the city council.  For purposes of
this paragraph both the person or persons operating the watercraft and the
person or persons being towed are deemed equally responsible for this public
nuisance.



   f.   A person must not swim in a channel, or jump or dive from a
channel bridge.  The channels to which this restriction applies are the
Libbs Lake channel to Grays Bay and the channel that divides Shady Oak Lake.



3.   Enforcement.  A licensed peace officer employed by the Minnetonka
police department,  the Hennepin county sheriff’s department, or the
Minnesota department of natural resources may enforce this ordinance.



4.   Exemption.  Authorized emergency and law enforcement personnel are
exempt from the provisions of this ordinance when acting in the performance
of their assigned duties.



845.040.  Buildings or Structures That Endanger Public Safety, Health or
Property Within the City.



1.   A building or structure in the city is a public nuisance affecting
public safety and health if the city building official or fire marshal find
it to be dangerous to public safety, health or to other property by reason of:



   a.   damage by fire;



   b.   defective chimneys or stovepipes;



   c.   dilapidated condition or decay;



   d.   defective electric wiring;



   e.   defective gas installation;



   f.   defective heating apparatus;



   g.   defective sewage disposal system or plumbing; or



   h.   any other defect endangering the public safety, health or other
property.



2.   The building inspector or the fire marshal may order the nuisance
abated by ordering its repair, correction or removal.  This order must be in
writing and must order the repair, correction or removal of the nuisance
within 30 days or other time that the building inspector or fire marshal
deems reasonable.  This order must be served upon the owner, the lessee or
the occupant by mail or by personal service. The order may provide that the
building or structure not be further used or occupied until the repair or
correction of the defect.



845.045.  Abatement.



1.   Standard abatement. Except for the abatement of public nuisance
vehicles governed by section 845.025 and except as otherwise provided under
subdivisions 2, 3, and 4 below, the following abatement procedure applies to
all public nuisances.  Whenever the officer who is charged with enforcement
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on property,
the officer must give written notification to the property owner and occupant
or other responsible party of that fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated and abated.  Notice must be served in person or by certified
mail.  Failure of the party to receive the certified mail does not
invalidate the service of the notice. Notice to the owner will be satisfied
by notice to the person listed as the taxpayer on the county's tax records. 
If the property is not occupied, the owner is unknown, or no other
responsible party can be reasonably identified, notice may be served by
posting it on the property for a period of at least 72 hours.  The notice
must state:



   a.   the property location of the public nuisance;



   b.   the nature of the public nuisance, with reference to the
appropriate code provision;



   c.   the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and a reasonable
amount of time, within which the nuisance is to be abated;



   d.   that if the owner, occupant, or other responsible party does
not comply with the notice within the time specified, the city may provide
for abating the nuisance;



   e.   that the owner, occupant, or other responsible party has the
right to appeal the designation as a public nuisance by submitting a request
in writing to the city clerk before the date by which abatement must be
completed or within seven calendar days after service of the notice,
whichever comes first; and



   f   that the city may assess its costs against the property in
accordance with this section.



If no timely appeal is submitted and the nuisance is not abated within the
deadline given, the enforcement officer may proceed to abate the nuisance. If
a timely appeal is submitted, the matter must be scheduled for a hearing
before the city council. A notice of the hearing must state the date, time,
and location of the city council hearing, must be served in the same manner
as the abatement notice, and must be given at least ten days before the
hearing.  After holding the hearing, the city council may issue an order
requiring abatement of the nuisance.



2.   Summary abatement.  The enforcing officer may provide for abating a
public nuisance without following the standard abatement procedure required
in paragraph 1 above when:



   a.   there is an immediate threat to the public health or safety;



   b.   there is an immediate threat of serious property damage;



   c.   a public nuisance has been caused by private parties on public
property; or



   d.   there has been a violation of section 845.010(11).



   If the enforcing officer abates the nuisance under this section, the
officer must reasonably attempt to notify the owner, occupant, or other
responsible party of the intended action and the right to appeal the
abatement and any cost recovery at the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting.



3.   Major abatement. When the enforcement officer determines that the
cost of abating a nuisance will exceed $5,000 based on a reasonable, good
faith estimate, the standard abatement procedure provided in paragraph 1 is
altered in the following manner:



   a.    The abatement notice must provide that if the party does not
abate the nuisance within the time specified, the matter will be referred to
the city council for a hearing, and



   b.   The abatement notice must specify the date, time, and location
of the city council hearing.



4.   Vegetation abatement. For a vegetation public nuisance under section
845.030, the standard abatement procedure provided in paragraph 1 is altered
in the following manner:



   a.   The abatement notice may require removal within three days
after service of the notice, not including Saturdays, Sundays or holidays.
This notice will remain in effect for the remainder of the calendar year; and



   b.   Two days advance notice posted on the property is required for
abating a recurrence of the same condition.



5.   Cost recovery.  The owner of property on which a nuisance has been
abated by the city, or a person who has caused a public nuisance on property
not owned by that person, is personally liable to the city for the cost of
the abatement, including administrative costs. Unpaid charges constitute a
lien against the premises where the abatement occurred on and after the date
they were incurred. A property that is the subject of multiple nuisance
abatements within any continuous 60-month period may be charged additional
administrative fees as follows, except when the city council determines that
there are mitigating circumstances to reduce or eliminate the fee:



   For the 2nd abatement            $100



   For the 3rd abatement            $200



   For the 4th abatement            $400



   For the 5th and subsequent abatements   $800



As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, an
appropriate official will prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the
owner or other responsible party.  The amount is immediately due and payable
to the city treasurer.



6.   Assessment.  If the cost, or any portion of it, has not been paid
under subdivision 5 within 30 days after the date of the bill, the council
may certify the unpaid cost against the property to which the cost is
attributable.  Before certification against the property, reasonable notice
of the impending certification and an opportunity to be heard by the council
must be given to the taxpayer of record.  Failure of the taxpayer to receive
the notice will not invalidate the certification.  The council may certify
unpaid cost to the county auditor for collection along with current taxes in
the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the
council may determine in each case.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-01, adopted January 26, 2009; amended by Ord. #2008-32,
adopted October 13, 2008; amended by Ord. #2008-17, adopted May 19, 2008;
amended by Ord. #2002-10, adopted May 6, 2002)



845.050.  Prohibitions; Penalty.



A person must not act or fail to act in a manner that is or causes a public
nuisance. A person must not maintain, allow, or permit a public nuisance to
exist on property that the person owns, occupies, or otherwise controls. A
violation of this ordinance is a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties
contained in section 1310 of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-10, adopted May 6, 2002)



SECTION 846.  CLEAN-UP OF CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES.



846.005.  General Provisions.



1.   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce public
exposure to health risks associated with hazardous chemicals or residue from
a clandestine drug lab site. Professional testing and investigations show
that chemicals used in the production of illicit drugs can condense,
penetrate, and contaminate surfaces, furnishings, and equipment of
surrounding structures. The city council finds that such sites, and the
personal property within such sites, may contain suspected chemicals and
residues that place people, particularly children or adults of child bearing
age, at risk when exposed through inhabiting or visiting the site or being
exposed to contaminated personal property.



2.   Interpretation and application. The provisions of this section must
be construed to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When the
conditions imposed by this section conflict with comparable provisions
imposed by another law, ordinance, statute, or regulation, the regulations
that are more restrictive or that impose higher standards will prevail.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.010. Definitions. 



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words and phrases below
are defined for the purpose of this section as follows:



1.   "Chemical dump site" means a place or area where chemicals or other
waste materials used in a clandestine drug lab operation have been located.



2.   "City" means the city of Minnetonka.



3.   "Clandestine drug lab operation" means the unlawful manufacture or
attempt to manufacture a controlled substance.



4.   "Clandestine drug lab site" or "site" means a place or area where law
enforcement personnel have determined that conditions associated with an
unlawful clandestine drug lab operation exist. A clandestine drug lab site
may include dwellings, accessory buildings, structures or units, a chemical
dump site, a vehicle, boat, trailer, or other appliance.



5.   "Controlled substance" means a drug, substance or immediate precursor
specified in Minn. Stat. § 52.02, Schedules I through V, as may be amended.
The term does not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages,
intoxicating liquors or tobacco.



6.   "Manufacture," in places other than a pharmacy, includes the
production, cultivation, quality control, or standardization, by mechanical,
physical, chemical or pharmaceutical means, and the packing, re-packing,
tableting, encapsulating, labeling, re-labeling, or filling of drugs.



7.   "Owner" means a person, firm, corporation or other entity who or
which owns, in whole or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle,
boat, trailer or other location associated with a clandestine drug lab site.
Unless information is provided to prove otherwise, the owner of real property
is deemed to be the property taxpayer of record in the Hennepin county files,
and the owner of a vehicle, boat or trailer is deemed to be the person listed
as the owner on the most recent title to the vehicle, boat or trailer.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.015.  Declaration of Public Health Nuisance.



   All dwellings, accessory structures, buildings, vehicles, boats,
trailers, personal property, adjacent property or other locations, associated
with a clandestine drug lab site are potentially unsafe due to health hazards
and are declared to be a public health nuisance.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.020.  Law Enforcement Action.



1.   Law enforcement authorities who identify conditions associated with a
clandestine drug lab site that may place the public or occupants at risk for
exposure to harmful contaminants and other associated conditions may:



   a.   promptly notify the city health authority, county child
protection division, the United States drug enforcement administration, and
the site owner about the site and the conditions found;



   b.   treat, store, transport or dispose of all waste generated from
the clandestine drug lab operation and found at the site in a manner
consistent with the Minnesota department of health and Minnesota pollution
control regulations;



   c.   issue a temporary declaration of public health nuisance for the
affected site and post a copy of the declaration on all doorway entrances to
the site or, in the case of bare land, in several conspicuous places on the
property. This temporary declaration will expire after the city health
authority inspects the site and determines the appropriateness of issuing a
permanent declaration of public health nuisance;



   d.   notify all people occupying the site that a temporary
declaration of public health nuisance has been issued;



   e.   require all people occupying the site to immediately vacate the
site, remove all pets from the site, and not return without written
authorization from the city health authority;



   f.   notify the occupants vacating the site that the personal
property at the site may be contaminated with dangerous chemical residue; and



   g.   put locks on each doorway entrance to the site to prohibit
people from entering the site without authorization.



2.   The notification of the people and organizations mentioned above may
be delayed to accomplish appropriate law enforcement objectives.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.025.  Seizure of Property.



   When a clandestine drug lab site is inside a vehicle, boat, trailer or
other form of moveable personal property, law enforcement authorities must
immediately seize it and not allow it to be transported except to a more
secure location. All other requirements of this section must be followed as
closely as possible given the specific type of property in which the site is
discovered.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.030.  Action by City Health Authority.



1.   Inspection and declaration of nuisance. Within 48 hours of
notification that law enforcement authorities have determined the existence
of a clandestine drug lab site, the city health authority must inspect the
site. The city health authority may then promptly issue a permanent
declaration of public health nuisance and a Do Not Enter-Unsafe to Occupy
Order for the affected site to replace the temporary declaration. A copy of
the permanent declaration and order must be posted on all doorway entrances
to the site or, in the case of bare land, in several conspicuous places on
the property.



2.   Abatement order. After issuing the permanent declaration, the city
health authority must send written notice to the site owner ordering
abatement of the public health nuisance. The abatement order must include the
following:



   a.   a copy of the declaration of public health nuisance and Do Not
Enter-Unsafe to Occupy Order;



   b.   information about the potentially hazardous condition of the
site;



   c.   a summary of the site owner's and occupant's responsibilities
under this section; and



   d.   information that may help the owner locate appropriate services
necessary to abate the public health nuisance.



3.   Notice to other parties. The health authority must also mail a copy
of the permanent declaration of public health nuisance and a copy of this
section to the following parties at their last known addresses:



   a.   occupants or residents of the site if known;



   b.   neighbors in proximity to the site who may be reasonably
affected by the conditions found;



   c.   the appropriate enforcement division of the United States drug
enforcement administration; and



   d.   other city, state and local authorities, such as the city
public works department, the state pollution control agency, the state
department of health, and the department of natural resources, that are known
to have public and protection responsibilities applicable to the situation.



4.   Modification or removal of declaration. The city health authority may
modify or remove the declaration of public health nuisance after the health
authority receives documentation from a city-approved environmental hazard
testing and cleaning firm stating that the suspected health and safety risks,
including those to neighbors and potential occupants, either do not exist or
have been sufficiently abated or corrected to justify amendment or removal of
the declaration.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.035.  Site Owner's Responsibility to Act.



1.   Within 10 business days after the abatement order is mailed to the
site owner, the owner must accomplish the following:



   a.   provide the city health authority, in writing, with:



      (1)   confirmation that all persons and their pets have
vacated the site;



      (2)   the names of all children who the owner believes were
residing at the site during the time period the clandestine drug lab is
suspected to have been at the site; and



      (3)   confirmation that the site will remain vacated and
secured until the public health nuisance is completely abated as required by
this section.



   b.   contract with one or more city-approved environmental hazard
testing and cleaning firms to conduct the following work in accordance with
the most current state guidelines:



      (1)   a detailed on-site assessment of contamination at the
site, including the personal property in the site;



      (2)   soil testing of the site and testing of all property and
soil in proximity to the site which the environmental hazard testing and
cleaning firm determines may have been affected by the conditions found at
the site;



      (3)   a complete clean-up of the site (including the clean-up
or removal of plumbing, ventilation systems, fixtures and contaminated soil)
or a demolition of the structures on the site and a complete clean-up of the
demolished site;



      (4)   a complete clean-up, or disposal at an approved dump
site, of all personal property in the site that is found to have been
affected by the conditions at the site;



      (5)   a complete clean-up of all property and soil in
proximity to the site that is found to have been affected by the conditions
at the site; and



      (6)   remediation testing and follow-up testing, including
testing of the ventilation system and plumbing, to determine that all health
risks are sufficiently reduced to allow safe human occupancy and use of the
site, the personal property in it, and all property and soil in proximity to
the site.



   c.   provide the city health authority with the identity of the
testing and cleaning firm with which the owner has contracted for abatement
of the public health nuisance as required above; and



   d.   sign an agreement with the city health authority establishing a
clean-up schedule. The schedule must establish reasonable deadlines for
completing all actions required by this section for abatement of the public
health nuisance. The city health authority must consider practical
limitations and the availability of contractors in approving the clean-up
schedule.



2.   The owner must meet all deadlines established in the clean-up
schedule. The owner must provide the city health authority written
documentation of the clean-up, including a signed statement from a
city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm that the site,
all personal property in it, and all property and soil in proximity to the
site is safe for human occupancy and use and that the clean-up was conducted
in accordance with the most current state guidelines.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.040. Site Owner's Responsibility for Costs. 



The site owner is responsible for all costs of dealing with and abating the
public health nuisance, including contractor's fees and the city's costs for
services performed in connection with the clandestine drug lab site clean-up.
The city's costs may include:



1.   posting of the site;



2.   notification of affected parties;



3.   securing the site, providing limited access to the site, and
prosecution of unauthorized persons found at the site;



4.   expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the special
assessment process;



5.   laboratory fees;



6.   clean-up services;



7.   administrative fees;



8.   legal fees; and



9.   other associated costs.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.045. City Action and Recovery of Costs.



1.   If the site owner fails to comply with any of the requirements of
this section, the city health authority is authorized to take all reasonable
actions necessary to abate the public health nuisance including contracting
with a city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm to
conduct the work outlined in section 846.035(1)(b). The health authority is
also authorized to provide a copy of the declaration of public health
nuisance to the holders of mortgage or lien interests in the affected site.



2.   If the costs to clean the site or to clean the personal property at
the site are prohibitively high in relation to the value of the site or the
personal property, the city is authorized to remove or demolish the site,
structure or building and dispose of the personal property in it. These
actions must be taken in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap.
463.



3.   If the city abates the public health nuisance, the city is entitled
to recover all of its actual costs plus an additional 25% of such costs for
administrative and legal expense, in addition to any other legal remedy.
Unpaid charges constitute a lien against the premises where the abatement
occurred on and after the date they were incurred. The city may recover costs
by civil action against the site owner or by assessing the costs against the
site as a special assessment under city code section 845.045.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-01, adopted January 26, 2009; added by Ord. #2003-15,
adopted May 12, 2003)



846.050.  Recovery of Costs from Persons Causing Damage.



   Nothing in this section limits the rights of the site owner, occupants,
neighbors, or the city to recover costs from the persons contributing to the
public health nuisance, such as the operators of the clandestine drug lab, or
from other lawful sources.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.055.  Unauthorized Removal of Postings.



   It is unlawful for a person, except authorized city personnel, to
remove a temporary or permanent declaration of public health nuisance or Do
Not Enter--Unsafe to Occupy Order from a clandestine drug lab site.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.060. Entry Into or Onto the Site.



   While a declaration of public health nuisance for a site is in effect
and has been posted at the site, no person, other than a law enforcement
officer, the city health authority, or a person authorized by the city health
authority, is permitted to be inside or on a site.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



846.065. Removal of Personal Property from the Site. 



   While a declaration of public health nuisance for a site is in effect
and has been posted at the site, no personal property may be removed from the
site without prior written consent from the city health authority. Consent to
remove personal property may be granted at the reasonable discretion of the
health authority, and only in cases of hardship after:



1.   a city-approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm has
advised the city, in writing, that the item(s) of personal property can be
sufficiently cleaned to remove all harmful contamination; and



2.   the owner of the personal property agrees in writing that the owner:



      a.   is aware of the danger of using the contaminated property;



      b.   will thoroughly clean the property to remove all
contamination before the property is used; and



      c.   releases and agrees to indemnify the city from all
liability to the owner and third parties for injuries or damages alleged to
have been caused by the contaminated property.



(Added by Ord. #2003-15, adopted May 12, 2003)



SECTION 850.  NOISE REGULATIONS.



850.005.  General Restrictions.



A person must not make, or assist in making, permit or allow the making of a
noise that is prohibited by this section 850.  The factors that should be
considered in determining whether a noise is loud, disturbing, unnecessary,
or unreasonable for the purposes of section 850 include the following:

1.   the time of day or night when the noise occurs;

2.   the duration of the noise and whether the noise is recurrent,
intermittent, or constant;

3.   the proximity of the noise to a sleeping facility or residential area;

4.   the land use, nature and zoning of the area from which the noise
emanates and the area where the noise is perceived;

5.   the number of people and their activities that are affected or are
likely to be affected by the noise; and

6.   the sound peak pressure level of the noise, if known, in comparison
to the level of ambient noise.

(Amended by Ord. #2003-29, adopted December 15, 2003)



850.010.  Prohibited Noises.



The following acts are loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises that are
prohibited:



1.   the continual sounding of a horn, siren, or other signaling device on
a motor vehicle for a period of at least 15 seconds even though interrupted
by short gaps in sound, except in cases of imminent danger or emergency; or
the amplification of sound emitted by a signaling device beyond that of its
design.  Burglar alarms, sirens or similar devices installed and operated
for the use specified by the manufacturer, are exempt from the provisions of
this section if they sound no longer than 15 minutes;



2.   a radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, stereo, or
other machine or device used for reproduction of sound used or operated in a
manner to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of a reasonable
person of ordinary sensitivity in its vicinity.



   The operation of a receiving set, instrument, phonograph, stereo
machine or device between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. is prima facie evidence of
a violation of this section if done in a manner to be plainly audible:



   a.   at the real property boundary of the building, structure,
residence, or other area in which it is located; or



   b.   at a distance of 50 feet from any motor vehicle in which it is
located.



3.   attracting the attention of the public to a business, building,
structure, vehicle, or other area by creating a noise that is unreasonably
disturbing to a reasonable person of ordinary sensitivity including, but not
limited to crying out, sounding a horn, ringing a bell, or issuing music or
sound broadcasts through any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, stereo, loud speaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device
for the production or reproduction of sound.  In addition, a person must not
create noise that is unreasonably loud or disturbing to a reasonable person
of ordinary sensitivity through the use of a sound production or reproduction
device in activities or proceedings of a business including, but not limited
to, the use of loud speakers for communications. If speaker or sound systems
are required by law for safety reasons, businesses are exempt from the
provisions of this section;



4.   any noise that is unreasonably disturbing to a reasonable person of
ordinary sensitivity in any multi-family residential building audible beyond
the boundaries of the area or premise owned, rented, leased, or used by the
person;

5.   the loading or unloading of a motor vehicle or handling of bales,
boxes, crates, or containers in a manner to cause loud or disturbing noise
that is unreasonable to a reasonable person of ordinary sensitivity;

6.   disturbing noise adjacent to a school, learning institution,
religious institution, court, hospital, home for the aged, or other similar
institution which unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution
or unreasonably disturbs or annoys inhabitants of the institution who are
reasonable people of ordinary sensitivities, provided that a conspicuous sign
indicating the presence of the institution is clearly displayed;

7.   the operation of a motor vehicle, a minibike or other similar vehicle
or device in a way which results in the squealing of tires or the creation of
other noise on a highway, private road, public or private parking lot,
driveway, or other property in the city if the noise unreasonably disturbs a
reasonable person of ordinary sensitivity, except when there is reason to do
so for the safe operation of the vehicle;

8.   the use of a compression release engine braking system, commonly
known as a "jake brake", except in an emergency;

9.   the operation of an internal combustion engine or the repairing,
rebuilding, building or testing of vehicles or equipment in a manner to
create noise that is unreasonably disturbing to a reasonable person of
ordinary sensitivity;

10.   operation of earthmoving or related construction equipment on
residential property during more than 5 days within a 30 day period, except
during construction or remodeling activity for which a building or grading
permit has been obtained;

11.   participation in a party or gathering that creates noise that is
unreasonably loud or disturbing to a reasonable person of ordinary
sensitivity as determined at the property line or boundary of the building,
structure, rental unit, yard, or other portion of the property where the
party or gathering occurs.  When a party or gathering creates unreasonably
loud or disturbing noises, all persons except the owner, renter, lessee or
other occupants must promptly leave the premises in an orderly manner; and

12.   the operation of a public address or sound amplification system in a
public or private park, unless a permit has been received from the recreation
services department two weeks before the event or unless it is necessary for
the safe operation of the facility.  Permits will only be issued for special
events such as high school athletic contests, horse ring or amphitheater
events, or in other circumstances determined to be appropriate by the city.

(Amended by Ord. #2003-29, adopted December 15, 2003; amended by Ord.
#2001-29, adopted November 13, 2001)



850.015.  Operational Limits for Various Sound Sources.



1.   A person must not engage in, permit, or allow construction or grading
activities involving the use of power equipment, or other activities
resulting in unreasonably loud or disturbing noise for a person of ordinary
sensitivity at any time other than between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



2.   A person must not operate outdoor power implements including, but not
limited to, power lawn mowers, power hedge clippers, power saws, or other
such implements at any time other than between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
Operation of equipment for snow removal is exempt from the provisions of this
section when initiated within 12 hours of completion of a recent snowfall.



3.   A person must not drive or operate a minibike, snowmobile, or other
similar recreational vehicle not licensed for travel on public streets at any
time other than between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-29, adopted by December 15, 2003)



850.020.  Exceptions to Regulations.



The foregoing regulations do not apply to:



1.   noise necessary for the protection or preservation of property or the
health, safety, or life of a human being;



2.   the operation of motor vehicles on public streets and highways in
compliance with state and local laws;



3.   operation of locomotives and railroad cars;



4.   sirens, warning devices or other equipment used by public safety
personnel in emergency situations;



5.   emergency work such as utility maintenance and snow removal necessary
to restore public service or to eliminate a hazard, or maintenance activities
conducted or contracted for by the city of Minnetonka; and



6.   activity conducted in compliance with a permit issued under section
850.025.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-13; adopted June 20, 2011)



850.025.  Administrative Permit.



The community development director may permit an activity that does not
comply  with the provisions of this chapter if the applicant demonstrates a
compelling need and the granting of a permit will not materially affect the
health, safety or general welfare of the public. When reviewing a permit
application, the director will evaluate the stated need, the length of time
in a day, the number of days, the number of previous requests, other options
that might be available, and other related matters. The director may issue a
permit only for the minimum amount of time  and number of days that are
reasonably necessary under the circumstances and may impose reasonable
conditions on the permit governing such matters as time, duration, methods to
minimize noise, and other related matters. The permit holder must provide
written notice to all properties within the area potentially affected by the
noise as determined by the community development director. The notice must be
provided no less than 14 calendar days before the activity is scheduled to
begin. The applicant may appeal the granting or denial of a permit to the
city council by submitting an appeal in writing to the city clerk no later
than 10 calendar days after the decision. Any other party aggrieved by the
community development director's decision may appeal to the city council by
submitting an appeal in writing to the city clerk no later than 10 calendar
days after service of the notice required under this paragraph. The filing of
an appeal automatically suspends the permit pending review by the city
council.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-13, adopted June 20, 2011)



SECTION 855.  TRAILERS.



855.005.  Definition.



The word “trailer” when used in this chapter means a vehicle equipped
with wheels or rollers and constructed with the capacity to be moved from
place to place, with or without its own motive power.  The word includes a
motor vehicle and recreational vehicle.



855.010.  Permit Required.



A person must not occupy or use a trailer for habitation or living quarters
for longer than ten days in a calendar year, without first obtaining a permit
from the community development director.



855.015.  Application.



Application for a permit must be made to the community development
department, must be accompanied by the fee established in section 710, and
must contain the following information:



1.   the names of the owners and persons who are to occupy the trailer,
and residence of each during the two years immediately preceding the signing
of the application;



2.   name of owner and address or description of premises on which the
trailer is to be placed and used;



3.   description of the trailer, and the serial number, if any, or other
identifying feature, and the license number of the vehicle used to move the
trailer;



4.   date of placing on the private premises described in the application;



5.   duration of the proposed occupancy; and



6.   signature of applicant, and verification.



855.020.  Issuance.



A permit will not be issued unless adequate water supply and sanitary
services are provided.



855.025.  Duration.



The term of a permit is no greater than three months.  If the applicant is
the fee owner and the land is occupied by no other habitable dwelling than
the applicant's trailer, the director may grant a permit for longer than
three months while a permanent dwelling is constructed.  Only one permit may
be issued for a particular piece of property in a 24-month period, except
that additional permits may be granted when necessitated by unforeseen acts
of nature.



CHAPTER 9:  PUBLIC SAFETY



Section



   900.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.



   905.   FIRE DEPARTMENT.



   910.   FIRE CODE.



   915.   PUBLIC SAFETY ALARMS.



   920.   UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   925.   ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS.



   930.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   935.   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES.



   940.   SNOWMOBILES.



   945.   AIRCRAFT.



   950.   ANTI-GRAFFITI REGULATIONS.



   955.   FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLIES.



SECTION 900.  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.



900.005.  Policy and Purpose.



The city council determines that the city of Minnetonka should be prepared to
adequately deal with potential emergencies and disasters of major size and
destruction resulting from natural or man-made causes.  In addition, the
city should generally provide for the common defense, preserve the lives and
property of the people of this city, and protect the public peace, health,
safety, and general welfare.  To accomplish these goals, the city council
determines that it is appropriate and necessary:



1.   to establish a city emergency management organization responsible for
planning and preparation for emergency government operations in time of
disasters;



2.   to provide for the exercise of necessary powers during emergencies
and disasters;



3.   to provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city and
other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with respect
to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions; and



4.   to comply with provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter 12, § 12.25, which
requires each political subdivision of Minnesota to establish a local
organization for emergency management.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



900.010.  Definitions.



1.   “Director” means the emergency management director appointed by
the city manager.



2.   “Disaster” means a situation that creates an immediate and
serious impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation
that has resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property,
and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the
affected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



3.   “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances that
calls for immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



4.   “Emergency Management” means the preparation for and the carrying
out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military
forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and
damage resulting from disasters. These functions include firefighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning
services, communications, rescue evacuation, emergency human services,
emergency transportation, restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions.  Emergency
management includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil
defense” functions.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-07, adopted April 22, 2002)



900.015.  Establishment of an Emergency Management Organization.



The city manager must designate a department to be the emergency management
organization for the city of Minnetonka.  The city manager must also appoint
the emergency management director, who will have responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the emergency management
organization, subject to the direction and control of the city manager.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-07, adopted April 22, 2002)



900.020.  Powers and Duties of the Director.



1.   The director, with the consent of the city manager, may represent the
city at various regional or state conferences for emergency management.  The
director will recommend to the city council proposed mutual aid agreements
with other political subdivisions for reciprocal assistance in an emergency
too great to be handled unassisted.  These agreements will be consistent
with the state comprehensive emergency plan.



2.   The director will make studies and surveys of the personnel,
industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed necessary to
determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan for their most
efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.



3.   The director will prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for the
emergency preparedness of the city and will present this plan to the city
council for approval. When the council has approved the plan, it will be the
duty of all agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the city to
perform the duties and functions assigned by the approved plan.  The plan
may be modified in the same manner.  The director will coordinate the
emergency management activities of the city so that they are fully integrated
with the emergency plan of the federal government and the state and
correlated with emergency plans of other political subdivisions within the
state.



4.   In accordance with the state and county emergency plan, the director
will institute and conduct training programs, public information programs,
practice warning alerts, and emergency exercises as appropriate to ensure
prompt and effective operation of the city emergency plan when a disaster
occurs.



5.   The director will use the personnel, services, equipment, supplies
and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to the
maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of those departments
and agencies will, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate with and
extend services and facilities to the director. The director will include the
head of each department in the planning and programming of emergency
activities that will involve the use of that department’s resources.



6.   The director will, in cooperation with other departments and agencies
affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of emergency
management personnel that may be required to carry out the emergency plans of
the city and state.  If personnel are recruited to augment a regular
department for emergencies, they will be assigned to, and under the
administration and control of, that department.



7.   Consistent with state law, the director will coordinate the activity
of emergency management services and assist in establishing and conducting
training programs as appropriate to ensure emergency operational capability.



8.   The director will carry out all lawful orders and regulations issued
regarding emergency management. The director may issue directives to
effectuate these orders and regulations.



9.   The director will act as advisor and coordinator to the city manager
and be responsible for emergency operations during an emergency, unless those
duties are otherwise assigned.  The director will ensure coordination among
the operating departments, non-governmental groups, and other governmental
agencies.



10.   The director will prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities as may be requested by the city council.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



900.025.  Local Emergencies.



1.   A local emergency may be declared only by the mayor by written order.
A local emergency cannot continue for a period in excess of three days except
by or with the consent of the city council.  An order declaring, continuing,
or terminating a local emergency will be given prompt and general publicity
and will be filed promptly with the city clerk.



2.   A declaration of a local emergency may invoke necessary portions of
the response and recovery aspects of applicable disaster plans, and may
authorize assistance under those plans.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



900.030.  Emergency Regulations.



1.   Whenever reasonably necessary to meet a declared emergency, the mayor
may by emergency written order adopt regulations governing the conduct of
persons and the use of property during emergencies; the repair, maintenance,
and safeguarding of essential public services; emergency health, fire, and
safety regulation drills, or practice periods required for preliminary
training; and all other matters that are reasonable necessary to protect
public safety, health, and welfare in declared emergencies. Regulations
adopted by the mayor alone will be effective no longer than three days. The
council may by emergency ordinance adopt regulations governing the same
matters. If there is a conflict between an emergency order and an emergency
ordinance, the ordinance will take precedence.



2.   Every emergency ordinance must be adopted and posted in accordance
with city charter requirements. An emergency order by the mayor must be
posted in accordance with the same requirements.



3.   The city council may rescind the emergency ordinance at any time. 
If not sooner rescinded, every such ordinance will expire on the 61st day
after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it relates,
whichever comes first.  Any resolution or regulation inconsistent with an
emergency regulation adopted by the council will be suspended during the
period of time and to the extent the conflict exists.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



900.035.  Municipal Powers.



During a declared emergency, the city may enter into contracts and incur
obligations necessary to combat the disaster by protecting the health and
safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the
victims of the disaster.  The city may do so without compliance with the
time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law for the
performance of public work, rental or purchase of supplies, materials, and
equipment and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds.



900.040  Location of City Council Meetings.



When an emergency or disaster makes it imprudent or impossible to conduct the
affairs of the city at its regular locations, the city council may meet at
any place, inside or outside the city limits. A temporary disaster meeting
location for the city council may continue until a new location is
established or until the emergency or disaster is terminated and the city
council is able to return to its normal location.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



900.045.  Enforcement Authority.



The members of the city fire department, environmental health division,
police department, other law enforcement agencies having jurisdiction in the
city, and other people authorized by the mayor, city council, or emergency
management director are authorized and directed to enforce this section and
the orders and regulations made pursuant to this section.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



900.050.  Authority to Enter Property.



During the period of a declared emergency, a person authorized under section
900.045 may enter onto private property if the person has reasonable grounds
to believe that there is an immediate need for assistance for the protection
of life or property, and that entering onto the private land will allow the
person to take steps to alleviate or minimize immediate danger to lives or
property.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



900.055.  Prohibited Conduct.



During the period of a declared local emergency, no person may:



1.   enter or remain on the premises of an establishment that is not open
for business to the general public, unless the person is the owner of the
establishment or the owner's agent;



2.   violate an order or regulation properly issued by the mayor or the
city council, or a directive issued by the emergency management director or
the director's authorized agent; or



3.   willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay a person who is authorized to
enforce this section while that person is exercising those duties or
enforcing an order or regulation issued under authority of this section.



A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Amended by Ord. #2005-14, adopted May 23, 2005)



SECTION 905.  FIRE DEPARTMENT.



905.005.  Organization.



The Minnetonka volunteer fire department has the primary purpose of
preventing and suppressing fires within the city of Minnetonka to protect and
preserve lives and property. The city commits to maintaining this department
as primarily a paid on-call organization, but some regular city employees
will be assigned to the department when appropriate. The members of the
department, including both paid on-call and regular employees, are governed
by this section, city personnel policies, fire department policies, and
directives adopted by the fire chief.



905.010.  Membership.



1.   Membership in the department is based upon criteria established by
the chief.



2.   There are six categories of members within the department: regular
employees, probationary, active, retired, auxiliary and honorary members.



3.   Each category of membership is defined as follows.



   a.   Regular employees are regular employees of the city assigned to
the fire department.



   b.   Probationary members are paid on-call employees who must serve
a one-year probationary period with the department before being eligible to
become active members. They are subject to criteria established by the fire
chief before being eligible to become active members.



   c.   Active members are those paid on-call employees who have
successfully completed the probationary period based upon their training,
experience, participation, and adherence to standards established by the fire
chief. The chief will decide whether a probationary member becomes an active
member.



   d.   Retired members are those who served in the Minnetonka
volunteer fire department and have retired in good standing.



   e.   Auxiliary members are persons who assist the department upon
request of the fire chief.



   f.   Honorary members are those persons chosen by the fire chief who
have promoted the goals and purposes of the department or otherwise served to
enhance or promote firefighting safety, fire prevention, or the protection of
persons or property from the hazards of fire.



4.   Probationary and active members must be at least 18 years of age and
meet other qualifications regarding such things as response time, physical
condition, training, participation and behavior which are established by the
fire chief.



905.015.  Officers.



1.   The fire chief has the responsibility for the management and
operation of the department. The chief is appointed by, and works under the
direction of, the city manager.



2.   The fire chief has the authority to appoint all subordinate officers
in the chain of command. These officers will serve at the pleasure of the
chief. All appointments must be made on the basis of merit and ability.



(Section 905 was repealed and amended by Ord. #2008-31, adopted October 13,
2008; amended by Ord. #2002-06, adopted April 22, 2002)



SECTION 910.  FIRE CODE.



910.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, certain words are defined for
the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   “Municipality” means the city of Minnetonka.



2.   “Corporation counsel” means the city attorney.



3.   “City fire code” means the fire code adopted in sections 910.005
through 910.035.



4.   "Portable outdoor fireplace" means a portable, outdoor,
sold-fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay
or other noncombustible material. A portable outdoor fireplace may be open in
design, or may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or
chimney opening in the top.



5.    "Recreational fire" means an outdoor fire burning materials other
than rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator,
outdoor fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit
and has a total fuel area of 3 feet or less in diameter and 2 feet or less in
height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar
purposes.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-07, effective June 24, 2017)



910.010.  Adoption of Minnesota State Fire Code.



The following are adopted and incorporated by reference as the city fire code:



1.   State fire code. The 2015 state fire code, promulgated by the state
department of public safety, as published in Minnesota Rules chapter 7511,
subject to the amendments specificed below.



2.    International Fire Code. The 2012 edition of the International Fire
Code (IFC) promulgated by the International Code Council, subject to the
changes in this chapter 910 and in the state fire code.



3.    Appendices. The following appendices of Minnesota Rules subpart
7511.7900, amendments to the appendices of the IFC, is adopted as part of
this code: B (Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings), C (Fire Hydrant
Locations and Distribution), D (Fire Apparatus Access Roads), F (Hazard
Ranking), H (Hazardous Materials Management Plan [HMMP] and Hazardous
Materials Inventory Statements [HMIS] Instructions), I (Fire Protection
Systems-Noncompliant Conditions), and K (Fires or Barbecues on Balconies or
Patios).



One copy of the state fire code will be retained on file in the city clerk's
office.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-07, effective June 24, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2008-23,
adopted August 25, 2008)



910.015.  Establishment of Fire Prevention Districts.



1.   In accordance with section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the state fire code,
storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited in the following zoning districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, B-1,
B-2, B-3, PUD, and PID.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-07, effective June 24, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2008-23,
adopted August 25, 2008)



910.020.  Amendments to the Minnesota state fire code.



The state fire code is amended as follows:



1.   Section 307, "Open Burning and Recreational Fires," is amended to
read as follows:



   307.1. General. A person must not kindle or maintain or authorize to be
kindled or maintained a recreational fire unless conducted and approved in
accordance with this section.



   307.2  Permit required. The person who will be responsible for the
recreational fire must obtain an annual permit from the fire department prior
to kindling a recreational fire. The permit holder is responsible for
conducting, controlling and extinguishing the fire in compliance with the
city fire code. A recreational fire permit does not relieve the applicant
from liability due to damage resulting from fire or smoke.



   307.3. Extinguishment authority. The fire chief or designee has the
authority to order extinguishment of any fire if: the fire creates or adds to
a hazardous situation; the fire chief or designee determines that the smoke
from the fire is unreasonably offensive or injurious to others; or, a
required permit has not been obtained.



   307.4.2. Recreational fires.  Recreational fires must not be conducted
within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure or combustible material; except that
the minimum distance from a structure does not apply to a  nonmoveable fire
pit that existed prior to June 24, 2017. Conditions which could cause a fire
to spread within 25 feet 97620 mm) of a structure must be eliminated prior to
ignition. Fire pits must be located a minimum of 10 feet from any property
line.



   307.4.3. Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces must
be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and must not be
operated within 15 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material.



   307.4.4. Materials burned. Wood burned in a recreational fire or
portable outdoor fireplace must be dry, aged wood and a minimum of one inch
in diameter. No trash, brush, leaves or treated lumber may be burned.



   307.5. Attendance. Permitted fires must be constantly attended until
the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher
complying with Section 906 of the state fire code with a minimum 4-A rating
or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand,
water barrel, garden hose or water truck, must be available for immediate
utilization.



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-12, effective October 21, 2017)



2.     Appendix K (Fires or Barbecues on Balconies or Patios) of the
state fire code is amended to read as follows:



   1.1    Open flame prohibited.  In any apartment or condominium
building two or more stories in height, no person may kindle, maintain, or
cause any fire or open flame on any balcony above ground level, or on any
ground floor patio within 15 feet of the structure.



   1.2    Fuel storage prohibited. No person may store or use any fuel,
barbecue, torch, or other similar heating or lighting chemical or device in
any apartment or condominium building two or more stories in height, except
as provided in this section 1.2. The following devices are allowed under the
circumstances specified, provided that all devices must maintain an 18-inch
clearance on all sides to combustibles:



      1.2.1   Listed electric barbecue grills are allowed on
balconies and patios provided they are permanently mounted and hardwired to
the building's electrical system.



      1.2.2   Listed natural gas fueled barbecue grills are allowed
on balconies and patios provided they are permanently mounted and plumbed to
the building's natural gas supply.



      1.2.3   Listed propane fueled barbecue grills are allowed only
on ground level. Propane cylinder storage is prohibited within 15 feet of the
building.



      1.2.4   Listed charcoal barbecue grills are allowed only on
ground level and may not be used or stored within 15 feet of the building.



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Ord. 2017-07, effective June 24, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2011-14, adopted
August 1, 2011; amended by Ord. 2008-23, adopted August 25, 2008)



910.025.  Order of Fire Marshal.



The fire marshal may issue an order to any person who violates the Minnesota
state fire code or any of the city's fire regulations set forth in the city
code.  The person to whom the order is directed must comply with it no later
than the deadline for compliance specified in the order unless an appeal is
filed in accordance with section 910.030 of this code.



(Section 910.025 was repealed and replaced by Ord. 2009-02, adopted February
9, 2009)



910.030.  Appeal of Order; Variance Application.



A person may appeal an order of the fire marshal, or apply for a variance
from the order, by filing a written notice of appeal or a written variance
application with the city clerk within 30 days after the date of the issuance
of the order.



(Section 910.030 was repealed and replaced by Ord. 2009-02, adopted February
9, 2009)



910.031.  Hearing.



A hearing must be held within 30 days after receipt by the city clerk of a
timely appeal or variance application.  The hearing must be held before the
city council, unless the council appoints an ad hoc board of appeals to hear
the matter. An ad hoc board of appeals must consist of at least three
members, each of whom is familiar with construction methods and the uniform
fire code. The Minnesota rules of evidence need not be strictly followed, and
the records of the fire marshal must be considered without further
foundation. 



(Amended by Ord. 2015-15, adopted October 26, 2015; Section 910.031 was added
by Ord. 2009-02, adopted February 9, 2009)



910.032.  Decision.



The city council or ad hoc board of appeals must issue a written decision
within 30 days after the hearing, affirming or overturning the fire marshal's
decision and approving or denying the variance application.  The decision
must be mailed or delivered to the person who filed the appeal or variance
application, the fire marshal, and the city clerk. The decision of the
council or ad hoc board of appeals is the final decision of the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-15, adopted October 26, 2015; Section 910.032 was added
by Ord. 2009-02, adopted February 9, 2009)



910.033.  Standards of Review.



In reviewing a variance application submitted under section 910.030, the city
council or ad hoc board of appeals must take into consideration the benefit
to be obtained by complying with the fire marshal's order and the effect on
affordable housing, provided that the spirit of the code is complied with and
public safety is secure. In addition, a variance from the minimum
requirements in the state fire code may be granted only if there is
substantial compliance with the provisions of the state fire code, the safety
of the public and occupants of buildings will not be jeopardized, and undue
hardship will result to the applicant unless the requested variance is
granted.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-15, adopted October 26, 2015; Section 910.033 was added
by Ord. 2009-02, adopted February 9, 2009)



910.035.  Penalties.



It is a misdemeanor to:



1.   violate or fail to comply with any provision of the city fire code;



2.   violate or fail to comply with any order issued pursuant the city
fire code; or



3.   build any structure not in compliance with detailed plans and
specifications submitted and approved as part of a permit required by the
city fire code.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



SECTION 915.  PUBLIC SAFETY ALARMS.



915.005.  Purpose and Scope.



1.   This section provides for regulating the use of police, fire, and
medical alarms, establishes users' fees, and establishes a system of
administration.



2.   The purpose of this section is to provide maximum possible services
to public safety alarm users and protect the public safety services of the
city from misuse.



3.   Installation and use of public safety alarms are a personal or
business decision and do not create an obligation for city response.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-27, adopted November 24, 2003)



915.010.  Definitions.



1.   “Alarm system” means a mechanical or electronic device installed
in a building or on real property that directly or indirectly summons police,
fire, or medical personnel.



2.   “Alarm user” means a person, owner, occupant, tenant, firm,
partnership, association, corporation, company or other organization on whose
premises, building, structure, or facility an alarm system is maintained.



3.   “Automatic dialing device” means a device that is inter-connected
to a telephone line or system and programmed to select a pre-determined
telephone number and transmit by voice, message, or coded emergency signal a
need for response of police, fire, or medical personnel.



4.   “Year” means January 1 to December 31 of each year.



5.   "False alarm" means an alarm message or signal initiated and
transmitted either automatically or manually through an alarm system to the
public safety communications center that summons a response by police or
medical personnel when no criminal activity, medical or other emergency
exists.



   “False alarm” also means the failure or refusal of an alarm user or
authorized designee to respond upon request to the activated alarm system
location to assist public safety personnel, whether or not an emergency
exists.



   “False alarm” does not include an alarm caused by climatic
conditions, tornadoes, thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent
conditions of nature, or other conditions which are determined by the chief
of police to be beyond the control of the alarm manufacturer, installer,
owner or user. "False alarm" also does not include an alarm that has been
canceled if the cancellation has been received by the public safety
communications center before public safety personnel arrive at the alarm
location.



6.   “City” means city of Minnetonka.



7.   “Public safety communications center” is the Minnetonka city or
Hennepin county facility used to receive emergency requests for police, fire,
and medical service or other information from the public used to dispatch
public safety personnel.



8.   “Public safety personnel” means people authorized to maintain,
assist, or enforce public safety, including police, fire, and medical
personnel.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. #2003-27, adopted
November 24, 2003; amended by Ord. #2000-21, adopted November 27, 2000)



915.015.  Administration.



The chief of police or designee is responsible for administering this
chapter, except section 915.029, and determining whether a false alarm has
occurred.  The chief of police may promulgate rules deemed necessary for the
implementation and administration of this chapter.  The fire chief or
designee is responsible for administering section 915.029.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. #2003-27, adopted
November 24, 2003)



915.020.  Alarm System Registration



1.   An alarm user must annually file with the police department a
registration for each alarm system used. The registration will expire
December 31 of each year. The alarm user must pay a registration fee of
$10.00 per alarm system, which will not be prorated.



2.   A person filing an alarm system registration must supply the
following information on a form provided by the city:



   a.   The name, address and telephone number of the registrant;



   b.   The place where the alarm system will be, or has been,
installed and maintained;



   c.   The type of alarm system to be installed or already in place;



   d.    A list of the names and phone numbers of people who have the
ability to control the alarm system;



   e.   A declaration that he/she has been shown by an alarm company
representative how to use the alarm system.



3.   After the first response to an unregistered alarm system, the police
department has the authority to not respond to subsequent intrusion alarms as
long as the alarm system remains unregistered. The authority to not respond
continues indefinitely, and the alarm user is not entitled to one response
per year.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-27, adopted November 24, 2003; amended by Ord.
#2000-21, adopted November 27, 2000)



915.025.  Prohibited Acts.



1.   Automatic dialing devices.  A person must not use or cause to be
used any automatic dialing device that automatically selects any telephone
line to the city or county public safety communications center or any of its
departments or divisions.



2.   Testing of equipment.  A person must not test or demonstrate an
alarm system designated to summon public safety personnel without first
notifying the public safety communications center.  The unannounced testing
of equipment that results in a response by public safety personnel will be in
violation of this chapter and designated as a false alarm.



3.   Alarm nuisance.  Except for a fire alarm user, an alarm user must
not allow an alarm system with exterior audible sounds to emit sound for a
period exceeding 15 minutes unless otherwise authorized.



4.   False alarm.  A person must not intentionally activate a false alarm
or make or cause to be made a call or request for service from public safety
personnel knowing or having reason to know that there is no basis or need for
the request.



5.   Tampering.  A person must not tamper or interfere with any element
of an alarm system except as authorized by the alarm user.



6.   Unlocked doors.  Except for a fire alarm, a person must not activate
an alarm system in a building and leave access to the building unlocked.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; amended by Ord. #2003-27,
adopted November 24, 2003)



915.029.  Fire Alarm Fees.



Fees must be paid by an alarm user to the city for each alarm resulting in a
fire response, except one generated by an automatic fire sprinkler system.
The fee for each fire alarm is $250.00.  The fire chief may waive or reduce
the fire alarm fee if in the chief's sole discretion circumstances justify
such action based on criteria in a written policy adopted by the chief and
maintained on the city's website.  A fire alarm fee is a lien against the
property which was the subject of the alarm and may be collected in the same
manner as a false alarm fee under section 915.030. An alarm user may appeal
the fee in the same manner as an appeal of utility charges in city code
section 1200.030.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-19, adopted December 3, 2012; amended by Ord. 2011-15,
adopted August 1, 2011; amended by Ord. 2009-01, adopted January 26, 2009;
Ord. #2003-27, adopted November 24, 2003)



915.030.  False Alarm Fees.



Fees must be paid by the alarm user to the city for each false alarm
resulting in police or medical response in excess of two per year.  The fee
for a police or medical false alarm is $50.00 for the third false alarm and
increases by the sum of $50.00 for each succeeding false alarm in each
year.  The city must first attempt to obtain voluntary payment of the fees.
If efforts to obtain voluntary payment fail, all payment of penalties may be
enforced by civil action.  In addition, unpaid fees and late payment
penalties are liens against the property which was the subject of the false
alarms and may be collected by certifying the amounts against the property in
the same manner as the collection of delinquent utility fees provided in city
code section 1200.030(6). An alarm user may appeal the fee in the same manner
as an appeal of utility charges in city code section 1200.030.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-19, adopted December 3, 2012; amended by Ord. 2009-01,
adopted January 26, 2009; amended by Ord. #2003-27, adopted November 24,
2003; amended by Ord. #2000-21, adopted November 27, 2000)



915.031. Suspension of Response.



1.   The chief of police may suspend response to an intrusion alarm if:



   a.   the alarm system has had four or more false intrusion alarms in
one year, or



   b.   an alarm user has not paid a fee charged under section 915.030
within 30 days after written notice of the fee has been mailed.



   The suspension of response will not apply to robbery, medical, fire or
emergency alarms.



2.   The suspension of response will take effect 48 hours after written
notice is personally delivered or mailed by certified mail to the alarm user.
The notice must explain the appeal process provided below. The suspension of
response will continue in effect until January 1 of the following year,
unless the alarm user has not filed the alarm registration for the following
year or not paid all outstanding fines. The suspension will remain in effect
until both of those conditions have been satisfied. The chief of police may
reinstate response to an alarm user before January 1 of the following year if
the alarm user provides sufficient proof that it has remedied the
circumstances causing the suspension and has paid all outstanding fines.

(Amended by Ord. #2004-15, adopted April 26, 2004; added by Ord. #2000-21,
adopted November 27, 2000)



915.035.  Appeal Process.



1.   An alarm user who has been charged with a false alarm fee or who has
been issued a suspension of response notice may appeal in writing to the
chief of police within 10 days after notice was mailed.  The chief of police
will issue a decision in writing.



2.   An alarm user may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the
city council by submitting a request in writing to the city manager within 10
days after notice of the decision was mailed.



(Amended by Ord. #2000-21, adopted November 27, 2000)



915.040.  Exceptions.



The provisions of this ordinance are not applicable to alarm systems affixed
to automobiles, boat trailers, and recreational motor vehicles.



(Amended by Ord. #2000-21, adopted November 27, 2000)



915.045.  Liability of the City.



The regulation of alarms does not constitute acceptance by the city of
liability to maintain equipment, to answer alarms, or to respond to alarms in
any particular manner. The city has no responsibility for any consequential
damage resulting from the city's failure to respond to an alarm.



(Amended by Ord. #2000-21, adopted November 27, 2000)



SECTION 920.  UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



920.005.  Custody of Property.



The chief of police will take custody of all personal property, including
lost money, lawfully coming into the possession of the city and city
employees in the course of municipal operations and remaining unclaimed by
the owner.  The chief of police must retain the property in a safe place for
a period of at least three months, unless claimed by the true owner with
satisfactory proof of ownership.  The chief must keep a record of the
property, including its disposition.



920.010.  Disposition of Property.



Property held in custody by the chief of police and not claimed by the true
owner within three months will be deemed abandoned. The chief of police may
dispose of abandoned property in one of the following ways:



1.   sell the property at public sale following 10 days published notice
in the official newspaper;



2.   return lost property to its finder;



3.   convert usable property to city use; or



4.   donate the property to a tax-exempt, non-profit organization.



Property not purchased at a sale may then be disposed of by the chief in any
reasonable manner.



(Amended by Ord. #2008-34, adopted October 27, 2008)



920.015.  Summary Disposal.



The chief of police may dispose of unclaimed property without notice and in a
summary manner when he/she believes this to be in the public interest and if
he/she determines that the property:



1.   is of a dangerous or perishable nature;



2.   is contraband;



3.   has no resale value; or



4.   cannot be legally or safely sold at public sale.



920.020.  Disposition of Funds.



Together with found money that has been held for three months, the chief of
police must deliver all money that was received from the sale of abandoned
property to the finance director.  If no claim has been made by the former
owner with satisfactory proof of ownership, found money may be returned to
the finder; otherwise the money will revert to the city's general fund.



920.025.  Special Provisions: Police Department.



Money and other property lawfully seized by, or voluntarily surrendered to,
the city at the scene of a crime or during an official police investigation
must be retained by the chief of police in a safe place for at least three
months.  If not lawfully claimed by the true owner with adequate proof of
ownership during that time, non-monetary property may be sold at public sale
after 10 days published notice, converted to city use, or given to a
tax-exempt, non-profit organization.  Sale proceeds and seized money may
then be deposited in the police department forfeiture and seizure account to
be used only for law enforcement purposes.



920.030.  Disposition of Abandoned Motor Vehicles.



The chief of police must dispose of abandoned motor vehicles by following the
procedure in Minn. Stat. § 168B.01 through §168B.101.



SECTION 925.  ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS.



925.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words and phrases below
are defined for the purpose of this section as follows.



1.   “At large” regarding a dog, means being off the property of the
person owning, harboring or keeping the dog and not under restraint.



2.   “Authorized city personnel” means the chief of police, the health
authority, their designees, and other personnel assisting in the enforcement
of this chapter.



3.   “Commercial kennel” means a place where more than the allowed
number of animals are kept for the business of boarding for a fee, for the
business of breeding for sale, or for some other profit-making purpose,
except a hobby breeder.



4.   "Dangerous animal" means an animal that has:



   a.    without provocation, inflicted substantial bodily harm on a
human being on public or private property;



   b.   killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the
owner's property; or



   c.   been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has
notice that the animal is potentially dangerous, the animal aggressively
bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.



5.   “Farm animal” means cattle, mules, sheep, goats, swine, ducks,
geese, turkeys, chickens, guinea hens, horses, rabbits, llamas, ostriches,
emus, and other animals typically maintained in a farm setting but not in an
urban setting.  “Large farm animal” means a farm animal over 100
pounds.  “Small farm animal” means a farm animal weighing 100 pounds or
less.



6.   "Hobby breeder" means a place where more than the allowed number of
animals are kept for the business of breeding dogs or cats or both for sale,
and there are no more than a total of two litters of offspring (dogs or cats)
per calendar year.



7.   “Maltreated animal” means one that has not been given adequate
food, water, or shelter as specified in section 925.080 or that has been
subjected to the conduct prohibited by Minn. Stat. § 343.21.



8.   “Multiple animal location” means a place other than a commercial
kennel where more than the allowed number of animals are kept, including a
hobby breeder.



9.   “Owner” means a person owning, keeping, harboring or acting as
custodian of a dog or other animal.  All adult occupants of the property
where the animal resides or is kept is considered an owner or owners.



10.   “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership or corporation.



11.   “Premises” means a building, structure, shelter or land where a
dog or other animal is kept or confined.



12.   “Potentially dangerous animal” means an animal that:



   a.   when unprovoked, inflicted bites that broke the skin on a human
or domestic animal on public or private property;



   b.   when unprovoked, chased or approached a person, including a
person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private
property other than the animal owner's property, in an apparent attitude of
attack indicated by such things as snarling and bared teeth; or



   c.   has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack
unprovoked, causing injury or otherwise threatening the safety of humans or
domestic animals.



   “Potentially dangerous animal” does not include an animal taking
action that was done to defend or protect itself or a human being within its
immediate vicinity from an unjustified attack or assault.



13.   “Public nuisance animal” means an animal that:



   a.   is maintained in a manner that violates section 925.080(2);



   b.   by virtue of number or types of animals maintained, is
offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare; or



   c.   has been the subject of a violation of this chapter more than
two times in a 24-month period.



14.   “Under restraint” regarding a dog means being: (a) at heel
beside a person having custody of it and obedient to that person's command;
(b) within a private motor vehicle of a person, owning, harboring or keeping
the animal; or (c) controlled by a leash not exceeding six feet in length.



15.   “Veterinary hospital” means a place for the treatment,
hospitalization, surgery, care and boarding of animals and birds, under the
direction of one or more licensed veterinarians.



16.   “Wild animal” means any of the following:



   a.   front-fanged venomous snakes, including the viperidae and
elapidae families of snakes, such as rattlesnakes and cobras;



   b.   snakes over 8 feet in length;



   c.   reptiles that have the physical ability as an adult to cause
substantial bodily injury as defined in Minn. Stat. § 609.02, subd. 7a, to
humans and domestic animals, such as python snakes and crocodilians;



   d.   animals that can transmit rabies and cannot be vaccinated
against rabies, except domestic animals such as cows;



   e.   mammals that as a breed are considered wild by nature because
of breeding, history, character, habit, or disposition; and



   f.   mammals that have at least 25 percent of their heritage from
mammals specified in subparagraph e, above.



   “Wild animal” specifically includes such animals as a wolf, fox,
skunk, raccoon, mink, bobcat, deer, and monkey, but does not include a fish,
bird, ferret, hamster or gerbil.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-16, adopted September 16, 2013; amended by Ord.
2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. 2008-29, adopted October 13, 2008;
amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006; amended by Ord. #2002-13,
adopted May 20, 2002)



925.010.  Enforcement.



The provisions of this chapter will be enforced by the chief of police, the
health authority, and designees, with the assistance of other personnel when
appropriate.



925.015.  Right of Entry.



Authorized city personnel have the right to enter upon a premises at 
reasonable times for the purpose of discharging their duties imposed by this
chapter when there is reasonable belief that a violation of this chapter has
been committed.



925.020.  Impounding Animals.



1.   Authorized city personnel may seize and impound an animal found to be
in violation of this chapter.  These personnel may enter onto private
property to seize and impound animals when:



   a.   they have a reasonable and immediate concern for the animal's
health, safety or welfare;



   b.   they have a reasonable and immediate concern for the health and
safety of human beings or other animals as a result of the animal's continued
presence on the property; or



   c.   they have reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this
chapter has occurred or is occurring and that seizure is necessary to prevent
further violation, but only after a reasonable effort has been made to
contact an occupant of the property.



2.   A person must not interfere with authorized city personnel impounding
an animal, nor refuse to surrender an animal to these personnel.



3.   The animal owner is responsible for costs for the impounding and
housing of an impounded animal.



925.025.  Impounding Strays.



1.   Authorized city personnel may seize and impound an animal found at
large on public property or claimed to be a stray by the occupant of the
premises upon which the animal is found.



2.   An impounded stray animal displaying a need for medical care may be
taken to a veterinarian for emergency treatment.  The owner of the animal is
responsible for payment of expenses incurred as a result of the
veterinarian's treatment.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-13, adopted May 20, 2002)



925.030.  Impounding Facility.



1.   The council will designate a place as an animal impounding facility
for keeping animals that are impounded by the city.



2.   Each month the impounding facility will give to the city a written
report showing the animals impounded, the duration of the impoundment, and
the method of disposal for each animal.



925.035.  Redeeming Animals.



Upon the impounding of a dog or other animal, the city must promptly notify
the owner personally or by mail, addressed to the owner's last known
address.  If the owner is unknown, the city must post a written notice at
the city hall and two other public places in the city describing the dog or
other animal.  The notice must state where the animal is impounded and that
it can be redeemed within five business days after the date of the notice by
payment of: a) the required impounding fee established in chapter 710 and b)
the cost of boarding for each day the dog or other animal is confined. No dog
may be released unless properly inoculated for rabies.  The impounding
facility may not release an animal until it has received authorization to do
so from authorized city personnel.



(Amended by Ord. #2000-14, adopted July 10, 2000)



925.040.  Disposition of Animals.



If an impounded animal is not redeemed within five business days after the
required notice, authorized city personnel may give the animal away or direct
the impounding facility to dispose of the animal in a humane manner.



925.045.  Rabies Vaccination Required.



1.   A person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog, cat, or ferret over six
months old within the city must have the dog, cat, or ferret vaccinated by a
licensed veterinarian with an anti-rabies vaccine that is currently effective.



2.   A vaccination certificate is valid only for the dog, cat, or ferret
and owner to which it was issued. A person must not use a rabies vaccination
certificate for a different dog, cat, or ferret than the one for which it was
issued.



(Amended by Ord. #2007-33, adopted October 22, 2007; amended by Ord.
#2002-13, adopted May 20, 2002; amended by Ord. #2000-14, adopted July 10,
2000)



925.050.  [Repealed].



(Repealed by Ord. #2000-14, adopted July 10, 2000)



925.055.  Tags.



A person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog over six months old within the
city must securely attach an identification tag or plate to the dog's collar
so that it can be readily seen. The tag or plate must contain the name and
home telephone number of the owner or other person who is keeping the dog.
The identification tag or plate must be worn by the dog at all times when it
is off the owner's or keeper's property.



(Amended by Ord. #2000-14, adopted July 10, 2000)



925.060.  [Repealed].



(Repealed by Ord. #2000-14, adopted July 10, 2000)



925.065.  Commercial Kennel Licenses and Multiple Animal Permits.



1.   No person may own keep, or allow the keeping of more than the
following number of animals over the age of six months on his or her premises:



   a.   two dogs; or



   b.   five cats; or



   c.   five animals that consist of a combination of cats and dogs
(but no more than two dogs).



   A person who wishes to exceed this number must first obtain a
commercial kennel license or a multiple animal permit and comply with
applicable requirements. The holder of a multiple animal permit may not have
more than a total of six animals over the age of six months. The applicant
must also obtain any approvals required under the zoning code and comply with
zoning code requirements. For any multiple animal permit issued prior to
October 26, 2013, where the permit allowed more than the number of animals
specified in the first two sentences of this paragraph, the permit may be
renewed for the same number of animals, on the condition that the permit
holder may not replace any animals that die until the permit holder can do so
in compliance with the maximum number stated in the first two sentences of
this paragraph. A commercial kennel license or a multiple animal permit may
be used to exceed the maximum number of large farm animals allowed by section
925.115 only under the circumstances cited in section 925.115(2).



2.   An application for a commercial kennel license or multiple animal
permit must be submitted to the police department accompanied by the fee
established in section 710. For the initial application, the applicant must
also submit an acknowledgment form signed by at least one of the property
owners of each parcel of land that has any portion of the parcel within 200
feet of the land that is the subject of the application. The form must state
that the applicant has notified the property owners of the application and
that they may contact the city with any comments they might have within 15
days after receiving the notice. If a property owner refuses to sign the
acknowledgment form, the applicant may sign and submit an affidavit to that
effect.



3.   An application for a license or permit will be considered and acted
upon by authorized city personnel according to adopted city council policy. A
license or permit may not be issued until at least 15 days has expired after
the last person was notified under subparagraph 2 above. A license or permit
may be issued after an inspection reveals that adequate safeguards are
present to protect the surrounding neighborhood from nuisances and to ensure
compliance with this chapter.  A license or permit may not be issued if the
location does not comply with the applicable health and maintenance standards
set forth below. A license or permit may not be issued for a residential unit
that shares a common wall with another residential unit. The license or
permit may include conditions that authorized city personnel deem reasonably
necessary to protect public health and safety and to protect people in
neighboring property from unsanitary conditions, unreasonable noise and
odors, and other unreasonable annoyances.  Authorized city personnel may
require the license or permit holder to have each animal identified by an
attached durable tag, embedded micro-chip, or other reasonable means.  The
license or permit may be reasonably modified by authorized city personnel if
necessary to respond to changed circumstances.  The modification will be
effective 10 days after the mailing of written notice by certified mail to
the holder.  The holder may challenge the modification by requesting a
hearing in accordance with city code section 700.



4.   A license or permit will be issued for a maximum of one year and will
expire on May 31 of each year.  A license or permit may be revoked because
of a violation of this chapter, or another relevant law, ordinance or
regulation.  The procedure for revocation will be that specified in section
700.035.



(Amended by Ord. #2013-16, adopted September 16, 2013; amended by Ord.
#2002-13, adopted May 20, 2002; amended by Ord. #2001-6, adopted March 19,
2001)



925.070.  Veterinary Hospital License.



A veterinary hospital must not operate in the city without a license issued
by the police department.  The license fee is established in section 710. 
A license may be issued only after an inspection reveals that the hospital
complies with the health and maintenance standards set forth below. A license
will be valid for a maximum of one year and will expire on December 31 of
each year.



925.075.  Inspections.



Authorized city personnel may go onto the premises of licensed kennels,
permitted multiple animal locations, and veterinary hospitals at reasonable
times to inspect for compliance with this chapter and other relevant laws and
regulations.  A violation of those laws not corrected within 10 days after
notice will be grounds for revocation of the license or permit.



(Amended by Ord. #2002-13, adopted May 20, 2002)



925.080.  Health and Maintenance Standards.



1.   All animals - animal health standards.  The owner of an animal kept
in the city must comply with the following standards.



   a.   An animal kept outdoors or in an unheated enclosure must be
provided with adequate shelter and bedding to protect it from the sun, rain,
snow, and temperatures below 50 degrees Fahrenheit.



   b.   The shelter must include a moisture proof and windproof
structure of suitable size to allow the animal to stand in an upright
position and to lie down stretched out so that no part of its body need touch
the sides of the structure.  The structure must be made of durable material
sufficient to allow retention of body heat with a solid floor raised at least
two inches from the ground and an entrance covered by a flexible windproof
material or self-closing swinging door.  The structure must be provided with
sufficient quantity of suitable bedding material consisting of hay, straw,
cedar shavings, blankets or the equivalent to provide insulation and
protection against cold and dampness and to promote retention of body heat. 
The structure must be structurally sound and maintained in good repair.



   c.   In lieu of the requirements of paragraphs a and b, an animal
may be provided with access to a barn with a sufficient quantity of loose hay
or bedding and protection against cold and dampness.



   d.   If an animal is confined by a chain, the chain must be so
attached that it cannot become entangled with the chains of other animals or
other objects.  A chain must be of a size adequate to restrain the animal
involved and must be attached to the animal by means of a well fitted
collar.  The collar must be large enough to allow free breathing but small
enough to avoid being easily pulled over the animal's head.  A chain must be
at least three times the length of the animal as measured from the tip of his
nose to the base of his tail.



   e.   A female dog in season must be confined indoors or in a secure
enclosure so that she will not be in contact, except for intentional breeding
purposes, with another dog or create a nuisance by attracting other animals
who engage in continued barking, yelping or howling.



   f.   An animal must be provided with sufficient food and water to
meet adequate nutritional requirements.



2.   All animals - maintenance standards.  An owner of an animal kept in
the city must comply with the standards below.  Before commencing an action
to enforce compliance with these standards, enforcement personnel must give
an owner notice of a violation and a reasonable opportunity to comply.



   a.   An owner must maintain an animal and the area where it is kept
so that no odor that offends the senses of a reasonable person is detected,
for more than one day, off the property where the animal is kept.



   b.   An owner must maintain the property where the animal is kept so
that there is no erosion, and no drainage of water contaminated by the
animal, onto adjacent properties or into public waters or wetlands.



   c.   The owner must manage the feces and other bodily wastes from
the animal in a timely and sanitary manner that prevents health risks and
prevents odors that are prohibited under paragraph (a) above.



3.   Commercial kennels/veterinary hospitals.  In addition to the
standards established under paragraph 1, commercial kennels and veterinary
hospitals must comply with the following standards.



   a.   Housing facilities must be structurally sound and maintained in
good repair.  Indoor housing facilities must be adequately ventilated and
have ample light, either natural or artificial.



   b.   An enclosure must be of sufficient size to allow each animal to
turn around fully and to stand, sit and lie in a comfortable normal
position.  The floors of the enclosure must be constructed so as to prevent
injury to the animal's legs and feet.



   c.   The temperature for indoor housing facilities must not be
allowed to fall below 50 degrees Fahrenheit for dogs not accustomed to lower
temperatures.



   d.   Disposal facilities must be provided to minimize vermin,
infestation, odors and disease hazards.



   e.   Adequate storage and refrigeration must be provided to protect
food supplies against contamination and deterioration.



   f.   The premises, cages, enclosures and housing facilities must be
clean and disinfected as often as is necessary to maintain clean and sanitary
conditions at all times.



   g.   Animals must be fed at least once a day with clean, wholesome
food, sufficient to meet the normal nutritional requirements for the animal's
age, size and condition.



   h.   Clean potable water must be made available to all animals at
least twice daily for periods of not less than one hour.



   i.   Feeding and water receptacles must be kept clean and sanitary
at all times.



   j.   Animals housed in the same primary enclosure must be maintained
in compatible groups.  Non-adult animals must not be housed in the same
primary enclosure with adult animals other than their mothers.



   k.   An animal exhibiting a vicious disposition must be housed
separately.



   l.   Females in season must not be confined in the same enclosure
with males except for breeding purposes.  Animals used for breeding must be
of compatible size and only one male and one female may be mated at one time
in a single enclosure.



   m.   Animals affected with clinical evidence of infections,
contagious or communicable disease must be separated from other animals in a
manner to minimize the chance of further infection.  An effective program
for the control of insects, ecto parasites and other pests must be
established and maintained.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-10; adopted March 24, 2008)



925.085.  Prohibitions.



1.   An owner must not cause or permit his/her dog to run at large within
the city limits, including within a public park, except as otherwise allowed
by this code. Being "at large" means being off the property of the person
owning, harboring or keeping the dog and not: (a) at heel beside a person
having custody of it and obedient to that person's command; (b) within a
private motor vehicle of a person owning, harboring or keeping the animal; or
(c) controlled by a leash not exceeding six feet in length.



2.   An owner must not cause or permit his/her dog to be on a public beach
or school grounds, even if under restraint, except for dogs that have been
specially trained and certified to perform tasks to assist people, such as
handicapped assistance, police canine duties, or search and rescue.



3.   A person must not abandon an animal within the city.



4.   A person must not keep, own, harbor or otherwise possess a public
nuisance animal, which is one that:



   a.   is maintained in a manner that violates section 925.080(2);



   b.   by virtue of number or types of animals maintained, is
offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare; or



   c.   has been the subject of a violation of this chapter more than
two times in a 24-month period.



5.   A person must not own, keep, or have in his/her possession an animal
that unreasonably causes annoyance or disturbance to another person by
frequent howling, yelping, barking, or other kinds of noise.  The phrase
"unreasonably causes annoyance or disturbance" includes the creation of noise
by an animal which can be heard by any person, including an animal control
officer or a law enforcement officer, from a location outside of the unit,
building or premises where the animal is being kept and which animal noise
occurs repeatedly over at least a five-minute period of time with one minute
or less lapse of time between each animal noise during the five-minute
period. The noise described in this paragraph is not a violation if the
defendant can affirmatively prove that the noise occurred due to harassment
or injury to the animal from someone or something other than the owner or
keeper of the animal, or due to a trespass upon the property where the animal
was located. When there has been a violation of this paragraph, the enforcing
officer has the discretion to issue or to not issue a citation, based on the
officer's good judgment and the circumstances of the situation.



6.   A person must not permit an animal under his/her care, custody or
control to damage another person's lawn, garden or other property.



7.   A person must not injure, harass, or interfere with a police canine
in the lawful performance of its duties, or attempt, permit or cause the same.



8.   An owner of an animal must not fail to restrain the animal from
inflicting or attempting to inflict bodily injury on a person at any place or
on a domestic animal off the owner's property, except in the circumstances
specified in section 925.005(10), paragraphs d, e, and f.



9.   A person, except police officers in the lawful performance of their
duties using a police canine, must not cause or encourage an animal to engage
in unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals.



10.   A person must not own, possess, harbor, or train an animal for the
purpose of fighting with other animals.



11.   A person must not permit an animal under his/her care, custody or
control to defecate on public or private property without permission of the
property owner, unless the person immediately cleans up and disposes of the
animal's feces in a sanitary manner. A person who has custody or control of
an animal on property that the person does not own or occupy must have in
his/her immediate possession suitable equipment for picking up and removing
the animal's feces in a sanitary manner. The person must dispose of the feces
in appropriate waste containers, at a location owned or occupied by the
person, or at a location where the person has been given permission to do so.
The provisions of this paragraph do not apply to a blind person accompanied
by a service dog or a person physically unable to clean up after a dog, and
does not apply to a person in control of a dog involved in official police or
rescue activities.



(Amended by Ord. 2011-26, adopted December 19, 2011; amended by Ord.
#2011-08, adopted June 6, 2011; amended by Ord. #2002-13, adopted May 20,
2002)



925.090.  Confinement in Motor Vehicle.



1.   A person must not cause or allow an animal to be placed or confined
in a motor vehicle without adequate ventilation when the atmospheric
temperature, humidity, and sun rays can be reasonably expected to cause
suffering, disability or death.  Evidence that the animal is suffering from
heat stress is prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



2.   This section does not prohibit the transportation of horses, cattle,
sheep, poultry or other agricultural livestock in trailers or other vehicles
designed and constructed for that purpose.



3.   Authorized city personnel who find an animal in a motor vehicle in
violation of this section may break and enter into the vehicle if necessary
to remove the animal.  Neither the personnel nor the city will be liable for
vehicle damage that results.  An animal removed must be taken immediately to
the animal impounding facility to be evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. 
The personnel must leave within the vehicle a written notice giving their
name and position and the address where the animal may be redeemed.  The
owner of the animal is responsible for all medical and housing expenses
incurred.



925.095.  Wild Animals.



1.   A person must not keep, own, harbor or otherwise possess a wild
animal within the city, except as provided in paragraph 2 below. A wild
animal is any of the following:



   a.   front-fanged venomous snakes, including the viperdae and
elapidae families of snakes, such as rattlesnakes and cobras;



   b.   snakes over 8 feet in length;



   c.   reptiles that have the physical ability as an adult to cause
substantial bodily injury as defined in Minn. Stat. § 609.02, subd. 7a, to
humans and domestic animals, such as python snakes and crocodilians;



   d.   animals that can transmit rabies and cannot be vaccinated
against rabies, except domestic animals such as cows;



   e.   mammals that as a breed are considered wild by nature because
of breeding, history, character, habit, or disposition; and



   f.   mammals that have at least 25 percent of their heritage from
mammals specified in subparagraph 1(e) above.



   "Wild animal" specifically includes such animals as a wolf, fox, skunk,
raccoon, mink, bobcat, deer, and monkey, but does not include a fish, bird,
ferret, hamster or gerbil.



2.   Wild animals may be brought into the city for the purpose of
entertainment, education or display only by the following:



   a.   a zoo operated by a governmental agency or a tax-exempt,
non-profit corporation;



   b.   the department of natural resources;



   c.   other similar public educational or charitable organization;



   d.   a circus; or



   e.   a city-licensed pet shop.



   An organization listed above may bring a wild animal or animals into
the city under this paragraph only after obtaining a permit from authorized
city personnel.  A permit may be granted only if the applicant can and does
comply with the standards contained in paragraph 3 below and pays the permit
fee specified in section 710. No organization covered by this paragraph may
have wild animals within the city on more than 7 days in a consecutive
12-month period, except that an organization listed above that has a wild
animal within the city on the effective date of this section may continue to
keep that animal as long as it lives if the organization obtains a permit
from the city and complies with the standards specified in paragraph 3 below.



3.   An organization that has obtained a permit under paragraph 2 above
must comply with the following standards at all times that it possesses a
wild animal within the city.



   a.   A non-governmental organization must have liability insurance
to cover potential personal injury or property damage caused by the
animal(s), in an amount of at least $300,000 per person per occurrence.



   b.   The animal(s) must be kept in a locked cage or other secure
enclosure at all times when the public is allowed to be near them.



   c.   The cage or enclosure must be constructed of sufficient
materials so that a person, including a child, cannot put a finger, hand, or
another portion of the body into the cage or enclosure so that the animal(s)
could touch it.  Alternatively, structural barriers may be used to keep the
public away from the cage or enclosure.



   d.   Only personnel with adequate training or experience in handling
wild animals may have contact with the animal(s) while in the city.



   e.   The animal(s) must be transported to the display location in
the city in a secure enclosure sufficient to prohibit potential contact with
humans or other animals, except the personnel identified under subparagraph
(d) above.



   f.   No sale of a wild animal(s) may occur, nor may orders for the
sale of wild animals be taken.



   g.   The display location must be inspected by authorized city
personnel before the wild animal(s) may be brought into the city.



   h.   Authorized city personnel must be allowed to periodically
inspect the display location during reasonable hours while the animal(s)
is/are in the city.



   i.   If a wild animal bites a person, the animal must be forfeited
immediately to authorized city personnel for rabies testing.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. #2002-13, adopted May
20, 2002)



925.100.  Rabies; Animal Bites.



1.   A dog or animal displaying symptoms of being rabid may be seized at
any place or time and will be confined in the city impounding facility at the
expense of the owner, until found to be free from rabies.



2.   If a dog or other animal appears to be diseased, vicious, dangerous,
rabid or has been exposed to rabies, and the dog or other animal cannot be
impounded without serious risk of personal injury, the dog or other animal
may be killed, if reasonably necessary for the safety of a person or persons.



3.   When a dog or other animal has bitten a person and the skin has been
broken or the services of a doctor are required, the owner or custodian of
the biting animal and the person bitten or his/her parent or guardian must
report the incident to the Minnetonka police department within 24 hours of
the bite.  The dog or other animal must be confined for a period of not less
than 10 days in a veterinary hospital or on the owner's premises, as
determined by the authorized city personnel.  These personnel may refuse to
permit confinement on the owner's premises if the animal has previously been
found repeatedly at large or if the animal does not have a currently
effective rabies inoculation.  If confinement on the owner's premises is
permitted, the animal may not be allowed off the premises or in contact with
people or other animals during the confinement period, except for medical
purposes.  If the owner fails to comply with these restrictions, authorized
city personnel may enter onto the property, seize the animal, and remove it
to a veterinary hospital.  The owner is responsible for all costs of
confinement incurred under this section.  As a condition of releasing a
confined animal, authorized city personnel may require that the animal's
owner take the animal for an examination by a veterinarian and may require
the owner to follow any recommendations from the veterinarian regarding the
animal's training or behavior.  The authorized personnel must notify the
owner of these requirements in writing.  Failure to comply with a
requirement is a violation of this code, punishable as a misdemeanor and as a
civil violation.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



925.105.  Dangerous and Potentially Dangerous Animals.



1.   Adoption of statute.  The provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 347.50
through 347.56 are adopted by reference and govern dangerous animals in the
city of Minnetonka, except that the word "animal" is substituted for the word
"dog" wherever it appears in those statutes. Authorized city personnel will
determine whether an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous. Requests
for a hearing regarding a determination will be referred to an independent
hearing officer. An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the hearing
officer's decision by a court of competent decision.



2.  Dangerous animals.



   a.   An owner of a dangerous animal must keep the animal in a proper
enclosure, as defined by statute, while on the owner's property. The
enclosure for a dangerous dog must meet the following specifications:



      (1)   The sidewall height must be at least five feet;



      (2)   The support posts must be buried at least 18 inches into
the ground;



      (3)   The enclosure must have secure sides and a secure top
that is attached to the sides, constructed of 11 gauge or heavier wire with
openings that do not exceed two inches;



      (4)   The enclosure must have a secure bottom or floor
attached to the sides of the enclosure, or the sides must be embedded in the
ground no less than 18 inches.



      (5)   The enclosure must be locked with a key or combination
lock whenever occupied by the dangerous dog.



      (6)   The enclosure must comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the city.



   b.   An animal may not be declared dangerous if the threat, injury,
or damage was sustained by a person:



      (1)   who was committing, at the time, a willful trespass or
other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal;



      (2)   who was provoking, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the animal or who can be shown to have repeatedly, in the past, provoked,
tormented, abused or assaulted the animal; or



      (3)   who was committing or attempting to commit a crime.



3.   Potentially dangerous animals.



   a.   A person who owns, keeps, possesses, or acts as a custodian for
a potentially dangerous animal must do the following:



      (1)   maintain the animal under restraint by use of a leash
not exceeding six feet in length at all times when the animal is off the
owner's premises;



      (2)   when the animal is on the owner's premises, confine the
animal within a fenced enclosure sufficient to keep the animal from leaving
the enclosure, or maintain the animal on a leash or chain not exceeding six
feet in length;



      (3)   have a microchip identification implanted in the animal
as required by Minn. Stat. §347.515; and



      (4)   provide notification of the death, change in ownership,
or transfer of the animal in accordance with the requirements in Minn. Stat.
§347.52(c) and (f).



   b.   The notice and hearing requirements provided in Minn. Stat.
§347.541 apply to the determination by authorized city personnel that an
animal is potentially dangerous.



4.   Stopping an attack.  If authorized city personnel are witness to an
attack by an animal upon a person or another animal, the personnel may take
whatever means the personnel deems appropriate to bring the attack to an end
and prevent further injury to the victim.



(Amended by Ord. #2016-03, effective March 3, 2016; amended by Ord. #2008-29,
adopted October 13, 2008; amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006)



925.110.  Forfeiture of Ownership Rights.



1.   The ownership rights of a person owning the following types of
animals may be forfeited to the city pursuant to the procedure in this
section:



   a.   a public nuisance animal;



   b.   a wild animal; and



   c.   a maltreated animal.



   In addition, the ownership rights of other animals owned by the same
owner may be forfeited if he/she has demonstrated an inability or
unwillingness to properly care for or control the animal in order to prevent
it from becoming a public nuisance animal or a maltreated animal.



2.   Authorized city personnel must notify the owner or apparent owner of
the animal sought to be forfeited that the city intends to forfeit his/her
ownership rights.  The notice must be served on the owner personally or by
registered mail. The notice must be in writing and state the reasons why
forfeiture is sought, including a summary of applicable incidents.  The
notice must state that the owner has a right to request a hearing before a
hearing officer appointed under city code section 1310.035 within 10 days
after receiving the notice.  A failure to request the hearing will
constitute an admission of the facts alleged in the notice, and the animal
will be deemed forfeited to the city.



3.   If the owner requests a hearing, the hearing will be held within 15
days after the city receives the appeal. The hearing will be held in
accordance with city code section 1310.035(3).  The hearing officer must
make written findings of fact and reach a conclusion whether the allegations
are true and whether the animal will be forfeited to the city.  The findings
and conclusions must be made within 10 working days after the hearing and
must be served on the owner personally or by registered mail.  The decision
of the hearing officer is final but may be appealed to a court of competent
jurisdiction.



4.   After receiving the forfeiture notice and during the forfeiture
proceedings, the owner must keep the subject animal confined within his/her
home or within a secure covered enclosure.  If the owner fails to do so, or
if there is an immediate threat to public health or safety or to the animal's
health or safety, authorized city personnel may immediately impound the
animal and keep it at the impound facility until a forfeiture determination
has been made.



5.   If the animal is deemed or ordered forfeited, the owner must
immediately give the animal to authorized city personnel, and a failure or
refusal to do so is a misdemeanor.  Authorized city personnel may use
reasonable force and go onto private property to take the animal into custody.



6.   Authorized city personnel will determine on a case by case basis
whether forfeited animals may be destroyed or given to new owners who will
adequately care for and control the animal.



(Amended by Ord. #2015-19, effective January 29, 2015)



925.115.  Farm Animals.



1.   A person who keeps or allows the keeping of a farm animal on property
in the city must comply with the following:



   a.   The parcel of property where a large farm animal is kept must
be at least one acre in size, not counting wetlands and undeveloped land not
usable for pasture.  The parcel of property where a small farm animal is
kept may be smaller than one-half acre, but the number of small farm animals
allowed must be reduced proportionally, rounded down to the nearest whole
number.  When determining the size of the property under this paragraph, and
paragraph b below, only one parcel of land can be included.  Parcels of land
cannot be combined to meet the minimum area unless those parcels are already
combined under one property identification number.



   b.   The maximum number of farm animals allowed are:



 


category

 

number



large farm animals over six months in age
 

one per acre



small farm animals over six months, except fowl
 

five per half acre



small farm animals that are fowl of any age
 

five per half acre




 



   c.   A farm animal must not be kept or maintained on a regular basis
on the front yard of the property, as defined by the zoning ordinance.



   d.   A farm animal that is kept outside must be provided a shelter
structure of appropriate size, that is accessible to the animal at all
times.  The shelter structure may not be located closer to the boundary line
of adjacent occupied property than it is to the principal structure on the
animal owner's property, but not less than 10 feet.



   e.   The farm animal must be contained on the property by the use of
a fence or other appropriate device.



   f.   Crowing roosters are not allowed if the crowing can be heard
off the property of the owner.



   g.   A farm animal must not be kept on residentially-zoned property
if it is being used as part of a commercial purpose, whether or not the
commercial use occurs on the residentially-zoned property.  This provision
does not apply to a property that is being used for agricultural purposes and
that qualifies for the agricultural property tax classification established
in Minn. Stat. § 273.11.



   h.   The ground or floor of the area where a farm animal is kept
must be covered with vegetation, concrete, or other surface approved by the
Minnetonka health authority, so that it can be, and is, sufficiently
maintained to adequately dissipate offensive odors, in compliance with
section 925.080(2)(a) and (c).



2.   The following provisions apply to property in the city where a farm
animal was kept outside the principal structure on the effective date of this
ordinance (June 5, 1999) and was kept there regularly from the date of
ordinance introduction (July 27, 1998) until that date.  Such property is
called a “pre-existing property”.



   a.   The owner of pre-existing property who does not comply with the
standards in paragraph 1(a) - (e), may continue in that manner only by
obtaining a multiple animal permit and complying with the required
conditions, except as otherwise provided below.  The multiple animal permit
will specify the maximum number of animals allowed based on the number and
size of animals kept when this ordinance was introduced.  The owner of
pre-existing property has the burden of establishing the number of animals
kept at that time.  Any new shelter or fence must comply with the zoning
ordinance standards.



   b.   In an action seeking enforcement of the maintenance standards
in section 925.080(2), the owner of pre-existing property may provide as an
affirmative defense that he/she is implementing the reasonable management
practices that have been required and approved by the health authority.



   c.   The owner of pre-existing property may replace animals that die
or are otherwise removed from the property, up to the maximum number allowed
by the permit, as long as there has been no finding or admission of a
violation of city ordinances relating to the keeping of the animals.



   d.   The pre-existing rights may continue only as long as the
pre-existing property is not reduced in size and as long as there has been no
finding or admission of a violation of city ordinances relating to the
keeping of the animals.



   e.   The permit and the pre-existing rights authorized above are
personal to the owner of the pre-existing property and cannot be transferred
to anyone else.



(Amended by Ord. 2007-33, adopted October 22, 2007; amended by Ord. #2002-13,
adopted May 20, 2002)



925.120.  Penalty.



A violation of section 925.020(2), section 925.080, section 925.085(7), (8),
(9), and (10), section 925.090, section 925.095, and section 925.105(1) and
(2) is a misdemeanor.  Unless otherwise designated, a violation of any other
provision in this chapter is a petty misdemeanor.  However, a violation
preceded by two or more violations of a of the chapter's petty misdemeanor
provisions within 12 months of the present violation is a misdemeanor.



SECTION 930.  GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



930.005.  Definitions.



1.   “Alley or alleyway” means every roadway that is used primarily
for vehicle service access to the back or the side of properties abutting on
a street.



2.   “Bus stop or taxi stand” means a place adjacent to a curb
reserved for the exclusive use of the designated vehicles during the loading
or unloading of passengers.



3.   “Fire lane” means any roadway and adjacent lands required to be
kept clear for unimpeded access by fire department personnel, equipment and
vehicles to exits, entrances, hydrants, stand pipes and other facilities.



4.   “Loading zone” means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.



5.   “Park or parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, or while actually
engaged in, the loading or unloading of merchandise or passengers.



6.   “Pedestrian bicycle safety zone” means the area or space
officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrian,
bicycle or other non-motorized traffic, and that is marked or indicated by
plainly visible signs.



7.   “Private parking lot” means an area not dedicated to municipal or
public use that is made available and equipped by the owner for motor vehicle
parking by the public or by persons visiting or having business on the
owner's premises.



8.   “Self-propelled roller device” means any device designed to be
propelled by human power that moves on rollers, such as rollerskates,
rollerblades, and skateboards.



9.   Any term used in this chapter and defined in Minn. Stat. § 169.01
has the meaning given to it by that section unless otherwise indicated.



930.010.  Through Streets; One-Way Streets.



The council may by resolution designate any street or portion of a street as
a through highway or a one-way roadway where necessary to preserve the free
flow of traffic, prevent accidents, or achieve other public goals.  The city
engineer must post appropriate signs at locations that will reasonably inform
the driving public of these designations.  A person must not operate a
vehicle contrary to the directions on these signs.  No trunk highway may be
so designated unless the consent of the commissioner of the Minnesota
department of transportation is first obtained.



930.015.  Turns.



The council may by resolution designate an intersection as one where the
turning of vehicles is to be restricted at all times or during specified
hours.  The city engineer must mark by appropriate traffic control device an
intersection so designated.  A person must not turn a vehicle at an
intersection contrary to the directions on those signs.  No intersection on
a trunk highway may be so designated until the consent of the commissioner of
the Minnesota department of transportation is first obtained.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



930.020.  Stop Intersections.



The council may by resolution designate an intersection as a stop
intersection.  The city engineer must mark by appropriate traffic control
device an intersection so designated.  Every driver of a vehicle must bring
his/her vehicle to a full stop before entering a stop intersection properly
designated and posted.  No intersection on a trunk highway may be designated
as a stop intersection unless the consent of the commissioner of the
Minnesota department of transportation is first obtained.



930.025.  Truck Routes.



1.   For the purpose of this section the term “truck” means a vehicle
with a weight classification G through T inclusive, as specified in Minn.
Stat. § 168.013. subd. 1e.



2.   A person must operate a truck only on streets that are designated as
truck routes.  Truck routes consist of the following streets:



   a.   all United States highways within the city;



   b.   all state highways within the city; and



   c.   all county highways within the city.



3.   The provisions of paragraph 2 do not apply to the following vehicles:



   a.   school buses when engaged in the act of transporting pupils to
or from school;



   b.   emergency vehicles;



   c.   trucks belonging to the city of Minnetonka;



   d.   trucks belonging to utility companies when actually engaged in
the construction or repair of utility company facilities;



   e.   trucks delivering retail merchandise to homes; and



   f.   trucks with a special permit to travel on city streets from the
public works director.



4.   Special permits may be obtained from the public works director for
travel on the city streets by prohibited trucks by submitting to the director
an application containing the following information:



   a.   name of the firm or person owning the truck;



   b.   gross weight of the truck;



   c.   street or streets for which permit is desired; and



   d.   time at which desired trip is to be made.



   Upon submission of a completed application and an agreement to pay for
any damage caused to the city streets, the director may issue a special
permit when the likely damage to city streets is minimal.



5.   The city engineer must cause to be posted within the city appropriate
signs designating the established truck routes.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-01, adopted January 6, 2003)



930.030.  Parking Regulations.



1.   For the purpose of this section and any regulations relating to
limited parking, a vehicle moved to another location within 100 feet of the
first location during the limited parking period is deemed to have remained
stationary.



2.   The council may designate no parking or limited time parking zones by
a resolution setting forth the location of the zone, and the time limit
imposed, if applicable.  The city engineer must post signs indicating a no
parking zone or the specified time limit for parking.  If there is a raised
curb, the curb must be painted yellow at the designated no parking zone.  A
person must not park a vehicle contrary to these postings or designations.



3.   A person must not park a vehicle where permanent or temporary signs
are posted by the city, or by authorized personnel acting at the city’s
direction, that state “no parking.”



4.   A person must not park in an area designated and posted as a fire
lane.



5.   Existing signs that have been posted by direction of the council,
city engineer, or the chief of police regulating parking of vehicles will be
recognized as properly placed under this chapter until changed by proper
direction of the council.



6.   A vehicle must not be parked on a public street between 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., and a vehicle must not be parked on a public street in any one
place for a longer continuous period than 6 hours, except as permitted under
section 930.032 of this code.



7.   A person must not leave or park a house trailer on a street or
highway or adjacent right-of- way for a longer period than six hours.



8.   A vehicle must not be parked on a street, including adjacent
right-of-way, for the purpose of displaying it for sale.



9.   A person must not park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether
attended or unattended, on an alley within this city; provided that this does
not prohibit the parking of vehicles for less than one hour on an alley for
the purpose of access to abutting property for loading or unloading
merchandise or other material when parking on the property itself is not
available.



10.   A person must not park a vehicle so as to block a fire escape or the
entrance or exit from a building, whether on public or private property.



11.   A person must not park or stop a vehicle for any length of time in a
manner to obstruct access to a fire hydrant, and in no event on a street or
parking lot within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.



12.   A person must not stop or park a vehicle on a street or highway when
directed or ordered to proceed by a peace officer invested by law with
authority to direct, control or regulate traffic or by an authorized person
under the direction and control of a peace officer.



13.   A person must not park a motor vehicle in an area designated by
posted signs for certain types of vehicles unless the motor vehicle is one of
the types of vehicles specifically permitted.



14.   A person must not operate a motor vehicle on a public or private
parking lot at a speed greater than is safe and reasonable under the
conditions of traffic then existing, and in no event at a speed exceeding 15
miles per hour.  Parking of vehicles on those lots must conform to any
stalls or positions for parking designated on the surface of the parking
area. A vehicle must not be parked or allowed to stand in an area of those
parking lots that has been designated or is used for a lane of moving traffic
so as to interfere with the movement of traffic.  The chief of police or
city engineer may post signs at entrances to a private parking lot from a
public street, that designate one-way traffic for entrance or exit, and the
driver of a vehicle entering or leaving a lot must comply with those one-way
signs.



15.   A person must not park a motor vehicle or trailer, or allow a motor
vehicle or trailer under his/her control, to remain on a street, road or
highway in a manner that interferes with the removal of snow, sleet, slush or
ice from the street, road or highway.  In addition to any other penalties
imposed for the violation of this section, the police department may order
that the motor vehicle or trailer be towed from the right-of-way at the
owner's expense.



16.   Loading zones.



   a.   A person may request in writing that the city council establish
a loading zone abutting premises that the person occupies.  If the council
grants the request, the city will bill the applicant for the estimated cost
of placing appropriate signs and painting the curb.  When the amount is paid
to the city treasurer, the city engineer will install the necessary signs and
paint the curb.



   b.   During posted loading zone hours, a person must not stop, stand
or park a vehicle in a loading zone except to receive or discharge passengers
or freight and then only for no longer than necessary.  A person must not
occupy a loading zone with a vehicle other than a truck for more than five
minutes during those hours.



17.   A person must not park or place a dumpster, or other object that is
not a motor vehicle, on the paved portion of a public street, except in
compliance with all conditions contained in a permit obtained from the city
engineer.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-18, adopted October 28, 2013;  amended by Ord.
#2005-19, adopted November 28, 2005)



930.031.  Unattended Child in Motor Vehicle.



1.   A parent, legal guardian, or caretaker must not cause or permit a
child under the age of five who is under the person's care to remain
unattended in a motor vehicle if:



   a.   the motor vehicle containing the child is out of the direct
view of the parent, legal guardian or caretaker;



   b.   weather conditions present a threat to the child because of
dangerous temperatures, air quality or lack of ventilation;



   c.   the child's physical environment within the motor vehicle
constitutes an unreasonable threat to the child's health, safety, or welfare;



   d.   the vehicle is left in a condition that is readily operable,
such as with the keys in the ignition or an unlocked ignition; or



   e.   there are other factors that unreasonably threaten the child's
health, safety, or welfare.



2.   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   a.   "caretaker" means anyone age 16 or older who assumes or has
responsibility for the welfare of the child left in the motor vehicle.



   b.   "unattended" means left in a vehicle without a person over the
age of 12.



3.   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-20, adopted August 25, 2003)



930.032.  Overnight Parking Permit Areas.



1.   Findings and purpose. The council finds that streets in certain
residential areas do not have sufficient off-street vehicular parking for the
use and convenience of the areas' residents in the vicinity of their homes.
It is the purpose of this section to protect residents from unreasonable
burdens in gaining access to their residences. The provisions of this
subsection, providing for overnight parking by permit only, are deemed to be
in furtherance of such objectives.



2.   Authority to establish. The council may establish overnight parking
permit areas as provided in this section. No person in charge of a vehicle
may park or permit the vehicle to be parked overnight on posted streets in a
designated area unless the vehicle bears a permit as provided in this section.



3.   Procedure. At the request of the council or upon his or her own
initiative, the police chief will conduct an investigation to determine (a)
whether insufficient parking exists in a residential area, and (b) whether
overnight permit parking, or removal or modification of overnight permit
parking, would be a viable solution to the parking problem in the area. The
police chief must submit a written recommendation to the city council
regarding the establishment of an overnight parking permit area and the
location and boundaries of the area.



4.   Council action. The council may establish an overnight parking permit
area by resolution. The resolution must:



   a.   Include findings that the area does not have sufficient
off-street vehicular parking for the use and convenience of the area's
residents in the vicinity of their homes and that the health, safety, and
welfare of residents of the area will be promoted by a system of allowing
overnight parking by permit only.



   b.   Identify the streets or portions of streets located within the
overnight parking permit area.



   c.   Specify the restrictions or conditions that apply to the
permits to be issued, including limits on the number of permits per residence
and requirements related to snow plowing.



   d.   Direct the public works director to post the streets in the
overnight parking area with appropriate signage to notify the public of the
parking restrictions.



5.   Permits. The police chief will issue parking permits for each
established permit area, according to the requirements in the council
resolution for that area.



   a.   Unless otherwise specified in the council resolution, permits
will be issued to residents of dwellings located on streets in the permit
area.



   b.   Each permit will be issued with a unique identifying number.
Permits must be hung from the rearview mirror of the vehicle and must be
easily seen by law enforcement personnel through the windshield.



   c.   Unless otherwise specified in the council resolution, the
police chief may issue temporary, special event permits to a resident of the
permit parking area. The temporary permit must specify the dates and hours it
is effective on its face.



   d.   Application; fees. Individuals who desire one or more overnight
parking permits must submit an application to the chief of police on a form
provided by the chief of police. To cover the costs of administering the
permit system, a fee will be charged for each permit in the amount
established by city code, unless otherwise specified in the council
resolution.



   e.   No transfer. No resident parking permit may be used by or sold
or transferred to a person not living at the address for which the permit was
issued in the household of the person to whom the permit was issued. No
visitor or temporary permit may be given or sold for any purpose other than
to permit parking by a visitor while actually visiting a resident. A permit
is valid only for the specified area for which it is issued.



6.   Permit scope; exceptions.



   a.   Nothing in this section nullifies the scope of parking
privileges granted the physically disabled as defined by state statutes.



   b.   Permits issued under this section do not exempt permit holders
from complying with other applicable parking regulations, including the
prohibition on interference with snow removal.



   7.   Disestablishment or modification. The city council may remove
an overnight parking permit area or modify the boundaries or other
requirements as set forth in the resolution establishing the overnight
parking permit area if, after investigation and receipt of the police chief's
recommendation, the city council determines that removal or modification is
warranted.



(Added by Ord. 2013-18, adopted October 28, 2013)



930.035.  Bus Stops and Taxi Stands.



1.   The city council may by resolution designate spaces on streets where
vehicles engaged in carrying passengers for hire may stand or park.  The
city engineer will mark by appropriate sign a designated bus stop or taxi
stand.



2.   Except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, a driver
of a vehicle other than a bus must not park that vehicle at a bus stop, and a
driver of a vehicle other than a taxicab must not park that vehicle in a taxi
stand.



3.   A driver of a bus must park the bus only at a bus stop.  Except for
the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or for a reasonable time while
on personal errands, a driver of a taxicab must park only at a taxi stand.



930.040.  Use of Pedestrian Bicycle Safety Zone.



All pedestrians and bicyclists must use the pedestrian bicycle safety zone,
if one is provided, rather than the remainder of the roadway or adjacent
property.  Every person utilizing a pedestrian bicycle safety zone or a
two-way bicycle lane must ride as close to the right side of the zone or
roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing, standing or moving
vehicles and must proceed in single file when encountering other traffic.



930.045.  Vehicles Prohibited on Sidewalks.



Except for crossing at an alley, driveway, building or other authorized
crossing, a person must not ride or drive a motor vehicle, all- terrain
vehicle, motorcycle, motor scooter, or motorized bicycle upon a sidewalk or
in a pedestrian bicycle safety zone.



930.050.  Bicycles.



All people operating bicycles must comply with the state laws governing use
of bicycles.  In addition, a person must not ride or operate a bicycle upon
public property while wearing headphones or earphones that are designed to be
used to hear broadcasts or sound reproductions from radios, tapedecks, or
other sound-producing or transmitting devices.  This prohibition does not
include the use of valid hearing aids.



930.055.  Self-Propelled Roller Devices.



1.   Except for crossing at an alley, driveway, or roadway intersection, a
person may ride or operate a self-propelled roller device upon a public
street, highway, or parking lot only within a pedestrian bicycle safety zone
that is designated by a posted sign or markings on the pavement or within an
area four feet from the edge of the roadway pavement when no bicycle safety
zone exists.



2.   A person must not ride or operate a self-propelled roller device upon
private property, including parking lots and streets held out for use by the
public, unless written permission has been obtained from the owner, occupant,
or person in charge of the property.  A person must not refuse or fail to
show the written permission upon request to a person authorized to enforce
this ordinance.



3.   A person must not ride or operate a self-propelled roller device
anywhere in a manner that willfully or carelessly disregards the rights and
safety of others or that endangers or is likely to endanger any property or
person, including the operator.



4.   A person must not ride or operate a self-propelled roller device upon
public property unless the person can safely and efficiently control the
device.



5.   A person must not ride or operate a self-propelled roller device in
an area where that conduct has been prohibited by conspicuously posted signs
erected by the owner or occupant of the property.



930.060.  Entering Highway From Public Alley.



The driver of a vehicle entering or crossing a highway from a public alley
must yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the highway.



930.065.  Exhibition Driving Prohibited.



A person must not turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise operate a motor
vehicle in a manner that causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire,
squealing tires, skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand, gravel, dirt
or other material, or in a manner simulating a race.  Unreasonable squealing
or screeching sounds emitted by tires, or the unreasonable throwing of sand,
gravel, dirt or other material by the tires is prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section. "Unnecessary" for the purposes of this section
means that the activity would not be caused by the normal course of operating
a motor vehicle. "Unreasonable" for the purposes of this section means that
the conduct would be considered unreasonable or inappropriate by people of
ordinary sensibilities.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006)



930.070.  Removing Keys.



1.   A person must stop the engine and remove all ignition keys from the
vehicle before leaving a motor vehicle unattended on a street, used car lot,
or unattended parking lot.  This prohibition does not apply to a truck that
is engaged in loading or unloading.



2.   Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle standing in violation
of this section, the officer may:



   a.   place the keys in the vehicle so they are not visible from
outside and lock the vehicle;



   b.   lock the keys in the trunk;



   c.   remove the ignition keys from the vehicle and deliver them to
police headquarters for the owner to collect; or



   d.   deliver the removed ignition keys to police headquarters, which
may mail them to the registered owner of the vehicle.



   If the police department does not elect to mail the keys to the owner,
it will mail notice to the registered owner of the vehicle within two weeks
after the keys were confiscated that the keys may be obtained from the
department.  If the keys are not collected by the registered owner or
authorized agent with proper identification within 90 days after
confiscation, the department may destroy or dispose of the keys.



930.075.  Vehicle Impoundment.



Authorized police department personnel may remove a parked vehicle from a
street to a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle:



1.   constitutes an obstruction to traffic;



2.   hinders snow removal, street improvements or maintenance operations;



3.   hinders public safety personnel at emergency scenes;



4.   constitutes evidence of a crime; or



5.   is parked in violation of the law.



A vehicle may also be impounded when necessary for its own safekeeping or
when the driver has been arrested and no other driver is available to
promptly remove the vehicle.  The vehicle may not be released until the fees
for towing and storage are paid.



930.080.  Temporary Traffic Regulations.



1.   Restrictions.



   a.    Authority. The city manager, police chief or fire chief may
temporarily close a public street or other area to vehicular traffic,
pedestrians, or parked vehicles, may temporarily designate one-way traffic,
or may reroute traffic, when it appears that this is necessary to:



      (1)   control or prevent a riot;



      (2)   fight or prevent the spread of fire;



      (3)   control or remove explosives;



      (4)   install or repair public streets or utilities;



      (5)   control traffic or crowds; or



      (6)   protect people or property.



   b.   Implementation. Action taken under paragraph 1 must be
implemented by placement of the following at all points where traffic would
enter the restricted area:



      (1)   authorized city personnel to direct traffic; or



      (2)   suitable signs, flags, barriers, warning lights, or
flasher signals.



   c.   Prohibition. A person must not disobey the authorized city
personnel, signs, flags, barriers, lights or signals that are implementing
the traffic restrictions imposed under this section.



2.   Parking Permits.



   a.   Authority.  The city manager or police chief may temporarily
permit parking in residential areas designated as “no parking” zones if
all of the following criteria are met:



      (1)   the applicant has obtained the consent of at least one
owner of 75 percent of the parcels adjacent to the area requested for parking;



      (2)   the parking will not occur between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.;



      (3)   the parking is in connection with a special event such
as a wedding or graduation celebration and will not occur beyond one period
of 20 consecutive hours;



      (4)   one parcel of land may have no more than four special
events with associated parking in a calendar year;



      (5)   the parking does not create a hazard to public safety or
violate any state requirements for municipal state aid streets;



      (6)   the parking will occur on only one side of the street if
both sides have been designated as “no parking” areas; and



      (7)   the special event will not violate any of the city’s
noise regulations in section 850 of the city code.



   b.   Implementation.  The city manager or police chief may take
appropriate action to administer the temporary parking, such as the issuance
of permits and the posting of temporary signs designating permit parking
only.  The city manager or police chief may deny an application when they
reasonably believe that this is in the public interest.  They must state
their reasons for denial in writing to the applicant, which should be
delivered to the applicant’s address by an authorized person or by
certified mail.  The applicant may appeal this decision to the city council
by submitting a request in writing to the city clerk within 10 days after
delivery of the decision.



   c.   Prohibition.  A person must not park a motor vehicle in a
“no parking” area, or in an area temporarily designated for parking,
without prominently displaying written permission from the city manager or
police chief in the vehicle.



930.085.  Driving Across Private Property.



A person must not disobey or avoid complying with an official traffic control
device by going across private property.



930.090.  Seasonal Weight Restrictions.



1.   Prohibition.  Between March 1 and May 1 of each year, a person must
not operate a motor vehicle weighing in excess of 6 tons per axle on city
streets.



2.   Additional restrictions.  The public works director may alter the
period and amount of weight limitations established in paragraph 1 and may
impose additional restrictions when necessary, or no longer necessary, to
prevent serious damage or destruction to the streets because of
deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions.  A person must not
operate a motor vehicle on city streets in violation of the restrictions
established by the director.



3.   Signs. The public works director must cause the posting of signs at
appropriate locations plainly indicating the prohibitions and restrictions
imposed under this section.



4.   Special permits.  A person may apply to the public works director to
operate a vehicle contrary to the prohibitions or restrictions imposed under
this section.  The director may issue the permit when the likelihood of
damage to the streets is minimal.  The director may impose conditions in the
permit and may require the posting of security to compensate for any
damage.  A person must not violate the terms and conditions of a special
permit.  A person operating under the terms of a special permit must have
the permit in his/her possession while so operating and must show it upon
request to a city police officer.



5.   Damage to streets.  In addition to being subject to the penalties
for ordinance violations, the driver and owner of a vehicle operated in
violation of this section will be responsible for any damage to city streets
that results.  The city may recover the damages through civil action.



6.   Civil penalty. The owner or lessee of a vehicle operated in violation
of this section is also subject to the civil penalty established in Minn.
Stat. § 169.871.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-01, adopted January 6, 2003)



930.095.  Rule of Evidence.



Under Minn. Stat. § 459.14, subd. 6, the presence of a motor vehicle on a
street or other public area when standing or parked in violation of this
chapter is prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
committed or authorized the commission of the violation.



930.100.  Traffic Enforcement and Direction.



The police department will enforce the provisions of this chapter and the
state traffic laws.  Police officers are authorized to direct all traffic in
conformity with this chapter and the state traffic laws.  During a fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police
department personnel may direct traffic contrary to those laws, as conditions
require.  Fire department personnel may direct, or assist the police in
directing, traffic at a fire scene or in the immediate vicinity.  The chief
of police may authorize city employees and volunteers who are not licensed
police officers to enforce parking regulations and direct traffic as long as
these personnel are under the direction and control of a licensed city police
officer.



930.105.  Penalty.



A violation of this chapter's provisions is a petty misdemeanor; except that
the following are misdemeanors:



1.   a violation that is committed in a manner or under circumstances that
endanger or are likely to endanger a person or property;



2.   a violation of a provision when preceded by two or more violations of
this chapter or the state traffic laws within the immediate preceding
12-month period, excluding violations related to the standing or parking of
an unattended vehicle; and



3.   a violation of the provisions of sections 930.090 and 930.031.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-20, adopted August 25, 2003)



SECTION 935.  RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES.



935.005.  Purpose and Intent.



The purpose of this section is to provide reasonable regulations for the use
of recreational motor vehicles.  This section is not intended to allow what
state law prohibits nor to prohibit what state law expressly allows.  It is
intended to prevent a public nuisance.



935.010.  Definitions.



1.   “Recreational motor vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle and
any vehicle propelled or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle used for
recreational purposes, including a trail bike or other all-terrain vehicle,
hovercraft or motor vehicle licensed for highway operation which is being
used for off-road recreational purposes, but excluding snowmobiles as defined
in Minn. Stat. § 84.81.



2.   “Public waters” has the meaning given in Minn. Stat. § 103G.005,
subd. 15.



935.015.  Operation.



A person must not:



1.   enter and operate a recreational motor vehicle on land not his/her
own without the written or oral permission of the owner, occupant or lessee
of the land, except where otherwise allowed by law.  Written permission may
be given by a posted notice which specifies the kind of vehicles allowed,
such as “recreational vehicles allowed” “trail bike allowed”, “all
terrain vehicles allowed”, or words substantially similar;



2.   operate a recreational motor vehicle carelessly or heedlessly in
disregard of the rights or the safety of others or in any manner which
endangers or is likely to endanger a person or property;



3.   operate a recreational motor vehicle in excess of 25 miles per hour
on publicly owned land;



4.   operate a recreational motor vehicle within 150 yards of a public
recreational area or gathering of people;



5.   operate a recreational motor vehicle on public property, except in
those areas designated by the council as provided in section 935.025;



6.   post, alter, mutilate, or remove any notice or sign relating to
recreational motor vehicles on property in which he/she has no legal interest;



7.   enter or leave the lands of another with a recreational motor
vehicle, or pass from one portion of those lands to another, through a closed
gate, without returning the gate to its original position.  A person must
not enter or leave the lands of another with a recreational motor vehicle by
cutting a wire or tearing down or destroying a fence; or



8.   operate a recreational motor vehicle on any public owned land and all
public waters, frozen or open, located in the city except for Gray’s Bay,
Shady Oak Lake and Glen Lake.  This prohibition applies to the portions of
Minnehaha Creek with the city which are: (a) Minnehaha Creek from Gray’s
Bay to a point on the southerly right of way line of the Burlington Northern
Railroad approximately 830 feet west of County Road 73, (b) Minnehaha Creek
from a point on the northerly extension of the centerline of Atwater Street
approximately 1,420 feet north of the centerline of County Road 5 to the
easterly line of Section 13, Township 117, Range 22, and (c) Minnehaha Creek
between the Gray’s Bay Dam and Interstate Highway 494.  The public land to
which this prohibition applies includes but is not limited to school grounds,
park property, playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except areas
designated by the city council by resolution for use.  Any area so
designated must be posted with signs indicating authorized use.



935.020.  Minimum Equipment Requirements.



1.   Standard mufflers must be properly attached and in constant operation
to reduce the noise of operation to the minimum necessary.  A person must
not use a muffler cutout, by-pass, straight pipe or similar device on a
recreational motor vehicle; and the exhaust system must not emit or produce a
sharp popping or cracking sound.



2.   Brakes must be adequate to control the movement of and to stop and
hold the vehicle under all conditions of operation.



3.   The following equipment must be attached and in operating condition
when a recreational motor vehicle is operated between the hours of one-half
hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise or at times of reduced
visibility.



   a.   At least one white lamp must be attached to the front with
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at least 500 feet ahead
during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.  The head
lamp must be so aimed that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an
oncoming vehicle operator.



   b.   At least one red tail lamp must be attached to the rear, with
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from 500 feet to
the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.



935.025.  Designation of Public Areas for Use.



1.   The city council may designate areas for use of recreational motor
vehicles.  A designation must be published in the official newspaper.  If
an area is changed, the change must also be published in the official
newspaper.  A current map of designated park areas open for recreational
motor vehicle use must be kept on file in the office of the city clerk.  The
city manager must provide on request a copy of the map, the applicable
regulations, and this chapter to each person requesting the information.



2.   Unless permitted by the city council, a person must not use a
recreational motor vehicle, except a city-owned vehicle used in the course of
city business, on city park property. Further, the use of city parks
designated by the city council must be in accordance with all of the
applicable provisions of this chapter and the regulations of the recreation
services director adopted under this code.



SECTION 940.  SNOWMOBILES.



940.005.  Definitions.



1.   Except where otherwise indicated, a term used in this chapter and
defined in Minn. Stat. § 84.81 has the meaning given it by that section.



2.   “Public water” has the meaning given in Minn. Stat. § 103G.005,
subd. 15.



3.   “Right-of-way” means the entire strip of land traversed by a
highway or street, for which the public owns the fee or an easement for
roadway purposes.



4.   “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, including the shoulder.



5.   “Safety or deadman throttle” is a device which causes the motor
to be disengaged from the driving track when pressure is removed from the
engine accelerator or throttle.



6.   “Street or highway” means the entire width of public right-of-way
between the boundary lines when any part of it is open to public use for
vehicular traffic.



940.010.  Adoption of State Code.



The provisions of Minn. Stat. §§ 84.87, 84.871, 84.872, 84.873, and 84.88
are adopted by reference.  These sections apply to all public streets and
all snowmobiles used in the city.



940.015.  Operating Prohibitions.



Except as otherwise specifically permitted, a person must not operate a
snowmobile within the city limits in the following manner:



1.   on a public sidewalk or walkway provided or used for pedestrian
travel;



2.   on private property of another without lawful written authority or
consent of the owner or occupant in his/her possession;



3.   on any publicly owned land and all public waters, frozen or open,
located in the city except for Gray’s Bay, Shady Oak Lake and Glen Lake. 
This prohibition applies to the portions of Minnehaha Creek within the City
which are: (a) Minnehaha Creek from Gray’s Bay to a point on the southerly
right of way line of the Burlington Northern Railroad approximately 830 feet
west of County Road 73, (b) Minnehaha Creek from a point on the northerly
extension of the centerline of Atwater Street approximately 1,420 feet north
of the centerline of County Road 5 to the easterly line of Section 13,
Township 117, Range 22, and (c) Minnehaha Creek between the Gray’s Bay Dam
and Interstate Highway 494.  The public land to which this prohibition
applies includes but is not limited to school grounds, park property,
playgrounds, recreation areas and golf courses, except areas designated by
the city council by resolution for use.  Any area so designated must be
posted with signs indicating authorized use;



4.   at any place, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
controlled substances;



5.   at a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances;



6.   at any place in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to
endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage;



7.   with any person or thing in tow except by use of a rigid towbar
attached to the rear of the snowmobile;



8.   at a speed greater than 10 miles an hour when within 100 feet of any
lakeshore (except on channels), or of fishermen, an icehouse or skating rink;



9.   within 100 feet of any sliding area, or where the operation would
conflict with the lawful use of property or would endanger other persons or
property;



10.   in a manner so as to create a loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
which unreasonably disturbs, annoys or interferes with the peace and quiet of
other persons;



11.   during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any day;



12.   entering or leaving the land of another, or passing from one portion
of land to another portion, through a closed gate, without returning the gate
to its original position.  A person must not enter or leave the land of
another with a snowmobile by cutting any wire or tearing down or destroying
any fence;



13.   upon the roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope of any street or
highway within the city.  Operation in the ditch or on the outside bank
within the right-of-way of any street or highway except interstate highways
or freeways is permitted in conformance with state law and city ordinances,
unless the roadway directly abuts a public sidewalk or walkway or property
used for private purposes; or



14.   at a location or in a direction other than on the right hand side of
a street or highway and in the same direction as the highway traffic on the
nearest lane of the adjacent roadway after sunset and before sunrise.



940.020.  Required Equipment.



A person must not operate a snowmobile unless it has the equipment required
by state law and the following paragraphs:



1.   brakes adequate to control the movement of, and to stop and hold, the
snowmobile under any conditions of operation;



2.   a safety, or so-called “deadman” throttle in operating condition,
so that when pressure is removed from the accelerator or throttle, the motor
is disengaged from the driving track;



3.   at least one white lamp attached to the front, with sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at least 500 feet ahead during the
hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.  The headlamp must be
aimed so that glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming
vehicle operator.  It must also be equipped with at least one red tail lamp
having sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from 500
feet to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.  The lamps are to be in operating condition when the vehicle is
operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour
before sunrise or at times of reduced visibility; and



4.   reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side, forward
of the handle bars, so as to reflect or beam light at a 90 degree angle.



940.025.  Further Regulated Activities.



1.   A person must not post, alter, mutilate, or remove any notice or sign
relating to snowmobiles on property in which he/she has no legal interest,
including any public land.



2.   Every person leaving a snowmobile in a public place must lock the
ignition, remove the key and take it with him/her.



940.030.  Impounding of Snowmobiles.



Authorized city personnel have the authority to impound a snowmobile under
the circumstances specified in section 930.075.  In addition, those
personnel may impound a snowmobile when it has been used without the
registration displayed as required by state law.  The snowmobile may not be
released until the required registration has been properly displayed and
proof of ownership has been provided.



940.035.  Application of Other Laws.



The provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter 169 apply to the operation of
snowmobiles upon the streets and highways in the city except:



1.   those provisions relating to required equipment; and



2.   those provisions which by their nature have no application.



SECTION 945.  AIRCRAFT.



945.005.  Definition.



For the purpose of this chapter, “aircraft” has the same meaning as
specified in Minn. Stat. § 360.013.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006)



945.010.  Prohibition.



A person must not land an aircraft within the city unless in compliance with
federal and state law and unless he/she has the permission of the owner or
occupant of the property where the landing takes place.  This prohibition
does not apply to emergency landings or to aircraft operated under the
direction of public safety personnel.



SECTION 950.  ANTI-GRAFFITI REGULATIONS.



950.005.  Purpose and Intent.



1.   The city council of the city of Minnetonka is enacting this ordinance
to help prevent the spread of graffiti vandalism and to establish a program
for the removal of  graffiti from public and private property. The council
is authorized to enact this ordinance pursuant to its police powers.



2.   The council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive
of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community.
Unless the city acts to remove graffiti from public and private property, the
graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of
graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable
places in which to be, all to the detriment of the city.



3.   The city council intends, through the adoption of this ordinance, to
provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property
from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement. The council does not intend
for this ordinance to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws.



950.010.  Definitions.



For the purposes of this section, the following words will have the meaning
provided to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.



1.   “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container that is
adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances
capable of defacing property.



2.   “Broad-tipped marker” means any felt tip indelible marker or
similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest
width, is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other
pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.



3.   “Etching equipment” means any tool, device or substance that can
be used to make permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface.



4.   “Graffiti” means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure,
painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched,
sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface
of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that
the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the
property, or despite advance authorization is otherwise deemed a public
nuisance by the city council.



5.   “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a
broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching
equipment, brush or any other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible
mark on any natural or man-made surface.



6.   “Paint stick” or “graffiti stick” means any device containing
a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable
of being applied to a surface by pressure and leaving a mark of at least
one-fourth of an inch in width.



7.   “Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative
association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee,
assignee, or any other legal entity.



950.015.  Prohibited Acts.



1.   Defacement. It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any
natural or man-made surface on any publicly-owned property or, without the
permission of the owner or occupant, on any privately-owned property.



2.   Possession of graffiti implements. Unless otherwise authorized by the
owner or occupant, it is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti
implement while:



   a.   within 200 feet of any graffiti located in or on a public
facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other
public building or structure owned or operated by a governmental agency; or



   b.   within 200 feet of any graffiti located in any public place, or
on private property, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.



950.020.  Graffiti as Nuisance.



1.   Declaration. The existence of graffiti on public or private property
in violation of this ordinance is expressly declared to be a public nuisance
and, therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified
in this ordinance.



2.   Duty of property owner. It is the duty of both the owner of the
property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in
possession or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep
the property clear of graffiti.



950.025.  Removal of Graffiti.



1.   By perpetrator. Any person applying graffiti on public or private
property has the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by
the city or private owner of the property involved. This removal must be done
in a manner prescribed by the city manager, chief of police, public works
director or their designees. Any person applying graffiti is responsible for
the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to
remove graffiti or pay for the removal will constitute an additional
violation of this ordinance. Where graffiti is applied by a person under18
years old, the parents or legal guardian will also be responsible for such
removal or for the payment for the removal.



2.   By property owner or city. If graffiti is not removed by the
perpetrator according to paragraph 1, the city may order that the graffiti be
removed by the property owner or any person who may be in possession or who
has the right to possess such property, pursuant to the nuisance abatement
procedure in city code section 845.045. If the property owner or responsible
party fails to remove offending graffiti within the time specified by the
city, the city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the
graffiti removal in accordance with city code section 845.045.



(Amended by Ord. #2003-01, adopted January 6, 2003)



950.030.  Penalties.



1.   Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with state law.



2.   Any violation of this section may be subject to civil penalties in
accordance with chapter 13 of the city code.



SECTION 955.  FIRE PROTECTION WATER SUPPLIES.



955.005.  Authority: purpose and Intent.



1.    Section 508 of the state fire code requires inspection, testing and
maintenance of fire protection water supplies which include water lines and
fire hydrant systems. The fire code requires fire hydrant systems to be
subject to periodic tests, maintained in an operative condition at all times
and repaired where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing
must comply with approved standards. Section 101 of the state fire code
authorizes the city to adopt rules to implement the fire code.



955.010.  Hydrant Requirements.



City fire hydrants are equipped with national hose thread (NHT) according to
the NFPA 1963 "Standard for Fire Hose Connections."  City fire hydrants have
two 2 1/2-inch NHT connections and either one 4 1/2-inch NHT pumper
connection or one 5-inch Storz pumper connection.  All private hydrants must
have hose and pumper connections that match those of city fire hydrants.
Private hydrants that do not comply with the 4 1/2-inch NHT pumper connection
must be equipped with an adapter to convert that connection to a 5-inch Storz
connection.



955.015.  Inspection; Reporting.



1.    The owner of a private hydrant that is directly or indirectly
connected to the municipal water system must have the hydrant inspected at
least annually by a company licensed in the state of Minnesota to complete
fire protection inspections. The inspection must include testing of the
operation and flow of the hydrant. The inspection must disclose the type of
thread on the hydrant's hose and pumper connections and whether an adapter or
Storz converter is present.



2.   The hydrant owner is responsible for providing an inspection report
to the fire marshal by July 15 of each year, on a form provided by the city.



955.020.  Private Water Line and Hydrant Repairs.



1.    If an inspection indicates that repairs are required to a private
hydrant or water line, the owner of the hydrant or water line must provide
the fire marshal with a copy of the inspection report within 5 business days
after receipt.  Based on the nature of the repairs to be made, weather
conditions, and the functionality, if any, of the fire hydrant and water
line, the fire marshal will determine a reasonable time period for making the
repairs and will order the owner to make the repairs at the owner's cost
within that time period. 



2.    The owner must have the water line or hydrant repaired by a licensed
fire protection company, licensed plumbing contractor or licensed pipe laying
contractor within the specified time period.  Within five (5) business days
after the repair is completed, the owner must provide the fire marshal with a
copy of a post-repair inspection report, prepared by a company licensed in
the state of Minnesota to complete fire protection inspections. If repairs
are not made within the time period set forth by the fire marshal in the
notification, the city will make the necessary repairs and bill the cost to
the owner. Bills that remain unpaid may be certified for collection with
taxes similar to other unpaid water utility charges.



3.    The property owner may sign a waiver and petition the city for the
repairs.The city will contract for the repairs and assess the property in
accordance with the city's assessment policy.



(Amended by Ord. #2015-14; adopted August 31, 2015)



CHAPTER 10:  CRIMES AND OFFENSES



Section



   1000.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   1005.   CURFEW.



   1006.   SOCIAL HOSTS.



   1010.   CRIMES AFFECTING PUBLIC OFFICERS.



   1015.   TRESPASS.



   1020.   LURKING, LOITERING, AND PROWLING.



   1025.   DANGEROUS WEAPONS; FIREARMS.



   1030.   PROSTITUTION.



   1035.   HUNTING; TRAPPING.



   1040.   HARASSMENT.



   1045.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES.



   1050.   STATE LAW OFFENSES.



SECTION 1000.  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



1000.005.  General.



The sales and possession of controlled substances and glue are regulated as
set forth below.



1000.010.  Definitions.



1.   “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance, or immediate
precursor in Schedules I through V of Minn. Stat. § 152.02.  The term does
not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors or
tobacco.



2.   “Deliver” means sell, offer for sale, barter, exchange,
administer, dispense, give away, distribute or supply in any other manner. 
The term deliver includes the attempt to do these acts as well as the actual
completed commission.



3.   “Patient” means:



   a.   the individual for whom a controlled substance is prescribed or
to whom a controlled substance is administered; or



   b.   the owner or the agent of the owner of any animal for which a
controlled substance is prescribed or to which a controlled substance is
administered.



4.   “Person” includes every individual, corporation, partnership and
association of one or more individuals.



5.   “Practitioner” means a person licensed by law to prescribe and
administer any of the controlled substances as defined above.



6.   “Pharmacist” means a person licensed and registered with the
Minnesota state board of pharmacy as a registered pharmacist.



7.   “Prescription” means a written or oral order by a practitioner to
a pharmacist for a controlled substance for a particular patient, which
specifies the date of its issue, the name and address of the practitioner,
the name and address of the patient (and, if the controlled substance is
prescribed for an animal, the species of the animal), the name and quantity
of the controlled substance prescribed, the directions for use of the
substance and in the case of a written order, the signature of the
practitioner.  An oral order by a practitioner for a controlled substance
must be promptly reduced to writing by the pharmacist.



8.   “Manufacturer” means a person or persons other than a pharmacist
who prepares controlled substances in dosage forms by mixing, compounding,
encapsulating, entableting, or other process.



9.   “Wholesaler” means a person or persons engaged in the business of
distributing controlled substances to persons included in any of the classes
named in section 1000.020.



10.   “Warehouseman” means a person or persons who stores controlled
substances, for others, and who has no control over the disposition of the
controlled substances except for the purpose of the storage.



1000.015.  Prohibited Acts.



1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section or state law, a person
must not:



   a.   manufacture, sell, offer to sell, give away, barter, deliver,
exchange or distribute; or possess with intent to manufacture, sell, give
away, barter, deliver, exchange or distribute, a controlled substance;



   b.   possess a controlled substance, except when the possession is
for one's own use and is authorized by law; or



   c.   manufacture, sell, transfer, or deliver, attempt or offer to
sell, transfer or deliver a noncontrolled substance in violation of section
1000.025.



2.   A person must not procure, attempt to procure, possess or have
control over a controlled substance by any of the following means:



   a.   fraud, deceit, misrepresentation or subterfuge;



   b.   using a false name, or giving a false address or false credit;



   c.   concealing a material fact;



   d.   forging or altering a prescription;



   e.   making a false statement in any prescription, order, report or
record relative to a controlled substance;



   f.   making, issuing or uttering any false or forged prescription; or



   g.   falsely assuming the title of, or falsely representing any
person to be, a manufacturer, wholesaler, warehouseman, pharmacist,
physician, doctor of osteopathy licensed to practice medicine, dentist,
podiatrist, veterinarian or other authorized person for the purpose of
obtaining a controlled substance



1000.020.  Exceptions.



Section 1000.015 of this ordinance does not apply to the following in the
ordinary course of their trade, business or profession; provided, however,
that this exception is not a defense to the doing of the acts prohibited in
section 1000.015:



1.   practitioners;



2.   pharmacists;



3.   manufacturers;



4.   pharmacists as manufacturers;



5.   wholesalers;



6.   warehousemen;



7.   persons engaged in transporting controlled substances as agent or
employee of a practitioner, pharmacist, manufacturer, warehouseman,
wholesaler, or common carrier;



8.   public officers or public employees in the performance of official
duties requiring possession or control of controlled substances, or persons
aiding these officers or employees in the performance of their duties;



9.   patients who procure, possess, or use a controlled substance in
accordance with terms of a prescription and prescribed treatment;



10.   persons who procure, posses or use controlled substances for the
purpose of lawful research, teaching or testing, and not for sale; and



11.   lawfully licensed and registered hospitals or bona fide institutions
where sick or injured persons are treated, or bona fide hospitals for the
treatment of animals.



1000.025.  Simulated Controlled Substances.



1.   Prohibition.  A person must not knowingly manufacture, sell,
transfer or deliver or attempt to sell, transfer or deliver a noncontrolled
substance upon:



   a.   the express representation that the noncontrolled substance is
a narcotic or nonnarcotic controlled substance;



   b.   the express representation that the substance is of such nature
or appearance that the recipient of the delivery will be able to sell,
transfer or deliver the substance as a controlled substance; or



   c.   under circumstances which would lead a reasonable person to
believe that the substance was a controlled substance.  Any of the following
factors may constitute relevant evidence:



      (1)   the noncontrolled substance was packaged in a manner
normally used for the illegal delivery of controlled substances;



      (2)   the delivery or attempted delivery included an exchange
of or demand for money or other valuable property as consideration for
delivery of the noncontrolled substance, and the amount of the consideration
was substantially in excess of the reasonable value of the noncontrolled
substance; or



      (3)   the physical appearance of the noncontrolled substance
is substantially identical to a specified controlled substance.



2.   Defense not allowed.  In any prosecution under this section, it is
no defense that the accused believed the noncontrolled substance to actually
be a controlled substance.



3.   Exception.  This section does not apply to the prescribing and
dispensing of placebos by licensed practitioners and licensed pharmacists.



1000.030.  Use of Original Containers and Labels Required.



A person who has possession of any controlled substance dispensed by a
pharmacist must keep the controlled substance in the original container in
which it was dispensed by the pharmacist until used in accordance with the
prescription, and must not remove the pharmacist's original label identifying
the prescription from the original container.



1000.035.  Self Service Display Prohibited.



Retail establishments must not sell a toxic substance as defined in Minn.
Stat. § 609.684 from a self-service display.



1000.040.  Confiscation.



Any controlled or noncontrolled substances found in the possession of a
person in violation of this section may be confiscated and forfeited to the
chief of police.



SECTION 1005.  CURFEW.



1005.005.  Findings and Purpose.



1.   In recent years, there has been a significant increase in juvenile
victimization and crime. At the same time, the crimes committed by and
against juveniles have become more violent. A significant percentage of
juvenile crime occurs during curfew hours.



2.   Because of their lack of maturity and experience, juveniles are
particularly susceptible to becoming victims of older perpetrators. The
younger a person is, the more likely he or she is to be a victim of crime.



3.   While parents have the primary responsibility to provide for the
safety and welfare of juveniles, the city of Minnetonka also has a
substantial interest in the safety and welfare of juveniles. Moreover, the
city has an interest in preventing juvenile crime, promoting parental
supervision, and providing for the well being of the general public.



4.   Hennepin county has adopted a county-wide curfew to reduce juvenile
victimization and crime and advance public safety, health, and general
welfare.



5.   The city adopts this ordinance to be consistent with the county-wide
curfew.



1005.010.  Definitions.



1.   “Juvenile” means a person under the age of 18. The term does not
include people under 18 who are married or have been legally emancipated.



2.   “Parent” means birth parents, adoptive parents, and stepparents.



3.   “Guardian” means an adult appointed under Minn. Stat. § 525.6155
or § 525.6165 who has the powers and responsibilities of a parent as defined
by Minn. Stat. § 525.619.



4.   “Responsible adult” means a person 18 years or older specifically
authorized by law or by a parent or guardian to have custody and control of a
juvenile.



5.   “Public place” means any place to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access and includes streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



6.   “Emergency” means a circumstance or combination of circumstances
requiring immediate action to prevent property damage, serious bodily injury
or loss of life.



7.   “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a
substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any body
part or organ.



8.   “Establishment” means any privately-owned place of business to
which the public is invited, including a place of amusement, entertainment,
or refreshment.



9.   “Proprietor” means an individual, firm, association, partnership,
or corporation operating, managing, or conducting an establishment. The term
includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.



1005.015.  Prohibited Acts.



1.   A juvenile under the age of 12 must not be present in a public place
or establishment within the city:



   a.   between 9:00 p.m. on a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and



   b.   between 10:00 p.m. on a Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on the
following day.



2.   A juvenile, age 12 through 14, must not be present in a public place
or establishment within the city:



   a.   between 10:00 p.m. on a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and



   b.   between 11:00 p.m. on a Friday or Saturday and 5:00 a.m. on the
following day.



3.   A juvenile, age 15 through 17, must not be present in a public place
or establishment within the city:



   a.   between 11:00 p.m. on a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; and



   b.   between 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on a Saturday or Sunday.



4.   A parent or guardian of a juvenile must not knowingly, or through
negligent supervision, permit the juvenile to be in a public place or
establishment within the city during the hours prohibited in paragraphs 1, 2,
and 3 of this section.



5.   A proprietor of an establishment within the city must not knowingly
permit a juvenile to remain in the establishment or on the establishment's
property during the hours prohibited in paragraphs 1, 2, and 3 of this
section.  If the proprietor is not present at the time of the curfew
violation, the responding officer must leave written notice of the violation
with an employee of the establishment. A copy of the written notice must be
served on the establishment's proprietor personally or by certified mail.



1005.016.    Limitation on Enforcement.



A law enforcement officer may not issue a citation, detain a child or take a
child into custody based on a violation of section 1005.015 (1), (2), or (3)
unless the officer reasonably believes, after speaking with the child and
considering the facts and surrounding circumstances:



   a.   that the child has violated section 1005.015 (1), (2), or (3);
and



   b.   that none of the defenses in section 1005.020 (1) apply.



(Added by Ord. #2006-15, adopted August 7, 2006)



1005.020.  Defenses.



1.   It is an affirmative defense for a juvenile to prove that:



   a.   the juvenile was accompanied by his/her parent, guardian, or
other responsible adult;



   b.   the juvenile was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was
going to or returning home from his/her place of employment;



   c.   the juvenile was involved in an emergency situation;



   d.   the juvenile was going to, attending, or returning home from an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity sponsored and
supervised by a public entity or a civic organization;



   e.   the juvenile was on an errand at the direction of a parent or
guardian;



   f.   the juvenile was exercising First Amendment rights protected by
the United States Constitution or Article I of the Constitution of the state
of Minnesota;



   g.   the juvenile was engaged in interstate travel; or



   h.   the juvenile was on the public right-of-way, boulevard, or
sidewalk abutting the property containing the juvenile’s residence or
abutting the neighboring property, structure, or residence.



2.   It is an affirmative defense for a proprietor of an establishment to
prove that:



   a.   the proprietor or employee reasonably and in good faith relied
upon a juvenile's representations of proof of age. Proof of age may be
established under Minn. Stat. § 340A.503, subd. 6, or other verifiable means
including school identification cards and birth certificates; or



   b.   the proprietor or employee promptly notified the responsible
police agency that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



1005.025.  Penalties.



1.   A violation of section 1005.015(1), (2), and (3) will be prosecuted
under Minn. Stat. §260B.235 and will be subject to the penalties provided
there.



2.   A violation of section 1005.015(4) or (5) is a misdemeanor and will
be punishable in accordance with state law.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-15, adopted August 7, 2006)



1005.030.  Preemption.



If this ordinance conflicts with a curfew ordinance adopted by Hennepin
county, the provisions of the Hennepin county ordinance will supersede the
conflicting provisions of this ordinance.



SECTION 1006.  SOCIAL HOSTS.



1006.05.    Findings and Purpose.



1.   The city council finds that:



   a.   Consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21 is
harmful to those persons and constitutes a potential threat to public health
from injuries related to alcohol consumption, such as alcohol overdose or
alcohol-related traffic collisions.



   b.   Alcohol is also an addictive drug which, if used irresponsibly,
could have drastic effects on those who use it as well as those who are
affected by the actions of an irresponsible user.



   c.   As a result, gatherings held on private or public property
where alcohol is possessed or consumed by persons under the age of 21 should
be prevented as much as possible.



   d.   Gatherings involving underage possession and consumption often
occur outside the presence of parents or other responsible adults.  However,
there are times when a parent or other adult is present and condones the
activity, and in some circumstances provides the alcohol.



   e.   Although furnishing alcohol to an underage person is a crime,
it is difficult to prove, and an ordinance is necessary to help further
combat underage consumption.



   f.   A deterrent effect will be created by holding a person
criminally responsible for hosting a gathering where underage possession or
consumption occurs.



2.   The purpose of this section is to discourage underage possession and
consumption of alcohol, even if done within the confines of a private
residence, and to hold persons criminally responsible who host gatherings
where persons under 21 years of age possess or consume alcohol, regardless of
whether the person hosting the gathering supplied the alcohol or was present.



3.   The city council intends that this ordinance should not target
parents who may have alcoholic beverages on their premises but who have
issued a standing order that alcohol is not to be consumed by underage
persons on those premises.



1006.010.  Definitions.



For purposes of this section, the following terms have the meanings given:



1.   "Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of
wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including
dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process
produced.



2.   "Alcoholic beverage" means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and
every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is
fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined
with other substances.



3.   "Gathering" means a group of three or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



4.   "Host" means to aid, conduct, sponsor, organize, supervise, control,
or allow a gathering.



5.   "Parent" means a person having the following relationship to a
juvenile:



   a.   a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent;



   b.   a legal guardian; or



   c.   a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a
court.



6.   "Person" means an individual, partnership, co-partnership,
corporation, or an association of one or more individuals. "Person" does not
include a city, county, or state agency.



7.   "Premises" means any location, including a home, yard, farm, field,
land, apartment, condominium, hotel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall
or meeting room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private,
whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for a party or other social function, and whether
owned, leased, rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.



8.   "Underage person" means an individual under 21 years of age.



1006.015.   Prohibited Acts. 



1.    It is unlawful for a person to host or allow a gathering on any
premises if:



   a.   the person knows that alcohol or alcoholic beverages will be
present; and



   b.   the person knows that an underage person will attend, or is
likely to attend; and



   c.   the person fails to take reasonable steps to prevent the
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person; and



   d.   an underage person consumes an alcoholic beverage, or possesses
an alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it, at the gathering.



2.    Examples of reasonable steps include:



   a.   directing, on a one-time basis or as a standing order, that no
consumption of alcohol and alcoholic beverages is allowed; or



   b.    controlling access to alcohol and alcoholic beverages; or



   c.   checking identification of attendees to determine age; or



   d.   supervising the activities of underage persons at the gathering
either in person or through a responsible adult.



3.   A person is not criminally responsible under this ordinance if the
person does not know that a gathering will occur, or does not know that
alcoholic beverages will be present, or does not know that an underage person
will be or is likely to be present. However, if a person has the knowledge
specified in paragraph 1 above, a person who hosts a gathering does not have
to be present at the gathering to be criminally responsible.



4.   A person is criminally responsible for violating paragraph 1 above if
the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires with or
otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.



1006.020.   Exceptions.



1.   This section does not apply to conduct of an underage person that is
permitted by his or her parent and occurs in the parent's household.



2.   This section does not apply to a legally protected religious
observance.



3.   This section does not apply when an underage person is lawfully in
possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course and scope of
employment.



4.   This section does not apply to the holder of a liquor license issued
under section 600 of this code, but it does apply to a person who hosts a
gathering at such a liquor establishment.



(Added by Ord. 2009-06, adopted May 18, 2009)



SECTION 1010.  CRIMES AFFECTING PUBLIC OFFICERS.



1010.005.  Obstructing an Officer.



A person must not wilfully resist, delay, obstruct, or interfere with a city
officer or employee in discharging or attempting to discharge a lawful duty
of the person’s office.



1010.010.  Disobeying an Officer.



A person must not wilfully fail or refuse to obey a reasonable order of a
firefighter or police officer given in the lawful discharge of duties.



1010.015.  Threatening an Officer.



A person must not directly or indirectly threaten or intimidate a city
officer, city employee, or a person authorized by law to hear or determine a
matter, with intent to induce him/her to act in a particular manner desired
by the person.  A person must not have on his/her person a dangerous weapon
or firearm as defined in section 1025.005 while in the presence of a city
officer or employee who is lawfully performing his/her duties, except that
this provision does not apply to a person who: (a) is showing or transferring
the weapon or firearm to a police officer as part of an investigation; (b) is
lawfully in possession of a weapon or firearm in the scope of his/her
employment duties; or (c) has a lawful permit to carry a weapon.



1010.020.  False Information to Police.



A person must not give any false information, whether written or oral, to a
police officer conducting a lawful police investigation or field inquiry when
the person knew or had reason to know, that the information was false at the
time it was given.



1010.025.  False Information.



A person must not give a false name, address, date of birth, social security
number, or other identifying data to a law enforcement officer lawfully
executing his/her duties, with the intent of misleading the officer as to the
person's identity or residence.



1010.030.  Deer Management Program.



1.   A person must not obstruct or interfere with the city’s deer
management program or threaten, intimidate, obstruct or interfere with an
authorized city employee or agent in implementing the deer management program.



2.   A person must not touch, damage, manipulate, disengage, make
inoperative, or otherwise tamper with a deer trap or other deer removal
equipment or material that is being used as part of the city’s deer
management program.



3.   A person must not be within a deer management area.  A “deer
management area” is a parcel of privately-owned land where a deer trap,
deer removal equipment, or other material being used as a part of the
city’s deer management program is located, or on publicly-owned property,
the area within 100 feet of a deer trap, deer removal equipment, or other
material being used as a part of the city’s deer management program.  If
proven by a preponderance of the evidence, the following are affirmative
defenses to a violation of this section:



   a.   the person was on land which he/she owns or rents;



   b.   the person was lawfully on a public right-of-way;



   c.   the person was in the act of attempting to contact an occupant
of the premises;



   d.   the person was a law enforcement official, firefighter, public
utility employee, or delivery person acting in the normal course of assigned
duties, or a physician, nurse, or other person in the act of providing health
care services to human beings or domestic animals; or



   e.   the person, within ten days of being informed by a police
officer that the person was determined to be within a deer management area,
provided written proof to the officer of permission to be within the deer
management area.  “Permission to be within the deer management area” is
written confirmation from the city or its authorized agent that the person
had the express permission to be in the deer management area, or written
confirmation from the owner or renter of the property that at the time of the
violation the person had the express permission to be there.



   Evidence of any of these affirmative defenses may not be admitted at
trial unless notice is given to the prosecution before the pretrial
hearing.  A person must not provide false proof of permission to be within a
deer management area to a police officer.



4.   A person must not go into or be in an area that the city has closed
to the public as part of the deer management program if the city has provided
notice by conspicuously posted signs or other reasonable means.



1010.035.  Penalty.



A violation of a provisions of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with section 1310.010.



SECTION 1015.  TRESPASS.



1015.005.  Trespass.



1.   A person must not enter or be on the land or premises of another
person, or enter or be within a structure, facility, or enclosure owned by
another person, without legitimate claim of right, in the following
situations:



   a.   when the person refuses to leave upon the oral or written
request of the lawful possessor or the possessor’s agent;



   b.   when the person has been informed orally or in writing by the
lawful possessor or the possessor’s agent that the person is not allowed
upon the land or premises;



   c.   when the structure, facility, or enclosure is locked; or



   d.   when the person's entry is prohibited by conspicuously posted
signs, such as “no trespassing,” “authorized personnel only,” or
“employees only.”



2.   The lawful possessor of land may appoint any Minnetonka police
officer as an agent for the purpose of making a request to leave.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-18, adopted December 3, 2012)



1015.010.  Building Trespass.



A person must not climb upon a building or structure without the express
permission of the person in charge of the building or structure.



1015.015.  Other Acts of Trespass.



A person must not:



1.   permit animals or fowl under his control to go on private property
owned by someone else;



2.   enter on someone else's property with the intent to take or damage
any fruit, vegetable, flower, tree, shrub or other vegetation growing there,
without the consent of the owner or occupant;



3.   go into, be on, or tamper with a motor vehicle, without the
permission of the owner or his/her agent;



4.   deposit or place on someone else's property objects or materials not
requested or permitted by the owner or occupant, such as dirt, tree stumps,
or branches and other debris; or



5.   enter or be on the residential property of another after sunset and
before sunrise.  If proven by a preponderance of the evidence, the following
are affirmative defenses to a violation of this subparagraph:



   a.   the person was in the act of attempting to contact an occupant
of the premises;



   b.   the person was a law enforcement official, firefighter, public
utility employee, or delivery person acting in the normal course of assigned
duties, or a physician, nurse, or other person in the act of providing health
care services to human beings or domestic animals; or



   c.   the person had the consent of an occupant of the premises. 
Consent must be shown by providing, within ten days of being informed by a
police officer that the person was determined to be in violation of this
section, to the officer written proof from an occupant of the premises that
the person had the express or implied permission of that occupant to be on
the property at the time of the violation.



   Evidence of any of these affirmative defenses may not be admitted at
trial unless notice is given to the prosecution before the pretrial
hearing.  A person must not provide false proof of permission to be on
residential property to a police officer.



SECTION 1020.  LURKING, LOITERING, AND PROWLING.



1020.005.  Loitering - Circumstances Cause Alarm.



1.   Prohibition.  A person must not lurk, loiter, or prowl in any place,
at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals, under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity.



2.   Circumstances causing alarm.  Among the circumstances that may be
considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the
person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer, refuses to
identify him/herself or endeavors to conceal him/herself or an object.



3.   Authority to detain.  A police officer may stop and briefly detain a
person suspected of violating paragraph 1 if the person's behavior reasonably
causes suspicion of criminal activity.  The officer's reasonable suspicion
must be based on objective, articulable facts and reasonable inferences drawn
from all the circumstances surrounding the person's behavior.



4.   Opportunity to dispel alarm.  Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer must, prior to any
arrest for a violation of paragraph 1, allow the person an opportunity to
dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him to
identify him/herself and explain his/her presence and conduct.  The person
may identity him/herself by presenting any of the following:



   a.   a state-issued identification card or driver's license
containing the persons' photograph;



   b.   an employer-issued identification card which verifies the
person's employment and includes the person's photograph;



   c.   a currently valid passport;



   d.   a certified copy of the person's birth certificate; or



   e.   verification of the person's identity by another person who can
establish his/her own identity by one of the documents listed above.



   An explanation of the person's presence and conduct will be sufficient
to dispel alarm if it shows that the person was engaging in, and planning to
continue engaging in, lawful activity consistent with his/her actions and all
the circumstances surrounding his/her behavior.



5.   Requisites for conviction.  A person may not be convicted of
violating paragraph 1 if:



   a.   no police officer gave the person the opportunity provided in
subdivision 4 to dispel the alarm created by his/her actions; or



   b.   the finder-of-fact determines that the police officer should
have accepted the person's explanation as sufficient to dispel alarm.



1020.010.  Loitering: Intent to Commit Crime.



A person must not in any public or private place lurk, loiter, prowl, lie in
wait or be concealed with intent to commit any act prohibited by law.



1020.015.  Loitering: Obstructing Public Passage.



A person must not loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public property,
private sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, parking lot, mall,
or other portion of private property open for public use, so as to
unreasonably block, obstruct, or hinder free passage of the public.  Also, a
person must not unreasonably block, obstruct, or hinder free access to the
entrance of a building or part of a building open to the public without
consent of the owner or occupant.  A person may not be arrested or convicted
under this provision until after a police officer has informed the person
that his/her action violates this ordinance and has asked the person to move
to a location, if one is available, that would not violate this ordinance.



1020.020.  Loitering: Signs Prohibiting.



A person must not loiter, stand, sit or lie for a period longer than 10
minutes in any area where a sign prohibiting loitering has been posted.

(Amended by Ord. #2004-010, adopted April 12, 2004)



1020.025.  Penalty.



A violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with section 1310.010.



SECTION 1025.  DANGEROUS WEAPONS; FIREARMS.



1025.005.  Definitions.



For purposes of this section, the following terms have the meanings given.



1.   “Dangerous weapon” means any of the following objects:



   a.   dagger, dirk or stilleto;



   b.   sabre or sword;



   c.   switchblade knife, spring blade knife or any knife the blade of
which can be opened by gravity, a flick of the wrist, or some type of
mechanism;



   d.   blackjack, sand club, sap, sap gloves, pipe club, bludgeon,
mace club;



   e.   chain club or chains assembled or used as an assault weapon;



   f.   artificial knuckles or other objects designed to be worn over
the fist or knuckles;



   g.   throwing devices with cutting or pointed edges;



   h.   Japanese or other night sticks, nut cracker, nunchaku, chaka,
flail, karate stick, morning star;



   i.   sling shots;



   j.   spears, lances; and



   k.   bow and arrow, blow gun.



2.   “Explosive” means an “explosive device” or incendiary
device” as defined in Minn. Stat. § 299F.72.



3.   “Firearm” means a weapon from which is propelled a missile,
projectile, or bullet by means of explosives, gas or compressed air, springs,
or elastic materials and includes air and “BB” guns.



4.   “Minor” means a person who is less than 18 years old.



5.   “Public place” means an area, building or structure that is open
and accessible to the public.



6.   “Replica firearm” means a device or object that is a facsimile or
toy version of, and reasonably appears to be, a pistol, revolver, shotgun,
sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or any other firearm.



1025.010.  Sale to Minors.



A person must not sell or transfer a dangerous weapon or explosive to a minor
unless the minor's parent or guardian is present at the time of sale or
transfer and gives the person his/her express written consent to the proposed
transaction.



1025.015.  Carrying by Intoxicated Persons or Those Under the Influence of
Controlled Substances.



A person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance must not carry a dangerous weapon or explosive upon his/her person
or in a vehicle.



1025.020.  Possession Prohibited.



1.   Unless permitted by the chief of police, a person must not have a
dangerous weapon or explosive in his/her possession, custody or control in a
public place, in or on private property of another without their permission,
or in a motor vehicle, except in compliance with the following.



   a.   A dangerous weapon or explosive may be transported by a person
directly to or from his/her place of business, the place of purchase, a gun
dealer, a gunsmith, a place of target practice, a gun club, or his/her home.



   b.   A dangerous weapon or explosive may be transported only if it
is:



      (1)   in a closed and fastened container or securely tied
package;



      (2)   in the locked trunk of a vehicle that is used or, if the
vehicle does not have a trunk, in the farthest rear portion of the vehicle in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers; and



      (3)   unloaded, disassembled, or otherwise rendered incapable
of immediate operation, if possible.



2.   The presence of a dangerous weapon or explosive in a passenger
automobile, van, pick-up truck, or sport utility vehicle permits the fact
finder to infer knowing possession of the dangerous weapon or explosive by
the driver or person in control of the vehicle when the weapon or explosive
was in the vehicle.  The inference does not apply:



   a.   to a licensed operator of a vehicle who is at the time
operating it for hire in the lawful and proper pursuit of the operator’s
trade;



   b.   to any person in the vehicle if one of them legally possesses a
dangerous weapon or explosive; or



   c.   when the dangerous weapon or explosive is concealed on the
person of one of the occupants.



3.   A person must not possess, carry, transport, or control a knife or
bladed instrument capable of cutting, stabbing or injuring while on school
property, in a school bus, or on public streets or sidewalks adjacent to a
school.  This prohibition does not apply when knives and bladed instruments
are used as part of an instructional activity carried on in the school, used
in the preparation or consumption of food in a lunchroom or kitchen, or used
as a tool by a person authorized to perform construction, repair or
maintenance services on school property.



1025.025.  Use; Discharge.



1.   A person must not in any public or private place use a dangerous
weapon or explosive or discharge a firearm if the firearm is loaded with
powder, a blank cartridge, explosive, bullet, pellet, or shot, without first
obtaining a permit from the chief of police as set forth in section 1025.030.



2.   The prohibition in paragraph 1 does not apply to:



   a.   licensed peace officers and other personnel authorized by the
chief of police; and



   b.   people lawfully acting in the defense of themselves or others;
and



   c. people engaged in bow fishing on Lake Minnetonka in compliance with
ordinances of the Lake Minnetonka Conservation District and state law.



(Amended by Ord. 2013-13, adopted August 5, 2013)



1025.030.  Permit Application, Granting and Revocation.



1.   Permit issuance. A person may apply to the chief of police for a
permit to possess, use, or transport a dangerous weapon or explosive or to
discharge firearm contrary to the provisions of section 1025.020 and
1025.025.  An application for a permit must be in writing and must state the
reason for requesting the permit, the period for which permit is desired, the
type of dangerous weapon, explosive, or firearm involved, the proposed
activity or use, and any other information that the chief of police deems
useful to review the application.  The chief will issue a permit only if
he/she determines that the proposed use is for a lawful purpose and will be
carried out in a safe manner.  The chief of police may impose conditions to
ensure the lawful and safe use of the permit and may specify the firearm,
explosive, or dangerous weapon to be used and the times, places and
circumstances of use.  Permits are usable only by the person to whom issued.



2.   Ineligible people. A permit under this section may not be issued if
the chief of police determines that the applicant is one of the following
categories of people:



   a.   those listed in Minn. Stat. § 624.713;



   b.   a person who presently has a court restraining order against
him/her, issued because of assaultive, aggressive or threatening behavior;



   c.   a person who is presently on court-ordered probation as the
result of a criminal conviction involving assault or disorderly conduct; or



   d.   a person who has, within the preceding two years, handled
firearms in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner or in a manner that
unreasonably alarms any person.



3.   Permit revocation.



   a.   A permit issued under this section may be revoked if the chief
of police determines that:



      (1)   the terms and conditions of the permit are being or have
been violated;



      (2)   continued use of the permit is or may be a danger to
public safety or any property;



      (3)   the permit holder has used the permit to violate any law
or city ordinance;



      (4)   the permit holder falsified any information or omitted
material information in the application; or



      (5)   the permit holder is or has become one of the persons
listed in subparagraph 2 above.



   b.   The chief of police may revoke the permit by giving written
notice to the permit holder.  The revocation will be effective upon delivery
of the written notice to the address of the permit holder set forth in the
permit application.



   c.   A permit holder aggrieved by a revocation of a permit may
appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.



   d.   A permit revoked under this ordinance will remain revoked
during the pendency of an appeal.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-19, effective January 29, 2016)



1025.035.  Confiscation.



The chief of police may confiscate and dispose of a dangerous weapon or
explosive worn, carried, possessed, used or handled in violation of any
ordinance or state statute.  The chief of police may provide for its sale,
destruction, or other disposition.



1025.040.  Civil Liability.



Nothing in this section authorizes the use of dangerous weapons, explosives,
and firearms, in a manner that will endanger a human being or property, and
no permit issued relieves a person from civil liability for damage resulting
from use of the permit.



1025.045.  Replica Firearms.



A person must not display, exhibit, brandish, or otherwise employ a replica
firearm in a threatening manner if, in doing so, the person either (1) causes
or attempts to cause fear in another person or (2) acts in reckless disregard
of the risk of causing fear in another person.



1025.050.  Penalty.



A violation of a provision of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with section 1310.010.



SECTION 1030.  PROSTITUTION.



1030.005.  Definitions.



For the purposes of this section the following terms having the meanings
given.



1.   “Prostitute” means an individual who engages in prostitution.



2.   “Prostitution” means engaging or offering or agreeing to engage
for hire or financial remuneration in sexual penetration or sexual contact.



3.   “Sexual penetration” means sexual intercourse, cunnilingus,
fellatio, anal intercourse, or any intrusion however slight into the genital
or anal openings of an individual's body by a part of another individual's
body or an object used for the purpose of satisfying sexual impulses. 
Emission of semen is not necessary.



4.   “Sexual contact” means any of the following acts, if the acts can
reasonably be construed as being for the purpose of satisfying the
individual's sexual impulses:



   a.   the intentional touching by an individual of a prostitute's
intimate body parts; or



   b.   the intentional touching by a prostitute of another
individual's intimate body parts.



1030.010.  Prohibitions.



A person must not:



1.   engage in prostitution;



2.   receive profit, knowing or having reason to know that it is from
prostitution or the promotion of prostitution;



3.   solicit or induce an individual to practice prostitution;



4.   solicit for a prostitute; direct, take or transport another to a
prostitute or bring a prostitute to a person, for the purpose of committing
an act of prostitution; or



5.   hire or offer or agree to hire another person to engage in sexual
penetration or sexual contact.



1030.015.  Penalty.



A violation of a provision of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with section 1310.010.



SECTION 1035.  HUNTING; TRAPPING.



1035.005.  Hunting.



1.   Purpose.  The council of the city of Minnetonka finds that as a
result of the increasing density of population within the city it is contrary
to the general welfare to permit the hunting of game within the city limits.



2.   Hunting prohibited.  A person must not hunt game at any time within
the city limits.



1035.010.  Trapping.



1.   Purpose.  The council of the city of Minnetonka finds it is in the
public interest and for a public purpose to protect wild animals and that
trapping creates a threat to the public health and safety.



2.   Definitions.



   a.   “Trap” means any mechanical device, snare, artificial
light, net, bird line, ferret, hawk, vehicle or contrivance used to trap,
catch, snare, kill or otherwise restrain the free movement of any animal,
wildlife or bird.



   b.   “Trapping” means the setting, laying or otherwise using a
trap to trap, catch, snare, kill or otherwise restrain the free movement of
animals, wildlife or birds.



3.   Trapping prohibited.  Trapping anywhere in the city of Minnetonka is
prohibited.



4.   Exceptions.  The prohibition in paragraph 3 does not apply to:



   a.   people who use a trap on their own private property to prevent
an unsafe condition or the waste or destruction of their property when in
compliance with state law;



   b.   representatives of the city, county or state who may in the
course of their duties be required to use a trap for humane or other
authorized purposes; and



   c.   scientists intending to identify animals, wildlife or birds and
then return them to their natural environment.



1035.015.  Penalty.



A violation of a provision of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with section 1310.010.



SECTION 1040.  HARASSMENT.



1040.005.  Prohibition.



A person must not engage, aid, abet or conspire in any of the following
conduct:



1.   making a telephone call or any other form of electronic communication
which is received by a person or persons within or outside of the city,
whether or not conversation ensues, with the intent to harass, abuse, or
intimidate the recipient of the call or message, or someone known by the
recipient;



2.   mailing, delivering or causing the delivery by any means, including
electronically, of a letter, card, telegram, message, package, or other
tangible material to a person or persons within or outside the city, with the
intent to harass, abuse, or intimidate the recipient of the letter, telegram,
message, package, or other object, or someone known by the recipient;



3.   entering the dwelling or upon the property of another within the city
without claim of right or consent of one who has the right to give consent to
the entry, with the intent to harass, abuse, or intimidate the owner or
occupant of the dwelling or property; or



4.   any conduct, other than that set forth in paragraphs 1 through 3
above, directed toward any person or persons within or outside of the city,
carried out with the intent to harass, abuse, or intimidate the recipient of
the conduct or someone known by the recipient and that has, or is intended to
have, a substantial adverse effect on the safety, security, or privacy of the
recipient or someone known by the recipient.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006)



1040.010.  Definition.



For the purpose of this chapter, conduct carried out with the intent to
harass, abuse, or intimidate means conduct that under the circumstances could
reasonably be expected to cause in another those feelings, as commonly
defined, and that does cause those feelings in the recipient or someone known
by the recipient.



1040.015.  Applicability.



For the purpose of this section, the prohibited conduct may be prosecuted in
the city if the prohibited conduct either occurred, or was directed toward
someone residing, within the city.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006)



1040.020.  Penalty.



A violation of a provision of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with section 1310.010.



SECTION 1045.  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES.



1045.005.  Disorderly Conduct.



1.   A person must not, in any public or private place, engage in, offer
or threaten to engage in, or congregate because of, any riot, fight, brawl,
tumultuous conduct, act of violence, or any other conduct which disturbs the
peace and quiet of another except for participating in a planned and
organized athletic contest.



2.   A person must not disturb or disrupt a lawful assembly or meeting.



1045.010.  Invasion of Privacy.



A person must not, in any public or private place, with intent to intrude
upon or interfere with the privacy of any individual, enter a toilet or
dressing room designated for the use of the opposite sex or look into any
window or other opening.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-16, adopted May 19, 2008)



1045.015.  Public Indecency.



1.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit public indecency
in order to deter criminal activity, to promote societal order and public
health, and to protect children.



2.   Findings. The council makes the following findings regarding the need
to prohibit public indecency:



   a.   Public indecency can increase the incidence of criminal
activity, including prostitution, disorderly conduct and sexual assault;



   b.   Public indecency can expose children to an unhealthy and
nurtureless environment;



   c.   Public indecency can present health concerns in places of
public accommodation and other public settings;



   d.   Public indecency can have a negative impact on the value and
marketability of property; and



   e.   Public indecency can disrupt the orderly operation of public
events and public accommodations, causing societal disorder.



3.   Definitions.  Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
words below are defined for the purpose of this section as follows:



   a.   "Nudity" means:



      1)   the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, pubic area, or the female breast below the top of
the areola; or



      2)   a state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.



   b.   "Person" means a natural person 12 years of age or older.



   c.   "Public place" means a location frequented by the public, or
where the public is present or likely to be present, or where a person may
reasonably be expected to be observed by members of the public.  Public
place includes streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial
establishments (whether for profit or not-for-profit and whether open to the
public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership
requirement), bottle clubs, hotels, motels, restaurants, night clubs, country
clubs, cabarets and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social,
fraternal or similar organization.



4.    Public indecency prohibited. A person who knowingly or intentionally
in a public place:



   a.   appears in a state of nudity;



   b.   shows his covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state;



   c.   fondles the genitals of himself or herself; or



   d.   fondles the genitals of another person,



   commits public indecency and is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
under Minnesota law.



5.   Exceptions. Division 4. above does not apply to:



   a.   premises used solely as a private residence whether permanent
or temporary in nature unless a person on or in those premises may reasonably
be expected to be observed by members of the public;



   b.   enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for
sleeping accommodations if the activity described in division 4. is not
exchanged for money or other consideration;



   c.   doctor's offices, portions of hospitals and similar places in
which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of
the home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally protected in it;



   d.   a modeling or art class operated by (1) a proprietary school,
licensed by the state; a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or (2) a private college or university that
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation or an accredited private college;



   e.   a theatrical production performed in a theater, by a
professional or amateur theatrical or musical company, which has serious
artistic merit; or



   f.   a woman breastfeeding a child.



6.   Limited exception. Division 4.a. above does not apply to enclosed
single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex functional showers, or
locker and dressing room facilities,



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; Ord. # 2003-24, adopted
September 29, 2003; former section repealed and new section added by Ord.
#2003-05, adopted March 17, 2003)



1045.016. Misuse of Public Restrooms and Changing Areas.



1. Findings.   The council makes the following findings regarding the need
to prohibit the misuse of public restrooms and changing areas:



   a.    Public sexual activity is often preceded by physical or visual
intrusions into a toilet stall.



   b.    Physical or visual intrusions into toilet stalls may be
facilitated by the assumption of unusual positions on fixtures.



   c.    Public sexual activity can offend inadvertent witnesses.



   d.    Public sexual activity can deter the legitimate use of public
spaces.



   e.    Public sexual activity may be related to the spread of
sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS.



   f.    Discarded used condoms, lubricant containers, and other
paraphernalia which may be left behind after public sexual activity are
unattractive and potentially hazardous.



   g.    Public sexual activity can attract a hostile audience,
creating a risk of violent crime such as assault and robbery, as well as
nonviolent crime such as blackmail.



   h.    Existing statutes and ordinances which require proof of a
specific intent to invade privacy can be difficult to enforce and do not
adequately address physical or visual intrusions into stalls, which are
legitimate subjects of regulation irrespective of the perpetrator's specific
intent.



   i.    The use of public restroom and changing area fixtures for
purposes other than that for which they are intended poses a risk of damage
to the fixtures.



2. Purpose.   The purpose of this section is to protect the privacy of
persons using public restrooms and changing areas, to deter public indecency,
and to prevent damage to property.



3. Definitions.  Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words
below are defined for the purpose of this section as follows:



   a. "Changing stall" - a partially enclosed and closable area within a
public changing area intended to provide an individual privacy while changing
clothes. "Changing stall" does not include areas within a public changing
area designed for the use of more than one person at a time, or which are
designated by sign as being for the use of families.



   b. "City-owned public restroom or changing area" - a public restroom or
changing area which is located on property either wholly or partially owned
by the city of Minnetonka, or which is located in a facility operated by the
city.



   c. "Person in need of assistance" - a person who because of age,
physical or mental infirmity, or other physical, mental, or emotional
dysfunction, has an impaired ability to provide adequately for the
individual's own care without assistance.



   d. "Public changing area" - an area made available to the public for
the purpose of changing clothes, including changing areas located on either
public or private property.



   e. "Public restroom" - any restroom available to the use of the public,
including restrooms located on either public or private property.  "Public
restroom" also includes a portable toilet enclosure available to the use of
the public.



   f. "Toilet stall" - a partially enclosed and closable area surrounding
a toilet.  "Toilet stall" also includes permanent public restrooms in which
there is one toilet, where there is no separate closable area around the
toilet within the restroom.



4. Intrusion into toilet or changing stall prohibited.  A person who
intentionally, in a public restroom or public changing area:



   a.   places the person's body or any body part into a toilet stall
or changing stall occupied by another;



   b.   is present in a toilet stall, changing stall, or portable
toilet enclosure in which another person is present; or



   c.   looks into a toilet stall or changing stall occupied by
another, commits the offense of intrusion into a toilet or changing stall and
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under Minnesota law.



5. Exceptions to prohibition of intrusion into toilet stall or changing stall.



   a.    Subdivision 4 above does not apply to an individual who is
assisting a person in need of assistance in a normal use of a toilet stall or
changing stall.



   b.    Subdivision 4(c) does not apply to an individual who looks
into a toilet stall or changing stall for 2 seconds or less solely for the
purpose of determining whether a stall is occupied.



6.  Misuse of public restroom or changing area fixtures. A person who, in a
public restroom or changing area:



   a.   stands or climbs upon any fixture; or



   b.   sits upon a fixture not intended to be sat upon,



commits the offense of misuse of public restroom or changing area fixtures.



7. Trespass on public restrooms.



   a.    When there is probable cause to believe that a person has
violated Section 1045.16 in a city-owned public restroom or changing area, a
police officer may provide the person a written notice providing that the
person is not to enter any city-owned public restroom or changing area for
one year.



   b.    A person who enters a city-owned public restroom or changing
area within one year after having received a written notice described in
Subdivision 7 (a) commits the offense of trespassing upon a city-owned public
restroom or changing area and is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under
Minnesota law.



8.  General Exceptions.



   a.    Subdivisions 4 and 6 do not apply to law enforcement officers
engaging in law enforcement duties and emergency medical personnel engaging
in the provision of emergency medical services.



   b.    Subdivisions 4 and 6 do not apply to persons engaged in the
cleaning or maintenance of public restrooms or public changing areas in the
course of their employment.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012; added by Ord. 2008-11,
adopted March 24, 2008)



1045.020.  Sexual Conduct.



A person must not, in a public place, engage in or attempt to engage in
sexual conduct as defined in this section 1145.020. For purposes of this
section, "sexual conduct" means human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or
any touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or
female, or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the
same or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-05, effective June 3, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2008-12;
adopted March 24, 2008)



1045.025.  Indecent Solicitation.



A person must not, in any public place, solicit or attempt to solict another
to engage in sexual conduct as defined in section 1045.020 or conduct that
involves the touching of the genitals, buttocks or female breast for the
purpose of sexual arousal, gratification, annoyance or offense. This section
is not applicable if the proposed sexual conduct is consensual and is to
occur in a private place and the solicitation does not occur in the presence
of a minor. For purposes of this section, a "public restroom" and a "public
changing area" as defined in city code section 1045.16 are not private places.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-05, effective June 3, 2017; Amended by Ord. #2008-12,
adopted March 24, 2008)



1045.030.  Liquor in Public Places.



A person must not do the following acts within or on a motor vehicle on a
public street or highway, on a parking area open to the public, or on private
property without the written consent of the owner or occupant or oral consent
if the owner or occupant is present:



1.   drink an alcoholic beverage; or



2.   possess on the person, or within immediate reach of the person, an
open or unsealed article which contains an alcoholic beverage.  Location in
the glove compartment is within the immediate reach of people sitting in the
front seat of a motor vehicle.



This prohibition does not apply to park property where the consumption of
alcoholic beverages has been permitted by the city, except that it does apply
within or on a motor vehicle on such park property.



1045.035.  Defacement of Buildings or Places.



A person must not mark with paint or other substance, post handbills on, or
in any other manner deface or damage any building, fence, pole, tree, lawn or
fixture in the city of Minnetonka.



1045.040.  Improper Conduct Affecting Schools.



1.   A person must not disturb or interrupt the peace and order of a
school while in session.



2.   A person must not trespass in or on any school by remaining on the
school premises after being ordered to leave by a school administrator or
teacher.



3.   A person who has been ordered to leave school premises must not
re-enter those premises without the written permission of an authorized
school official.



4.   A person must not loiter on any school ground or in any school
building or structure.



1045.045.  Fraudulent Identification.



A person must not identify him/herself by using a name, address, social
security number, date of birth, or other identifying data that is not his/her
own when applying for credit or returning goods to a business establishment.



1045.050.  Fireworks.



Except as otherwise permitted by state law, a person must not possess, sell,
offer or expose for sale, use, or explode any fireworks as defined in Minn.
Stat. § 624.20.



1045.055.  Tampering with Investigation Scene.



A person must not enter an area that has been designated by a peace officer
or city code enforcement official as the scene of an official investigation,
unless the person has been given permission by a designating official.  An
area is the scene of an official investigation if a peace officer or city
code enforcement official has posted or installed a prominent notice, tape,
or other device that clearly gives notice to a reasonable person that the
area is under investigation.



1045.056.  Use of City Identity.



Except as authorized by the city manager or the manager's designee, a person
must not use the name, logo, or other identifying mark of the city of
Minnetonka, or of any department, facility, or program of the city, in an
advertisement, correspondence, web page, social media page, or any other
item, in such a manner that the item appears to a reasonable person to be a
publication, act, document, or other item of the city.



(Added by Ord. 2011-05, adopted May 2, 2011)



1045.060.  Penalty.



A violation of a provision of this section is a misdemeanor, punishable in
accordance with section 1310.010.



SECTION 1050.  STATE LAW OFFENSES.



1050.005.  Criminal Code Provisions Adopted.



The provisions of Minn. Stat. chapter 609 specified below are adopted by
reference and made a part of this code, except that the violation of each is
a misdemeanor.



1.   Section 609.17, “Attempts.”



2.   Section 609.175, “Conspiracy.”



3.   Section 609.21, “Criminal Vehicular Homicide and Injury.”



4.   Section 609.24, “Simple Robbery.”



5.   Section 609.27, “Coercion.”



6.   Section 609.275, “Attempt to Coerce.”



7.   Section 609.321, “Prostitution; Definitions.”



8.   Section 609.322, “Solicitation, Inducement and Promotion of
Prostitution.”



9.   Section 609.323, “Receiving Profit Derived From Prostitution.”



10.   Section 609.324, “Other Prohibited Acts.”



11.   Section 609.325, “Defenses.”



12.   Section 609.326, “Evidence.”



13.   Section 609.33, “Disorderly House.”



14.   Section 609.377, “Malicious Punishment of a Child.”



15.   Section 609.378, “Neglect or Endangerment of a Child.”



16.   Section 609.379, “Permitted Actions.”



17.   Section 609.415, “Crimes Affecting Public Officer or Employee;
Definitions”, with the addition of the following category to subd. 1(1):



   (g)   a member of a municipal board or commission, whether appointed
or elected.



18.   Section 609.42, “Bribery.”



19.   Section 609.43, “Misconduct of Public Officer or Employee.”



20.   Section 609.455, “Permitting False Claims against Government.”



21.   Section 609.465, “Presenting False Claims to Public Officer or
Body”



22.   Section 609.47, “Interference with Property in Official Custody.”



23.   Section 609.485, “Escape From Custody.”



24.   Section 609.487, “Fleeing a Police Officer in a Motor Vehicle.”



25.   Section 609.495, “Aiding an Offender.”



26.   Section 609.498, “Tampering with a Witness.”



27.   Section 609.52, “Theft.”



28.   Section 609.521, “Possession of Shoplifting Gear.”



29.   Section 609.53, “Receiving Stolen Property.”



30.   Section 609.556, “Damage or Trespass to Property; Definitions.”



31.   Section 609.561, “Arson in the First Degree.”



32.   Section 609.562, “Arson in the Second Degree.”



33.   Section 609.563, “Arson in the Third Degree.”



34.   Section 609.564 “Excluded Fires.”



35.   Section 609.576, “Negligent Fires; Dangerous Smoking.”



36.   Section 609.581, “Burglary; Definitions.”



37.   Section 609.582, “Burglary.”



38.   Section 609.585, “Double Jeopardy.”



39.   Section 609.59, “Possession of Burglary or Theft Tools.”



40.   Section 609.595, “Damage to Property.”



41.   Section 609.625, “Aggravated Forgery.”



42.   Section 609.63, “Forgery.”



43.   Section 609.635, “Obtaining Signature by False Pretense.”



44.   Section 609.713, “Terroristic Threats.”



45.   Section 609.75, “Gambling; Definitions.”



46.   Section 609.755, “Acts of or Relating to Gambling.”



47.   Section 609.76, “Other Acts Relating to Gambling.”



48.   Section 609.761, “Operations Permitted.”



49.   Section 609.821, “Financial Transaction Card Fraud.”



50.   Section 609.825, “Bribery of Participant or Official in Contest.”



51.   Section 609.86, “Commercial Bribery.”



52.   Section 609.87, “Computer Crime; Definitions.”



53.   Section 609.88, “Computer Damage.”



54.   Section 609.89, “Computer Theft.”



CHAPTER 11:  STREETS, PARKS,
AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY



Section



   1100.   STREET SPECIFICATIONS.



   1105.   DRIVEWAYS, APPROACHES AND ENTRANCES.



   1110.   STREET NUMBERS.



   1115.   STREET LIGHTING SYSTEMS.



   1120.   RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT.



   1125.   PRIVATE USE OF UNDEVELOPED RIGHT OF WAY.



   1130.   SNOW REMOVAL RESTRICTIONS.



   1135.   PARK REGULATIONS.



   1140.   VACATION OF PUBLIC STREETS, EASEMENTS AND GROUNDS.



 



SECTION 1100.  STREET SPECIFICATIONS.



1100.005.  Definitions.



For the purpose of this section the words below are defined as follows.



1.   “City” means the city of Minnetonka.



2.   “Engineer” means the city engineer or agent.



3.   “Specifications” means the designs, standards, requirements, and
directions prepared by the engineer, as accepted by the council.



4.   The term “work” includes materials and labor.



5.   “Subdivider” means owner or developer.



1100.010.  Scope.



The specifications for city street construction by subdividers are on file in
the office of the clerk and apply to the construction of streets in
subdivisions preliminarily approved by the council.



1100.015.  Financial Security.



The subdivider must furnish a letter of credit in an amount equal to one and
one-half times the cost of the work estimated by the engineer. The conditions
and form of the letter of credit are subject to the approval of the city
attorney.



1100.020.  Partial Street Construction.



The subdivider may be permitted to complete only the streets in that portion
of the plat that he/she proposes to first develop and record.



1100.025.  Construction of Streets.



The specifications for city street construction are the minimum city standard
and apply to all streets that are to be offered to the city for ownership and
maintenance.



1100.030.  Inspection.



The city will inspect the construction to ensure compliance with the
specifications. The city’s inspection does not include the stake-out,
establishment of grades or similar work. This engineering must be done by the
subdivider's engineer.



1100.035.  Inspection Fee.



The subdivider must pay to the city an inspection fee in the amount
established in section 710. The cost of extra inspection caused by the
subdivider’s failure to promptly or properly meet the specifications will
be charged to the subdivider.



1100.040.  Partial Maintenance.



When a street has been completed to a point where it is suitable for
snowplowing, the city may commence those operations. Snowplowing does not
constitute acceptance for other maintenance and has no effect upon agreements
between the city and the subdivider.



1100.045.  Final Acceptance.



Final acceptance of streets will occur only after the engineer issues a
certificate of approval.



1100.050.  Variance.



The council may permit a variance from these requirements when there is a
hardship and may enter into an escrow agreement when the subdivider cannot
obtain a letter of credit. A variance may be granted only upon the
affirmative vote of two-thirds of the full council.



SECTION 1105.  DRIVEWAYS, APPROACHES AND ENTRANCES.



1105.005.  Definitions.



Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words and terms below are
defined for the purpose of this section as follows:



1.   “Business driveway approach” means a driveway approach providing
motor vehicle access from the public right-of-way to any property other than
a single family detached dwelling.



2.   “City engineer” means the city engineer or an authorized
representative.



3.   “Corner” means the point of intersection of the lines of two
street curb faces extended.



4.   “Curb cut” means the opening along a street curb line or pavement
edge where vehicles may enter and leave the roadway. Its width includes the
width of the driveway approach and of the curb returns, if any.



5.   “Curb return” means that portion of a curb next to a driveway
approach that includes the radius or curvature or the ramp-type lug on
commercial or industrial type pavements and that connects the driveway
approach to the street curb.



6.   “Driveway” means a paved or otherwise delineated area on private
property for the operation of motor vehicles.



7.   “Driveway approach” means a paved or otherwise delineated area on
the public right-of- way that is between the roadway of a public street and
private property and is intended to provide vehicle access from the public
roadway to private property.



8.   “Driveway turnaround” means a paved or otherwise clearly
delineated area on private property that is part of or connected to a
driveway or driveway approach and is sufficient in size for an automobile or
other vehicle to turn 180 degrees without leaving the paved or delineated
area.



9.   “Frontage” means the lot line bordering a public street.



10.   “Parcel of land” means a lot or contiguous lots or a tract
officially registered under one ownership.



11.   “Resident driveway approach” means a driveway approach providing
motor vehicle access from the public right-of-way to a single family detached
dwelling.



12.   “Three-car garage” means a structure for the storage of motor
vehicles that has doors for the entry of motor vehicles with a total width of
at least 24 feet.



1105.010.  Classification.



Driveway approaches are of two classes: (1) resident driveway approaches; and
(2) business driveway approaches.



1105.015.  Prohibited Construction.



A person must not construct, alter, or extend, or permit or cause to be
constructed, altered or extended a driveway approach that can be used only as
a parking space.



1105.020.  Construction Permit Required.



A person must obtain a permit for a driveway approach as provided below
before cutting, breaking out or removing a curb or making other provisions
for a driveway approach along a street or alley.



1105.025.  Application for Permit.



Any person who wants to construct a driveway approach across public
right-of-way must first apply to the city engineer for a permit. The
application must be in writing on a form provided by the city. The
application must contain information showing the legal description of the
property, the street address of the property, the type of construction, the
width of the proposed driveway approach, the location of the proposed
driveway approach on the lot, a profile of the proposed driveway, driveway
drainage plan, if necessary, and other information as may be required. The
application must be filed by the property owner or by his/her authorized
agent.



1105.030.  Issuance of Permit.



A permit may be issued by the city engineer if he/she determines that the
applicant has complied with the terms of this ordinance and paid the permit
fee. The city engineer may approve the driveway as requested or with
stipulated changes that are reasonably necessary for the public safety and
welfare. The city engineer may refuse to issue a permit when, in the
engineer's judgement, the requested construction would pose an unreasonable
hazard to the public. The applicant may appeal a denial to the city council
by submitting a request. The city council may affirm, reverse or modify the
engineer's decision.



1105.035.  Permit Fees.



1.   The permit fees for construction of driveway approaches is
established in section 710.



2.   If a person does work without a permit when a permit is required by
this ordinance, the permit fee will be doubled, in addition to other
penalties provided.



1105.040.  Revocation of Permit.



A permit may be revoked by the city council under the procedures in section
700.035.  In addition, the city council has the right to revoke a driveway
permit and to revise, relocate, or close a driveway approach as the result of
street reconstruction, a change in land use, or a major change in the traffic
pattern of an existing land use.



1105.045.  Authority of City Engineer.



1.   The city engineer may establish regulations and specifications for
materials and method of construction for driveway approaches.  A copy of
these regulations and specifications must be kept on file with the city
clerk.  Construction of a driveway approach must comply with these
regulations and specifications and with any conditions included in the
permit.  The city engineer may inspect the construction at any time to
determine compliance.  The city engineer may revoke a permit issued under
this section when he/she determines that the construction or activity is not
being performed according to the terms of the permit, the adopted regulations
and specifications, or this ordinance.



2.   Notice of revocation, with a description of the facts supporting the
revocation, must be mailed or delivered to the person named in the permit at
the address listed in the permit.



3.   Work must cease upon receipt of the notice of revocation.



4.   A person whose permit is revoked may appeal to the city council by
filing a written notice with the city clerk within 10 days after the date
that the revocation notice was mailed or delivered.



5.   The appeal will be conducted using the procedure in section
700.035(c) and (d).



1105.050.  Submission of Plans to City Engineer.



Plans submitted to the building inspector that include or involve a driveway
approach must be referred by the building inspector to the city engineer for
his/her approval before a building permit may be issued.



1105.055.  Construction Requirements Generally.



In addition to the regulations and specifications adopted by the city
engineer, the following requirements must be met.



1.   A driveway approach must intersect the street pavement at an angle to
be approved by the city engineer based upon the physical characteristics of
the street and the lot being accessed. The angle should be as close as
reasonably practical, in the judgment of the city engineer, to a right angle
to the tangent of the curve of the street pavement.



2.   A curb return must not extend beyond any property line as projected,
except when consented to in writing by the adjoining property owner.



3.   The top of the driveway approach paving at the curb line must be 1
inches above the flowline of the gutter, must not extend into the gutter
beyond the face of the curb or beyond the gutter line, and must not interfere
with the use of the street for the purpose of travel or maintenance. The
constructed street must not be excavated unless the city engineer has given
written permission.



4.   Driveway culverts must be provided and installed as required by the
city engineer.



5.   Driveways must not be constructed over curb stops, if at all
possible. If there is no other feasible location for the driveway, the curb
stop must be set flush with the final driveway surface, and provided with a
sleeve, as shown on the typical section attached to the permit.



6.   The property owner and contractor must protect the public from injury
or damage during the construction of the driveway approach.  A permit issued
under this ordinance must contain the applicant’s agreement that the city
will not be liable for damage that may arise from the work, and that the
applicant will hold the city harmless for any liability incurred by the city
as a result of the work performed under the permit.



7.   Trees or shrubs must not be placed adjacent to the driveway so as to
unreasonably interfere with the ability to see traffic on the public street.



8.   If a lot has frontage on both the turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac
and the portion leading to the turnaround, the driveway must be connected to
the “lead-in” portion of the street and not the turnaround.



9.   A driveway approach must provide access to a parking area, a
driveway, a door intended and used for the entrance of vehicles, or other
similar facility



1105.060.  Resident Driveways, Approaches, and Turnarounds.



1.   Only one driveway approach will be allowed from a single residential
lot to the same street, except that two driveway approaches to the same
street may be allowed when the lot frontage on that street is at least 110
feet. Lots having frontage on more than one street will be allowed driveway
approaches to each street consistent with the standards in this ordinance.



2.   A residential driveway approach must not exceed 20 feet in width at
the point it intersects with the right-of-way line, except that a driveway
approach that provides access to a three-car garage may have a width no
greater than 30 feet at that point.



3.   The total width of driveway approaches to a single lot from a single
street must not exceed 35 feet.



4.   A curb cut must not exceed the width of the driveway approach at the
property line by more than 10 feet.



5.   No portion of a driveway approach, except the curb return, may be
constructed within 45 feet of a corner.



6.   The following must be paved with bituminous concrete blacktop or
equivalent paving: (a) the driveway approach and that part of the driveway
between the minimum required building setback line and the street; or (b)
that part of the driveway approach, driveway and turnarounds that drain to
the street, whichever is greater.



7.   If the city's public works director determines that an existing
driveway is causing a maintenance problem on the public street, including the
washing of dirt and gravel into the public street, the city engineer may
require the property owner to pave the portion of the driveway that is
necessary to remove the maintenance problem. Portland cement concrete will
only be allowed outside the public right-of-way. This requirement cannot be
construed to reduce paving otherwise required by performance standards in the
zoning code or required as a condition to the granting of a conditional use
permit, lot division, subdivision or as designated in an approved site plan.
If the property owner fails to pave the driveway, then it will constitute a
public nuisance under section 845.010(18) and may be abated under section
845.045.



8.   A turnaround is required on a driveway entering onto a state highway,
county road, or collector roadway as designated in the comprehensive plan,
and onto city streets where this is deemed necessary by the city engineer,
based on traffic counts, sight distances, street grades or other relevant
factors. If a turnaround is required by the city engineer, this requirement
will be stated on the permit.



9.   When an existing garage or driveway on a residential lot is enlarged,
reconstructed, improved, or otherwise modified, the city may require that the
driveway be brought into compliance with all provisions of this section
1105.060.



(Amended by Ord. 2005-19, adopted November 28, 2005; Ord. #2003-12, adopted
April 14, 2003; amended by Ord. # 2003-01, adopted January 6, 2003)



1105.065.  Business Driveways, Approaches and Turnarounds.



1.   Only one business driveway is allowed per development unless a
greater number of driveways is approved by the city engineer, or as part of
site plan review. The business driveway approach must not exceed the width of
the access road or 32 feet at the property line, whichever is less in a
business or industrial district. The curb cut must not exceed the width of
the driveway approach at the property line by more than 20 feet, unless
approved as part of a site plan. In a residential district the curb cut must
not exceed the width of the driveway approach at the property line by more
than 10 feet, unless approved as part of a site plan.



2.   Business driveways and driveway approaches must be paved with
asphaltic concrete or equivalent material. Portland cement concrete is only
allowed outside the public right-of- way.



3.   Loading docks, ramps, and vehicular entrances must be located in a
manner to eliminate backing onto and maneuvering within the street
right-of-way and to keep driveways within the width specified by this chapter.



4.   No portion of a driveway approach, except the curb return, may be
constructed within 75 feet of a corner in a business, commercial or
industrial area, or within 45 feet of a corner in a residential district.



5.   A turnaround is required on a driveway entering onto a state highway,
county road, or a collector roadway as designated in the comprehensive plan,
and onto city streets where this is deemed necessary by the city engineer,
based on the traffic counts, sight distances, street grades and other
relevant factors. If a turnaround is required by the city engineer, this
requirement will be stated on the permit.



1105.070.  Maintenance and Removal.



The abutting property owner, or a responsible homeowner's association, must
maintain a driveway approach in a safe condition, in compliance with this
ordinance and the city engineer’s requirements, and in a manner that does
not interfere with or obstruct the drainage carried by the adjoining street
or the use of the adjoining street for travel.  If a driveway approach is
not maintained in this manner, the city engineer may give written notice to
the owner of the abutting property to remove it.  The property owner must
then, at his or her expense, remove the driveway approach and restore the
street, curbing, and right-of-way to its former condition. The removal and
restoration must be completed within 10 days after the owner received the
city engineer’s notice, or a later date authorized in writing by the city
engineer, unless the order is appealed in the manner in section 1105.045(4)
and (5).  If the removal and restoration are not timely completed, the city
may do the work, and the city's costs will be a lien against the abutting
property. The city may assess the cost against the abutting property in the
same manner as delinquent utility fees.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-01, adopted January 26, 2009)



1105.075.  Regulatory Signs.



The city may require the erection of regulatory signs adjacent to the
driveway at its intersection with a street or highway. A stop sign must be
purchased, erected and maintained by the property owner. If the property
owner does not have the sign erected within a reasonable length of time, the
city may erect the sign and bill the property owner for all costs.



1105.080.  Variances.



The city council may grant variances from the provisions of this ordinance if:



1.   the variance arises from peculiar physical conditions not ordinarily
existing in similar districts in the city or is due to the nature of the
business or operation on the abutting property;



2.   the variance is not against the public interest, particularly safety,
convenience and general welfare;



3.   the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent
property owners or tenants; and



4.   the strict application of this ordinance will cause unnecessary
hardship on the property owner or tenant.



(Amended by Ord. 2005-19, adopted November 28, 2005.)



SECTION 1110.  STREET NUMBERS.



1110.005.  Purpose.



The council finds that visible street numbering on each separate residential,
commercial or industrial building is necessary for the proper protection of
public and private property.



1110.010.  Exception.



This ordinance does not apply to accessory buildings as defined in the city
zoning ordinance.



1110.015.  Numbering Required.



Each separate residential, commercial and industrial building in the city
must have its street number displayed on it.  The number must be easily
visible from the street serving the building.  If the building is
constructed so that the number is not readily visible from the street, then
the number must also appear at the location where the building has access to
the street.



1110.020.  Numbering System.



The city engineer is responsible for assigning a street number or address to
each separate residential, commercial, and industrial building in the city. 
When circumstances warrant and upon notice to the owner and occupant, the
city engineer may change a street number or address or both for a building. 
The city engineer’s decision to change a number or address may be appealed
to the city council.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



1110.025.  Enforcement.



After receiving a written order from the city, the owner or occupant must
comply with the numbering requirements of this section within 30 days.  The
city engineer may grant an additional 30 days if an extension appears
appropriate.



1110.030.  Violation.



Failure to comply with a written order issued by the city is a violation of
this ordinance and is a petty misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with
state law.  In addition to the payment of a fine, the city attorney is
authorized to seek a court order directing compliance with the provisions of
this section, with the costs of the action to be assessed against the
violator’s property.



SECTION 1115.  STREET LIGHTING SYSTEMS.



1115.005.  Purpose.



A city street lighting system will exist in areas where underground cables
provide electric power to the areas and ornamental street lighting exists.



1115.010.  Electric Service.



The city will purchase electric power for the areas provided with ornamental
street lighting from private electric power suppliers.  Each residence,
business place, or industry located within those areas will be billed its
proportionate share of the cost of the electric power.  A request for
ornamental street lighting in a new development may be approved by the city
engineer, subject to the right of an applicant to appeal a denial to the
council.  The council will review other requests for ornamental street
lighting and may also approve such lighting on its own initiative.



1115.015.  Delinquent Payments for Electric Street Lighting.



Payments for the street lighting system are payable within 30 days following
the receipt of a statement from the city.  Delinquent and unpaid charges are
a lien against the benefiting property and may be certified to the county
auditor and collected as a special assessment on the property receiving the
service, pursuant to Minn. Stat. §429.101.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-01, adopted January 26, 2009)



SECTION 1120.  RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT.



1120.005.  Findings, Purpose, and Intent.



To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens, and to ensure
the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the rights-of-way,
the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good repair and free
from unnecessary encumbrances. Accordingly, the city enacts this section to
impose reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of facilities
within the city's rights-of-way and is intended to complement the regulatory
roles of state and federal agencies. This section requires persons excavating
and obstructing the rights-of-way to bear financial responsibility for their
work and to reimburse the city for its out-of-pocket and projected costs.



This section must be interpreted consistently with Minnesota statutes
sections 237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the "Act") and the
other laws governing applicable rights of the city and users of the
rights-of-way. This section must also be interpreted consistent with
Minnesota rules 7819.0050 - 7819.9950 where possible. To the extent any
provision of this section cannot be interpreted consistently with the
Minnesota rules, the interpretation most consistent with the Act and other
applicable statutory and case law is intended. This section may not be
interpreted to limit the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt
and enforce general ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public.



1120.010.  Election to Manage Public Rights-of-Way.



Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal law,
the city elects under the Act to manage rights-of-way under its jurisdiction
and to regulate excavations and obstructions within public rights-of-way.



1120.015.  Definitions.



The following definitions apply in this section of this code:



1.   "Abandoned facility" means: a facility no longer in service or
physically disconnected from a portion of an operating facility, or from any
other facility that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not
abandoned unless declared so by the right-of-way user.



2.   "Applicant" means a person requesting permission to excavate or
obstruct a right-of-way.



3.   "City" means the city of Minnetonka, Minnesota. For purposes of
section 1120.130, "city" also includes its elected officials, officers,
employees and agents.



4.   Collocate" or "collocation" means to install, mount, maintain,
modify, operate, or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or
adjacent to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is
owned privately or by the city or other governmental unit.



5.   "Construction performance bond" means any of the following forms of
security provided at permittee's option:



   a.   Individual project bond, including a "license and permit" bond;



   b.   Cash deposit;



   c.   Security of a form listed or approved under Minnesota Statutes,
section 15.73, subdivision 2;



   d.   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;



   e.   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city;



   f.   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other form of
construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to the city.



6.   "Degradation" means a decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way
caused by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the
need to reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be required if the
excavation or disturbance did not occur.



7.   "Degradation cost" means the cost to achieve a level of restoration
as determined by the city at the time the permit is issued, not to exceed the
maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to 13, set forth in Minnesota rules
parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.



8.   "Degradation fee" means the estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.



9.   "Delay penalty" means the penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable
delays in right-of- way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration.



10.   "Director" means the city's director of engineering, or his or her
designee.



11.   "Emergency" means a condition that (a) immediately endangers the
life, health, or safety of persons, (b) causes an immediate threat of
significant loss or damage to property, or (c) requires immediate repair or
replacement in order to restore service to a customer.



12.   "Equipment" means anything tangible used to install, repair or
maintain facilities in a public right-of-way.



13.   "Excavate" means to dig into or in any way remove, physically
disturb, or penetrate any part of a public right-of-way.



14.   "Excavation permit" means a permit that is issued by the city
authorizing the permittee to excavate in a public right-of-way as
specifically described in the permit.



15.   "Extension permit" means a permit that is issued by the city
authorizing additional calendar days to an excavation or obstruction permit.



16.   "Facility" means anything tangible, including equipment, that is
located in the public right-of-way.



17.   "Hole" means an excavation in the right-of-way, with the excavation
having a length less than the width of the pavement or adjacent pavement.



18.   "Local representative" means a person, or designee of such person,
authorized by a public right-of-way user to accept service and to act and
make decisions for the public right-of-way user regarding matters within the
scope of this section.



19.   "Management costs" means the actual costs the city incurs in
managing its rights-of-way, including the costs associated with registering
right-of-way users; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way or small
wireless facility permits; inspecting project work and restoration projects;
maintaining, supporting, protecting, or moving user facilities during
right-of-way work; determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration;
enforcing and correcting non-complying project work; mapping of facilities
located in the right-of-way; revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility
permits; performing all other tasks required by this section; and managing
matters described in this section. Management costs do not include: payment
by a telecommunications right-of-way user for the use of the right-of-way;
unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used by the city, including
fees tied to or based on customer counts, access lines, or revenues generated
by the right-of-way or for the city; the fees and cost of litigation related
to the interpretation of state law or this section; or the city costs related
to appeals taken pursuant to this section.



20.   "Obstruct" means to place an object or improvement in a public
right-of-way, or to take any other action in a public right-of-way, that
interferes with the free use of the public right-of-way, including action
that causes a visual obstruction.



21.   "Obstruction permit" means a permit that is issued by the city
authorizing the permittee to obstruct a public right-of-way as specifically
described in the permit.



22.   "Patch or patching" means a method of roadway surface replacement or
restoration that consists of: (a) the compaction of the sub-base and
aggregate base; and (b) the replacement, in kind, of the existing roadway
surface for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the defined excavation
in all directions.



23.   "Permittee" means a person to whom an excavation or obstruction
permit or small wireless facility permit has been issued by the city under
this section.



24.   "Person" means an individual or entity, however organized, whether
natural, corporate, or political.



25.   "Project or project work" means any activity, including
construction, reconstruction, installation, maintenance, relocation,
restoration or replacement of any facility or a public right-of-way in which
the facility is located.



26.   "Public right-of-way" or "right-of-way" means the area on, below, or
above a public roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, or public
sidewalk in which the city has an interest, including other dedicated
rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of the city. A public
right-of-way does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with
regard to cellular or other non-wire telecommunications or broadcast service.



27.   "Public right-of-way user" means a person or entity that owns or
controls a facility that is located, or is sought or intended to be located,
in a public right-of-way, including persons who have installation and
maintenance responsibilities by contract, lease, sublease or assignment.



28.   "Restore or restoration" means the process, including patching, by
which a public right-of- way and surrounding area, including pavement and
foundation, is returned to the same condition that existed before any project
work.



29.   "Restoration cost" means the amount of money paid to the city by a
permittee to meet restoration requirements in this section, in accordance
with state rules.



30.   "Service lateral" means an underground facility that is used to
transmit, distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, water,
steam, cooling or heating services, or other utility service from a common
source to an end-use customer. A service lateral is also an underground
facility that is used in the removal of wastewater or drainage from a
customer's premises.



31.   "Trench" means an excavation in the public right-of-way having a
length that is equal to or greater than the width of the roadway or sections
of roadway where the work is occurring.



32.   "Small wireless facility" means a wireless facility that meets both
of the following qualifications:



   a.   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or could fit within such an enclosure; and



   b.   All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility is, in aggregate, no more than 28 cubic feet in volume, not
including electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding equipment, power
transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services, and any equipment concealed from
public view within or behind an existing structure or concealment.



33.   "Telecommunications right-of-way user" means a person owning or
controlling a facility in the right-of-way-or seeking to own or control a
facility in the right-of-way that is used or is intended to be used for
providing wireless service or transporting telecommunication or other voice
or data information. A cable communication system defined and regulated under
Minn. Stat. Ch. 238, and telecommunication activities related to providing a
natural gas or electric energy services, a public utility as defined in Minn.
Stat. Ch. 453 and 453A, or a cooperative electric association organized under
Minn. Stat. Ch. 308A, are not telecommunications right-of-way users for
purposes of this section except to the extent such entity is offering
wireless service.



34.   "Utility pole" means a pole that is used in whole or in part to
facilitate telecommunications or electric service.



35.   "Wireless facility" means equipment at a fixed location that enables
the provision of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless
service network, including equipment associated with wireless service, a
radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and a small wireless facility. "Wireless facility" does not
include: wireless support structures; wireline backhaul facilities; or cables
between utility poles or wireless support structures, or not otherwise
immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a specific antenna.



36.   "Wireless service" means any service using licensed or unlicensed
wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or
by means of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities.
Wireless service does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including cable service.



37.   'Wireless support structure" means a new or existing structure in a
right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless
facilities, as reasonably determined by the city.



38.   "Wireline backhaul facility" means a facility used to transport
communication data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications
network.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-01; effective April 9, 2018)



1120.020.  Other Requirements.



1.   Franchises/Leases. In addition to the requirements of this section,
the city may require a public utility or cable operator who has or seeks to
have facilities located in a public right-of-way to obtain a franchise, and
may require other users of the public right-of-way to obtain a lease, if
allowed by state law.



2.   Wireless Telecommunications. In addition to the requirements of this
section, a wireless telecommunications provider is subject to section 300.34
of this code.



1120.025.  Administration.



The director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of this section.  The director may delegate any or all of the
duties.



1120.030.  Registration Requirement.



1.   Registration. Each public right-of-way user must register with the
city. Registration will be deemed complete upon the public right-of-way user
submitting to the city a completed registration form furnished by the city
and paying the registration fee. A right-of-way user is required to update
its registration within 60 days after any change of the information contained
in a current registration statement. Registration must be renewed annually.



2.   Registration Prior to Work.  No person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate, perform any work on, or use any facilities in any
public right-of-way without first being registered with the city.



3.   Exceptions. Persons engaged in the following activities are not
deemed to use or occupy the right-of-way, and are not governed by this
section, but may be governed by other city code sections, such as section
300.15, subd. 9(e):



   a.   planting or maintaining boulevard plantings in the right-of-way
between their property and the street curb;



   b.   installing private driveways that are allowed by driveway
permits issued under section 1105 of the city code, sidewalks, curb and
gutter, or parking lots;



   c.   installing above-ground private improvements such as private
streets on undeveloped right-of-way that are only for the benefit of adjacent
or nearby property, which is governed by section 1125 of this code;



   d.   installing mail boxes or publicly-owned bus stop benches and
shelters;



   e.   installing irrigation systems or pet containment systems;



   f.   engaging in snow removal activities; or



   g.   undertaking activities on behalf of federal, state, county, or
city agencies.



4.   Gopher One Call.  Nothing in this section relieves a person from
complying with the provisions of Minnesota statutes, chapter 216D, gopher one
call law.



5.   Requirements. A registrant is required to comply with the applicable
provisions of this section.



1120.035.  Registration Information.



1.   Information Required.  The registrant must provide the following at
the time of registration and must promptly notify the city of changes in such
information:



   a.   registrant's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number
and gopher one-call registration certificate number if required by state law;



   b.   name, address, telephone number, email address, and facsimile
number of the person responsible for fulfilling the obligations of the
registrant;



   c.   a certificate of insurance or self-insurance verifying the
coverage required in this section;



   d.   24-hour emergency number;



   e.   an acknowledgement by the registrant of the indemnification
pursuant to section 1120.130;



   f.   if the registrant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate
that is required to be filed under Minn. Stat. § 300.06 as recorded and
certified to the Minnesota secretary of state;



   g.   a copy of the registrant's order granting a certificate of
authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other
authorization or approval from the applicable state or federal agency to
lawfully operate, where the registrant is lawfully required to have such
authorization or approval; and



   h.   such other information as the director may require.



  2.   Notice of Changes.  The registrant must keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing the revised
information to the city within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.



3.   Transfer of Ownership or Interest. Within 30 days after a public
right-of-way registrant transfers, sells, or otherwise conveys ownership or
interest in facilities to another person, the registered public right-of-way
user must notify the city of the date of the conveyance and the name of the
transferee. Within 60 days after the conveyance a new registration fee must
be paid.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-01, effective April 9, 2018)



1120.040.  Reporting Obligations.



1.   Operations.  If requested by the director, each registrant must, at
the time of registration and by December 1 of each year, file a construction
and major maintenance plan for underground facilities with the city.  The
plan must be submitted using a format designated by the city and must contain
the information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the
coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions
of rights-of-way. The plan must include, at a minimum, the locations and the
estimated beginning and ending dates of all projects to be commenced during
the next calendar year.



2.   Additional Next-Year Projects.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure to
include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has used
commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.



1120.045.  Permit Requirements.



1.   Permit Required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person
may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way, or install or place facilities in
the right-of-way, without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way
permit from the city to do so. A public right-of-way user that owns or
controls a facility within a public right-of-way, or any portion of it, on
May 27, 2010  and that subsequently excavates or otherwise obstructs a
public right-of-way, or any portion of it, must first obtain a permit as
required under this section.



   a.   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a
registrant to excavate the part of the right-of-way described in the permit
and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing facilities as described in the permit, to the extent
and for the duration specified in the permit.



   b.   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by a
registrant to hinder free and open passage over the part of the right-of-way
described in the permit by placing equipment described in the permit on the
right-of-way, to the extent and for the duration specified in the permit. An
obstruction permit is not required if a person already possesses a valid
excavation permit for the same project.



   c.   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless facility
permit is required by a registrant to erect or install a wireless support
structure, to collocate a small wireless facility, or to otherwise install a
small wireless facility in the specified portion of the right-of-way, to the
extent specified in the permit, provided that the permit remains in effect
for the length of time the facility is in use, unless lawfully revoked.



2.   Routine Obstruction and Excavation.  Routine excavations and
obstructions are permitted without separate notice and separate compensation
for such projects.  Projects that do not involve excavation of paved surface
and that last less than a continuous eight hour period in duration between 7
a.m. and 7 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, may, in the
director's discretion, be considered routine obstruction and excavation and
include by way of example, switching, replacing fuses, replacing
transformers, placing line guards, animal protection, leak surveys, anode
installations and inspections, or to repair facilities due to public damage
or accident.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-01, effective April 9, 2018)



1120.050.    Permit Applications.



Applications for a permit must be completed by the public right-of-way user.
An application for a permit must be on a form furnished by the city and
completed and submitted to the city with the following information:



   a.   the applicant's name, gopher one-call registration certificate
number, the city's registration number, street address, e-mail address,
telephone number, and facsimile telephone number;



   b.   the local representative's name, street address, e-mail
address, telephone number, facsimile telephone number, and current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency;



   c.   the name, street address and telephone number of the person(s)
or entities, other than the applicant, to perform the project work or any
portion of it;



   d.   a certificate of insurance or self-insurance verifying the
coverage required in this section;



   e.   two copies of scaled drawings, or other drawings meeting
requirements established by the director, showing:



      1)   the location and area of the proposed project and the
location of all known existing and proposed facilities owned or operated by
the applicant;



      2)   the proposed location of the facility within the
right-of-way and scaled dimensions of the facility from an existing physical
topographic feature (such as "back of curb", "edge of bituminous road");



      3)   all existing physical topographic features (trees,
shrubs, culverts, driveways, fences, street signs) and all municipal
utilities that lie within ten feet of the proposed facility location;



      4)   the location of any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
trails that will be disrupted by the work; and



      5)   the location of any public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or
trails that will be temporarily closed to traffic or obstructed by the work;



   f.   a description of methods to be used for restoration of streets
or boulevards;



   g.   payment of money due the city for:



      1)   permit fees;



      2)   construction performance bond if required by the director;



        3)   prior obstructions or excavations; and



      4)   any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
city because of applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city;



   g.   payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting security or
depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 100% of the
amount owing; and



   h.   posting an additional or larger construction performance bond
for additional facilities when applicant requests a utility permit to install
additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.



1120.055.    Permit Fees.



1.   Establishment. Fees for right-of-way permits will be established to
recover the city management costs and, when applicable, restoration costs.
Fees for small wireless facility permits will be established to recover the
city's management costs and, for facilities to be collocated on city-owned
support structures, the city engineering, make-ready, and construction costs
associated with collocation. The permit fees are specified in section 710.005
of the city code. No permit fee is refundable. No permit fee will be required
for an obstruction or excavation permit issued to the city, although the city
must be allocated its full portion of the city management costs in
calculating the permit fees.



2.   Payment Required. No permit will be issued unless the applicable
permit fee has been paid.



3.   Work Without a Permit. Except as otherwise provided in section
1120.105,  a person who obstructs or excavates in the right-of-way before
obtaining a permit must pay double the normal fee for the permit.



4.   Application to Franchises and Leases.  Unless otherwise agreed in a
franchise, permit fees to cover management costs may be charged separately
from and in addition to the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in
the franchise. In addition, where permitted by state law, the city may
require the applicant to obtain a lease and pay a rental fee for use of the
right-of-way.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-01, effective April 9, 2018)



1120.060.    Permit Issuance.



1.   Issuance.  Except as otherwise provided in section 1120.062, if the
applicant has satisfied the requirements of this section and there are no
reasons for denial under paragraph 3 below, the city will issue a permit
within ten business days after receiving a completed application.



2.   Conditions.  The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit to protect the health, safety and welfare or when
necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use.



3.   Denial or revocation. The city may deny or revoke a permit for any
one or more of the following reasons:



   a.   The applicant failed to meet the requirements and conditions of
this section;



   b.   The applicant failed to register pursuant to this section;



   c.   The street surface was constructed or reconstructed at the
proposed location within the preceding five years, unless the director
determines that no other locations are feasible or when necessitated by
emergency;



   d.   The applicant is subject to revocation of a prior permit issued
pursuant to this section;



   e.   The proposed schedule for the work would conflict or interfere
with an exhibition, celebration, festival or other similar event;



   f.   The right-of-way would become unduly congested due to the
proposed facilities and equipment when combined with other uses in the
right-of-way;



   g.   The time schedule for the project conflicts with scheduled
public improvement of the public right-of-way;



   h.   Businesses or residences in the vicinity will be unreasonably
disrupted;



   i.   The applicant failed to meet a reasonable schedule to
participate in a mandated joint trench operation with other applicants, and
the additional work will unreasonably disrupt the restored right-of-way,
businesses or residences;



   j.   The proposed project violates a provision of this code;



   k.   Environmental or seasonal conditions are unreasonable for the
work; or



   l.   The proposed project is adverse to the public health, safety
and welfare, by interfering with the safety and convenience of ordinary
travel over the public right-of-way, or endangers the public right-of-way and
its users, as reasonably determined by the city based on relevant factors
that may include:



      1)   the extent of public right-of-way area available;



      2)   the competing public service demands for the particular
proposed space in the public right-of-way;



      3)   the availability of other feasible locations in the
public right-of-way or in other public rights-of-way for the facility(s) of
the permit applicant;



      4)   the applicability of an ordinance or other regulation
that affects the location of a facility in the public right-of-way;



      5)   the applicant's prior lack of compliance with the terms
and conditions of its franchise, this section or other applicable ordinances
and regulations;



      6)   the condition and age of the public right-of-way and the
city's scheduled reconstruction of it; or



      7)   the costs of disruption to the public and damage to the
public right-of-way balanced against the benefits to the public served by an
expansion into additional parts of the public right-of-way.



4.   Appeal.  The applicant may appeal a denial to the city council by
submitting a written request to the director. The city council may affirm,
reverse or modify the director's decision.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-01, effective April 9, 2018)



1120.062.    Small Wireless Facility Permit Applications.



1.   Deadline for action. The city shall approve or deny a small wireless
facility permit application within 90 days after the application is filed.
The small wireless facility permit, and any associated building application,
will be deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application
within the review periods established in this section.



2.   Consolidated applications. An applicant may file a consolidated small
wireless facility permit application addressing the proposed collocation of
up to 15 small wireless facilities, or a greater number if agreed to by the
city, provided that all small wireless facilities in the application:



   a.   are located within a two-mile radius;



   b.   consist of substantially similar equipment; and



   c.   are to be placed on similar types of wireless support
structures.



In rendering a decision on a consolidated permit application, the city may
approve some small wireless facilities and deny others, but may not use
denial of one or more permits as a basis to deny all small wireless
facilities in the application.



3.   Tolling of deadline. The 90-day deadline for action on a small
wireless facility permit application may be tolled if:



   a.   The city receives applications from one or more applicants
seeking approval of permits for more than 30 small wireless facilities within
a seven-day period. In that case, the city may extend the deadline for all
such applications by 30 days by informing the affected applicants in writing
of the extension.



   b.   The applicant fails to submit all required documents or
information and the city provides written notice of incompleteness to the
applicant within 30 days of receipt of the application. Upon submission of
additional documents or information, the city will have ten days to notify
the applicant in writing of any still-missing information.



   c.   The city and a small wireless facility applicant agree in
writing to toll the review period.



4.   Small wireless facility conditions. In addition to conditions imposed
under section 1120.060, subdivision 2, the erection or installation of a
wireless support structure, the collocation of a small wireless facility, or
other installation of a small wireless facility in the right-of-way is
subject to the following conditions:



   a.    A small wireless facility must be collocated on the particular
wireless support structure, under the attachment specifications and at the
height as indicated in the applicable permit application.



   b.   Small wireless facilities must comply with applicable
provisions of section 300 of this code, including, but not limited to,
separate requirements.



   c.   No new wireless support structure installed within the
right-of-way may exceed 50 feet in height without the city's written
authorization, provided that the city may impose a lower height limit in the
applicable permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare or to
protect the right-of-way and its current use, and further provided that a
registrant may replace an existing wireless support structure that exceeds 50
feet in height with a structure of the same height subject to such conditions
or requirements as may be imposed in the applicable permit.



   d.    No wireless facility may extend more than 10 feet above its
wireless support structure.



   e.    Where an applicant proposes collocation on a decorative
wireless support structure, sign or other structure not intended to support
small wireless facilities, the city may impose reasonable requirements to
accommodate the particular design, appearance or intended purpose of the
structure.



   f.    Where an applicant proposes to replace a wireless support
structure, the city may impose reasonable restocking, replacement, or
relocation requirements on the replacement of the structure.



5.   Denial or revocation. A small wireless facility permit may be denied
or revoked for one or more of the reasons in section 1120.060, subdivision 3.
The denial or revocation of a small wireless facility permit must be made in
writing and must document the basis for the denial. The city must notify the
applicant or right-of-way user in writing within three business days after
its decision to deny or revoke a permit. If an application is denied, the
right-of-way user may address the reasons for denial identified by the city
and resubmit its application. If the application is resubmitted within 30
days of receipt of the notice of denial, no additional application fees may
be imposed. The city must approve or deny the resubmitted application within
30 days after submission.



6.   Small wireless facility agreement. A small wireless facility may not
be collocated on a small wireless support structure owned or controlled by
the city, or on any other city asset in the right-of-way, unless the
applicant has executed a standard small wireless facility collocation
agreement with the city. The standard collocation agreement is in addition
to, and not in lieu of, the required small wireless facility permit;
provided, however, that the applicant is not required to also obtain a
license or franchise in order to collocate. Issuance of a small wireless
facility permit does not supersede, alter or affect any then-existing
agreement between the city and the applicant.



(Amended by Ord. 2018-01, effective April 9, 2018)



1120.065.    Joint Applications.



1.   Joint Applications.  The director may require registrants to jointly
apply for permits to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place
and time. Registrants may also voluntarily choose to jointly apply for a
permit for the same place and time. Only one permit will be issued for a
joint application.



2.   Fees.  One permit fee will be charged for a joint application.
Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and
indicate this on the application.



1120.070.    Supplementary Applications and Notifications.



1.   Limitation on Area.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
area of the right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do any
work outside the area specified in the permit.  A permittee who determines
that an area greater than that specified in the permit needs to be obstructed
or excavated must before working in that greater area (a) make application
for a permit extension and pay any additional fees required and (b) receive a
new permit or permit extension.



2.   Limitation on Dates.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for the
dates specified in the permit.  No permittee may begin work before the
permit start date or continue working after the end date.  Except in the
case of verbal extensions, if a permittee does not finish the work by the
permit end date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it
needs and receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before
working after the end date of the previous permit.  This supplementary
application must be submitted before the permit end date. Except when an
extension permit has been granted, a permittee that has failed to complete
the project work within the required time period under the initial permit,
must obtain a new permit and pay the full permit fee.



3.   Supplementary Notifications. If the obstruction or excavation of the
right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the date given on the permit,
permittee must notify the city by supplementary application of the accurate
information as soon as this information is known.



1120.075.    Revocation of Permits.



1.   Grounds for Revocation. The city may revoke a permit issued under
this section on any one or more of the following grounds:



   a.   breach of a material provision or condition of the permit or
city code;



   b.   material misrepresentation in the application for a permit;



   c.   failure to maintain the required bonds or other security and
insurance;



   d.   failure to complete the project work within the time specified
in the permit unless the failure to complete work is due to reasons beyond
the permittee's control;



   e.   failure in a timely manner to correct work that does not
conform to applicable standards, conditions, federal, state or local laws; or



   f.   evasion of any material provision of the public right-of-way
permit, perpetration of any fraud or deceit upon the city, or an attempt to
do either of the foregoing.



2.   Notice. If the director determines that the basis for revocation
exists, the director may initiate revocation of the permit. If the violation
is related to non-complying project work, the director must notify the
permittee of the actions necessary to remedy the violation and the date by
which the correction must be completed, which must be a reasonable period of
time. The director may impose additional or revised conditions on the permit
to mitigate or remedy the violation. If correction of the non-complying work
is not completed within the required time or if another basis for revocation
exists, the director must provide written notice to the permittee of the
basis for revocation and the date of the revocation hearing  before the city
council under subdivision 3 below. The notice must be given to the permittee
at least 10 days before the date of the revocation hearing.



3.   Hearing before City Council. A revocation hearing must be held before
the city council on the date specified in the notice. The purpose for the
hearing will be to determine whether any of the grounds for revocation exist.
No suspension or revocation may take effect until the permittee has been
afforded a hearing as provided in this section.



4.   Revocation Costs. If a permit is revoked, the permittee must
reimburse the city for its reasonable costs (including restoration costs)
incurred in connection with the revocation.



1120.080.    County or State Rights-of-Way.



A public right-of-way user who is required to obtain a county or state permit
for excavation or obstruction in a county or state right-of-way within the
city must provide notification of the proposed activity to the director
within one week after obtaining the permit but no less than 48 hours before
the activity would begin.



1120.085.    Conditions of Permit and Registration. 



All permittees and all registrants are subject to the following requirements:



1.   A permittee must comply with all conditions of the permit.



2.   All permits issued under this section or a copy of the permit must be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the project
work site and must be available for inspection immediately upon request by
the director or his/her designee.



3.   The permittee must promptly notify the director if the obstruction or
excavation of the public right-of-way begins later or ends sooner than the
dates specified in the permit.



4.   Installation, placement, location, and relocation of facilities must
comply with all federal, state and local laws.



5.   Public right-of-way restoration must be in accordance with the
restoration regulations set forth in this section.



6.   Installation of all underground utilities must be in accordance with
the underground utilities regulations set forth in this section and all other
applicable federal, state and local laws.



7.   A permittee or registrant must not obstruct a public right-of-way 
and must not hinder the natural free and clear passage of water through the
gutters or other waterways, except as expressly authorized by the permit.
Project operations and work must be conducted in a manner to ensure the least
obstruction to and interference with present and continued use of the public
right-of-way.



8.   Personal vehicles of those doing work in the public right-of-way may
not be parked within or next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance
with city parking regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be
done solely within the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by
the permit.



9.   Reasonable precautions must be taken as necessary to avoid creating
unsafe or unsanitary conditions. Precautions including appropriate signage
must be taken to ensure the safety of the general public, employees, invitees
and those who require access to abutting property.



10.   The permittee must maintain access to all properties and cross
streets during project work, including emergency vehicle access.



11.   The permittee must provide 48-hour written notice, using the
standard city form, to abutting property owners before commencement of any
project work that may disrupt the use of and access to the abutting property.
Written notification is not required for routine obstruction and excavation
projects described in section 1120.045, Subd. 3.



12.   A permittee involved in underground projects must register with
gopher state one call and comply with its requirements.



13.   The permittee must comply with the state's uniform traffic manual
for traffic control at all times during any project work and must protect and
identify excavations and work operations with barricade flags in the daylight
hours and by warning lights at dusk and night.



14.   When a trail or drive has been cut, the appropriate signs must be
kept in place and maintained until restoration is complete.



15.   The permittee must provide proper trench protection as required by
federal and state occupational safety regulations to prevent any cave-in,
injury to property or persons, or enlargement of the excavation.



16.   Excavations, trenches and jacking pits off the roadway surface area
or adjacent to the roadway or curbing must be sheathed and braced. When
unattended, all excavations, trenches and jacking pits must be protected to
prevent surface drainage from entering the excavation, trench, or jacking pit.



17.   The permittee must protect the root growth of significant trees as
defined in section 300 of the city code and shrubbery located within the
public right-of-way and adjacent to it. The permittee must protect sprinkler
systems, pet containment systems, and sod located adjacent to the public
right-of-way. The permittee must also comply with other protective conditions
that may be added as deemed necessary by the director.



18.   The permittee must coordinate project work and installation of
facilities in co-locations involving other public right-of-way users.



19.   The permittee must physically locate property lines abutting the
project work. The permittee must replace, with the services of a
Minnesota-licensed surveyor, any property corners or monuments disturbed as a
result of the project.



20.   The permittee must complete restoration of the public right-of-way
in conformance with this section.



21.   No permittee, or its agent, subcontractor or employee, may use lugs
(steel tracks) on any roadway surfaces.



22.   The permittee must daily remove all dirt or debris from sidewalks,
trails, public and private roadway surfaces, curbs and gutters during project
work.



23.   The permittee must obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and
approvals, and comply with all requirements of local, state and federal laws.



24.   The permittee must not do any work outside the project area as
specified in the permit.



1120.090.    Installation of Underground Facilities.



The permittee must comply with the following requirements when installing
underground facilities:



1.   Underground facilities must, where reasonably possible, be installed
outside the paved or improved area, in places with the least potential for
future conflict. If unable to install outside the paved or improved area, the
installation must be as close to the edge of the roadway surface as possible
to allow access to the facilities without unnecessarily disturbing paved
areas of the roadway.



2.   Public right-of-way alignment and grade must be maintained.



3.   Fiber facilities must be buried in a proper conduit and at a depth of
no less than three feet and no more than four feet; copper facilities below
concrete or bituminous paved roadway surfaces must be buried at a depth of no
less than three feet and no more than four feet, and all other copper
facilities must be buried at a depth of no less than 30 inches and no more
than four feet.



4.   Except for gas, all underground facilities that cross streets or hard
surfaced driveways must be bored and installed in conduit when requested by
the city.



5.   When required, the permittee must excavate an observation hole over a
city utility to ensure that a city utility is not damaged.



6.   If the project work involves an open cut, the permittee must install
visual tracers 18 inches over buried facilities. If other construction
methods are used, alternative location methods may be used upon approval by
the city.



7.   During plowing or trenching of facilities, a warning tape must be
placed at a depth of 18 inches above copper cables with over 200 pairs and
fiber facilities, and a locating wire or conductive shield must be installed
above buried telecommunication facilities, except for di-electric cables.



8.   Restoration of areas disturbed by facilities must include returning
the right-of-way to the same condition that existed before excavation in
accordance with Minnesota rules, which indicate maximum limits of restoration
methods and area requirements that the city can impose. The city and
right-of-way user may agree to a lesser requirement. The right-of-way user is
responsible for all of its work done in the public right-of-way, whether by
employees, agents, or independent contractors. Restoration must include
compaction of the materials placed in the excavation of the sub grade and
aggregate base, plus pavement replacement, in kind. All work must be
performed according to the city 's specifications and drawings. Installation
of service laterals must be performed in accordance with Minnesota rules and
this section.



9.   All facilities must be located so as to not interfere with existing
and potential future traffic signals and signs.



10.   Unless approved by the director, all above ground appurtenances must
be located no closer than ten feet from city hydrants, waterline valves,
manholes, lift stations, and catch basins; not in front of any city or
private sign, monument or amenity for facilities or parks; and no closer than
two feet from sidewalks and trails.



11.   Underground facilities must not be installed within five feet of
hydrants, waterline valves, lift stations, manholes or catch basins, unless
approved by the director.



12.   Underground facilities must not be installed between a hydrant and
an auxiliary valve.



13.   The location and installation of telecommunications facilities must
comply with the national electric safety code, as incorporated by reference
in Minnesota statutes.



14.   Permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including
horizontal directional drilling, must follow all requirements set forth in
Minnesota statutes and rules, and must use potholing or open cutting in order
to determine the precise location of marked underground utilities before
excavating. In addition, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods
must not install facilities at a depth greater than four feet below grade,
unless specifically approved by the director.



1120.095.    Public Right-of-Way Restoration.



1.   Timing. All project work under a permit must be completed within the
dates specified in the permit unless the project work could not be completed
due to circumstances beyond the permittee's control, including seasonal
weather prohibitions or inclement weather. An extension permit will be issued
at no charge for those circumstances.



2.   Restoration Costs. The permittee is responsible for all costs of
restoring the public right-of-way unless otherwise agreed.



   a.   Permittee Restoration. If the city determines that the
permittee must conduct the required restoration work, the city may require,
and the permittee must provide at the time of application for the permit, a
construction performance bond in an amount reasonably estimated by the
director to restore the right-of-way to the condition that existed before the
excavation. The city may require that the bond also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the director estimates will be incurred if the
permittee fails to perform under the bond. Litigation costs and attorney fees
are not direct costs to be included in calculating the amount of the bond. A
surety bond must be from a corporate surety authorized to do business in the
state.  Security required pursuant to this section must require that the
holder will perform the work in accordance with this section and applicable
permits, will pay to the city any costs incurred by the city in performing
work pursuant to this section, and will indemnify and save the city and its
officers, agents and employees harmless pursuant to the city code.  For
permits allowing excavations within public right-of-way, the construction
performance bond must be valid for a period of 24 months to guaranty the
adequacy of all restoration work. When 24 months have passed after completion
of restoration, the city may release the posted security if the director
determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored.



   b.   City Restoration. Instead of having the permittee do the
restoration, the city may at its option choose to perform the restoration
itself. If the city performs the restoration, the permittee must pay to the
city all of the restoration costs within 30 days after billing. If, following
such restoration, the pavement settles or otherwise fails for reasons not
caused by city's failure to properly restore, the permittee must pay to the
city, within 30 days of billing, all costs associated with correcting the
defective work.



   c.   Degradation Fee in Lieu of Restoration. In lieu of restoration
costs, the city may allow a permittee to pay a degradation fee. In that case,
however, the permittee must still replace and compact the subgrade and
aggregate base material in the excavation, and the degradation fee will not
include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.



3.   Standards. All restoration must be in accordance with the written
standards and materials specified by the city, which must comply with state
standards. Subject to state rules, the city may prescribe additional
restoration procedures and standards on a case-by-case basis based on the
following considerations:



   a.   the number, size, depth and duration of the excavation,
disruption or damage to the public right-of-way;



   b.   the traffic volume carried by the public right-of-way;



   c.   the character of the neighborhood surrounding the public
right-of-way;



   d.   the pre-project condition of the public right-of-way;



   e.   the remaining life expectancy of the public right-of-way due to
the project;



   f.   the costs of the restoration method in relation to the
prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the public right-of-way that
could result due to the project work in the public right-of-way; and



   g.   the likelihood that the particular restoration method would be
effective in slowing the depreciation of the public right-of-way that would
otherwise occur.



4.   Duty to Correct Defects. The permittee must guarantee the restoration
of the public right-of-way for 24 months following its completion and for 12
months for plantings and turf establishment. During the guarantee period, the
permittee must, upon written notification from the city, correct all
non-complying restoration work, using the method required by the city. Unless
otherwise agreed to by the director, this work must be commenced within two
days after receipt of the notice from the city and must be completed within
14 days of commencement of work, not including days during which work cannot
be done because of circumstances beyond the permittee's control.



5.   Failure to Restore.  If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
city, the city must notify the permittee in writing of the specific alleged
failure or failures and must allow the permittee five days from receipt of
said written notice to cure said failure or failures, unless otherwise
extended by the director.  In the event the permittee fails to cure, the
city may at its option perform the necessary work, and permittee must pay to
the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the
right-of-way.  If permittee fails to pay as required, the city, in addition
to other remedies provided by law, may exercise its rights under the
construction performance bond.



1120.100.    Inspection.



1.   Site Inspection. The permittee must make the project work site
available to the director for inspection at reasonable times during the
execution and upon completion of the project work.



2.   Authority of Director.



   a.   The director may order the immediate cessation or modification
of any project work that poses a serious immediate threat to the life,
health, safety or welfare of the public.



   b.   The director may order the permittee to correct any project
work to comply with the terms of the permit or other applicable standards,
conditions, or laws. The order must state the violation and the correction
work that is required. If the violation is a "substantial breach" as defined
in state law, the order must state that failure to correct the violation will
be cause for revocation of the permit after a specified period determined by
the director.  The permittee must present proof to the director that the
violation has been corrected within the time period set forth by the director
in the order.  The proof must be provided no later than the next business
day following the day of completion.  If the proof has not been presented
within the required time, the director may initiate revocation of the permit.



   c.   The director may order the permittee to pay for any cost the
city incurred for a project that posed a serious immediate threat to the
life, health, safety or welfare of the public.



3.   Notice of Completion. The permittee must sign and submit to the city
a certificate of project completion stating the completion date,
identification of the installer and designer of record, and certifying that
the project work was completed in accordance with the applicable
requirements. The project completion date is the date the notice is received
by the city. Projects are subject to delay penalties until notification is
received.



1120.105.    Work Done Without a Permit.



1.   Emergency Work by Owner. All persons with facilities in the public
right-of-way must immediately  notify the director of any event regarding
its facilities that it reasonably considers an emergency. Notification to
gopher state one call regarding an emergency situation does not fulfill this
requirement. The owner of the facilities may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary to respond to the emergency, but must apply for the necessary
permits, pay the associated fees, and fulfill all requirements as set forth
in this section within two business days after the occurrence of the
emergency.



2.   Emergency Work by City. If the city becomes aware of an emergency
regarding facilities in the public right-of-way, the city will attempt to
contact the local representative for the owner of each facility affected, or
potentially affected by the emergency. The city may take whatever action it
deems reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency, the cost of which
must be paid by the owner of the facility that caused the emergency.



3.   Non-Emergency Situations.  Except when there is an emergency and the
person complies with the notice provisions of paragraph 1, a person who
obstructs or excavates a right-of-way without first obtaining the necessary
permit must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for the
permit, pay double all the other fees required by the city code, deposit with
the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the right-of-way, and
comply with all of the requirements of this section.



1120.110.    Mapping Data.



1.   Information Required. Each registrant and permittee must provide "as
built" mapping information in accordance with state rules and in a format
acceptable to the city, providing the following:



   a.   the location of all of its underground and above ground
facilities and their appurtenances in the public right-of-way, identified by:



      1)   offsets from property lines, distances from the
centerline of the public right-of-way and from curb lines and other reference
points as requested by the city; or



      2)   coordinates derived from the coordinate system being used
by the city; and



      3)   approximate depth of facilities;



   b.   the type, quantity and size of the facilities;



   c.   a dimensional description of aboveground appurtenances;



   d.   a legend explaining symbols, characters, abbreviations, scale
and other data shown on the map;



   e.   the information in subparagraphs a - d also for restoration
work; and



   .   the information in subparagraphs a - d also for abandoned
facilities that remain in place.



2.   Submittal Requirements.



   a.   Within six months after May 27, 2010, all public right-of-way
users that own or control facilities within public rights-of-way within the
city on that date must submit the detailed mapping including restoration data
in accordance with this section for all facilities located within the public
right- of-way. Following initial mapping, all right-of-way users must by
April 1st of every year submit either (1) detailed mapping for all new
facilities and restoration located within public rights-of-way in the city
during the preceding calendar year, or (2) certification that no new
facilities and restoration were installed.



   b.   At the request of any public right-of-way user, information
required by the city that qualifies as "trade secret" data under Minnesota
law will be protected accordingly.



3.   Service Laterals. The holder of a permit for the installation or
repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minnesota
rules, must establish the horizontal locations of installed service laterals
and, when the director reasonably requires it, the vertical locations of
service laterals. Permittees or their subcontractors must submit this
information to the director in a form reasonably satisfactory to the director
within 30 days after completion of the work. Failure to provide prompt and
accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the
revocation of the permit issued for the work or the denial of future permits
to the offending permittee or its subcontractors.



1120.115.    Undergrounding.



1.   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the public and is intended to foster (a) safe
travel over the right-of-way, (b) safety around homes and buildings where
overhead services are connected and (c) orderly development in the city. 
Location and relocation, installation and reinstallation of facilities in the
right-of-way or other public ground must be made in accordance with this
section and is intended to be enforced consistently with state and federal
law regulating right-of-way users.



2.   Undergrounding of Facilities.  Facilities newly installed,
constructed or otherwise placed in the public right-of-way or in other public
property held for public use must be located and maintained underground
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this section and in accordance with
applicable construction standards, subject to the exceptions below. 
Above-ground installation, construction, modification, or replacement of
meters, gauges, transformers, street lighting, pad mount switches, capacitor
banks, re-closers and service connection pedestals are allowed.



3.   Undergrounding of Permanent Replacement, Relocated or Reconstructed
Facilities.  If the city finds that one or more of the purposes set forth in
subdivision 1 of this section  would be promoted, the city may require a
permanent replacement, relocation or reconstruction of a facility to be
located and maintained underground, with due regard for seasonal working
conditions.  For purposes of this subdivision, reconstruction means any
substantial repair of, or any improvement to, existing facilities. 
Undergrounding may be required whether a replacement, relocation or
reconstruction is initiated by the right-of-way user owning or operating the
facilities, or by the city in connection with (a) the present or future use
by the city or other local government unit of the right-of-way or other
public ground for a public project, (b) the public health or safety, or (c)
the safety and convenience of travel over the right-of-way.  Subject to
subdivision 4 below, all relocations from previously placed underground
facilities must be to another underground location.



4.   Exceptions to Undergrounding.  The following exceptions to the
strict application of this section will be allowed upon the conditions stated:



   a.   Technical/Economic Feasibility; Promotion of Policy. 
Above-ground installation, construction, or placement of facilities will be
allowed in residential, commercial and industrial areas where the council
finds that:



      1)   Underground placement would place an undue financial
burden upon the landowner, ratepayers, or right-of-way user or would deprive
the landowner of the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property
rights;



      2)   Underground placement is impractical or not technically
feasible due to topographical, subsoil or other existing conditions that
adversely affect underground facilities placement; or



      3)   The right-of-way user clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that none of the purposes under subdivision 1 would be advanced
by underground placement of facilities on the project in question, or the
city determines on its own review that undergrounding is not warranted based
on the circumstances of the proposed undergrounding.



   b.   Temporary Service.  Above-ground installation, construction,
or placement of temporary service lines will only be allowed:



      1)   during new construction of any project for a period not
to exceed three months;



      2)   during an emergency in order to safeguard lives or
property within the city; or



      3)   for a period of not more than seven months when soil
conditions make excavation impractical.



5.   Developer Responsibility.  All owners, platters, or developers are
responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and before
final approval of any plat or development plan, must submit to the director
written instruments from the appropriate right-of-way users showing that all
necessary arrangements for installation of such facilities have been made.



1120.120.    General Public Right-of-Way Regulations.



1.   Relocation and Temporary Relocation for Construction of Facilities. A
public right-of-way user must at its own expense permanently remove and
relocate any facility in the public right-of-way when it is necessary to
prevent interference in connection with: (a) a present or future city use of
the public right-of-way for a public project; (b) the public health or
safety; or (c) the safety and convenience of travel over the public
right-of-way including temporary relocation for construction. The work must
be done promptly, with due regard to seasonal working conditions. The
relocation cannot be merely for the convenience of the city. The public
right-of-way user must restore any public rights-of-way in accordance with
this section. A right-of-way user is not required to remove or relocate its
facilities from a right-of-way that has been vacated in favor of a
non-governmental entity unless and until the reasonable costs to do so are
first paid to the right-of- way user.



   a.   Relocation Notification Procedure.  The director will notify
the facility owner at least three months in advance of the need to relocate
existing facilities so the owner can determine if relocation or replacement
is required and plan any required work.  The city will provide the date work
will start on the city's project, and if different, provide the date by which
the relocation must be completed.  To the extent technically feasible and
limited by seasonal constraints, all facilities must be relocated within one
month or in a time frame determined by the director.  The director may allow
a different schedule if it does not interfere with the city's project.  The
facility owner must diligently work to relocate the facilities within the
above schedule.



   b.   Delay to City Project.  If the owner fails to meet the
relocation schedule due to circumstances within the owner's control, the city
may charge the owner for all costs incurred by the city because the
relocation is not completed in the scheduled timeframe.



   c..   Joint Trenching.  All facilities must be placed in
appropriate portions of right-of-way so as to cause minimum conflict with
other underground facilities.  When technically appropriate and no safety
hazards are created, all utilities must be installed, constructed or placed
within the same trench.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, gas and electric
lines must be placed in conformance with state rules governing safety
standards.



2.   Corridors. The city may assign specific corridors within the public
right-of-way, or a portion of it, for each type of facility. If those
corridors have been established, all permits issued by the city involving the
installation or replacement of facilities must designate the proper corridor
for the facility. This subdivision is not intended to establish "high density
corridors." Any owner that has existing facilities in the right-of-way in a
position at variance with the established corridors may remain at that
location until the city requires relocation to the corridor pursuant to
authority granted under state law.



3.   Limitation of Space. To protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the city or the integrity of the public right-of-way and its current use, the
city may prohibit or limit the placement of facilities from a particular
right-of-way. This decision will be based on a consideration of the public
interest, the public's needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the public right-of-way, the time of year with respect to
essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the public
right-of-way, and future plans for public improvements and development
projects that have been determined to be in the public interest.



4.   Damage to Other Facilities. Every public right-of-way user is
responsible for the cost of repairing any facility it damages. This provision
is intended to include costs for damages to boulevard amenities placed by
adjacent property owners, such as sprinkler systems.



5.   Pre-excavation Location.  Before the start date of any right-of-way
excavation, each owner who has facilities in the area to be excavated must
mark the horizontal placement of all those facilities, to the extent
technically feasible.  To the extent its records contain such information,
each registrant must provide information regarding the approximate vertical
location of its facilities to excavators upon request.  Nothing in this
subsection is meant to limit the rights, duties and obligations of the
facility owners or excavators as set forth in state law.



6.   City Activity. When the city does work in the right-of-way in its
governmental right-of-way management function and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move an owner's facilities to carry out the work
without damaging owner's facilities, the city must notify the local
representative as early as is reasonably possible.  The city costs
associated therewith will be billed to that owner and must be paid within 30
days after the date of billing.



7.   Diligence in Performing Work; Delay Penalty.  Work must progress in
an expeditious manner until completion in order to avoid unnecessary
inconvenience.  If the work is not done in an expeditious manner, or is
abandoned without due cause, the city may, after 72 hour notice to the permit
holder, complete or correct the work.  The entire cost of such work must be
paid by the permit holder upon demand made by the city.  In accordance with
Minnesota Rule 7819.1000 subp. 3, the city may establish and impose a delay
penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction,
patching, or restoration.  The delay penalty will be established from time
to time by city council resolution.  A delay penalty will not be imposed for
delays due to circumstances beyond the control of the permittee, such as
inclement weather, civil strife, or acts of God.



1120.125.    Public Right-of-Way Vacation.



1.   Reservation of Right. If the city vacates a public right-of-way that
contains the facilities of a public right-of-way user and the vacation does
not require the relocation of the facilities, the city must reserve, for
itself and the public right-of-way user, the right to install, maintain and
operate facilities in the vacated public right-of-way and to enter upon the
public right-of-way at any time for the purpose of reconstruction,
inspecting, maintaining or repairing the facilities.



2.   Relocation of facilities. If the vacation requires the relocation of
the public right-of-way user's facility, and the vacation proceedings are
initiated by the public right-of-way user or the city for a public project,
the public right-of-way user must pay the relocation costs. If the vacation
proceedings are initiated by a person or persons other than the public
right-of-way user or the city, the initiating person or persons must pay the
relocation costs.



1120.130.    Indemnification and Liability.



1.   Limitation of Liability. Issuance of a public right-of-way permit
does not impose any liability on the city for (a) injuries to persons, damage
to property or loss of service claims by parties other than the permittee or
the city, or (b) claims or penalties resulting from the installation,
presence, maintenance or operation of facilities by registrants or permittees
or activities of registrants or permittees.



2.   Indemnification. A registrant or permittee must indemnify and defend
the city, its officials, employees and agents to the maximum extent that is
allowed under Minnesota Rule 7819.1250.



1120.135.    Abandoned Facilities.



1.   Notification. A public right-of-way user must notify the city when
facilities are abandoned. If an abandoned facility remains, the user must
comply with section 1120.110, subd. 1(f).



2.   Removal of Abandoned Facilities. A right-of-way user that has
abandoned facilities in a right-of-way must remove them from that
right-of-way if required in conjunction with other right-of-way repair,
excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is waived by the city.



1120.140.    Appeal.



A public right-of-way user that: (1) has been denied registration, (2) has
been denied a permit, (3) has had a permit revoked, (4) believes the
relocation cost or city required relocation is unreasonable, (5) believes
that the fees imposed are invalid or unreasonable, or (6) disputes a
determination of the director, may have the matter reviewed by the city
council upon written request. The city council must consider the appeal at
the next reasonably available meeting. The decision by the city council must
be in writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision.



1120.145.    Insurance.



All certificate(s) of insurance or self-insurance required under this section
must provide that:



   a.    an insurance policy has been issued to the applicant by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Minnesota, or
that the applicant has a form of self insurance acceptable to the director;



   b.    the applicant is insured against claims for personal injury,
including death, and property damage arising out of the (1) use and occupancy
of the public right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents, and
employees, and (2) placement and use of facilities and equipment in the
public right-of-way by the permittee, its officers, agents, and employees,
including protection against liability from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities and collapse of property;



   c.   the city is named as an additional insured for the coverages
required under this section;



   d.   the city must be notified 30 days in advance of cancellation of
the policy or material modification of a coverage term; and



   e.   the following coverages and amounts of coverage are in effect:



   GENERAL LIABILITY: public liability, including premises, products and
complete operations.



   Bodily injury liability               $1,000,000 each
person, and



                        $3,000,000 each occurrence



   Property damage liability            $3,000,000 each
occurrence



   Bodily injury and property damage combined   $3,000,000 single limit



   COMPREHENSIVE:  automobile liability insurance, including owned,
non-owned and hired vehicles.



   Bodily injury liability               $1,000,000 each
person



   Property damage liability            $3,000,000 each
occurrence



   Bodily injury and property damage combined   $3,000,000 single limit



The city may require a copy of the actual insurance policies.



1120.150.    Reservation of Regulatory and Police Powers.



A permittee's or registrant's rights are subject to the regulatory and police
powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.



1120.155.    Existing  Agreements.



The provisions of this section apply to all agreements between the city and
another party that allow for an encroachment into public right-of-way and
that are in effect on May 27, 2010. The agreements will remain in effect, but
the provisions of this section will take precedence over any conflicting
provisions in an agreement.



1120.160.    Erosion Onto Street.



The owner of real property must not allow any dirt, sand, silt, gravel, or
other debris from the property to erode upon, or otherwise be deposited on, a
public street. A violation of this provision is a public nuisance that may be
abated in accordance with the provisions of section 845 of this code.



(Former section repealed and new section added by Ord. #2010-04, adopted
April 5, 2010)



SECTION 1125.  PRIVATE USE OF UNDEVELOPED RIGHT OF WAY.



1125.005.  Purpose.



The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure for the city to use
in considering requests for the private use of undeveloped public
right-of-way.



1125.010.  Applicability.



1.   Except as noted below below and except for uses that are regulated
under city code section 1120, this chapter applies to all private uses of
undeveloped public right- of-way regardless of whether the use is presently
taking place or may be permitted in the future. The intent of this chapter is
to primarily govern above-ground private improvements, such as private
streets, that are only for the benefit of adjacent or nearby property.



2.   A person may use undeveloped public right-of-way only by complying
with this chapter's provisions.  An adjacent property owner who owns the
underlying fee is not required to comply with this chapter if the owner’s
use does not have the potential of interfering with the city’s superior
easement rights, but the city may at any time require the owner's use of the
right-of-way to cease if such action would serve the public interest.



3.   Undeveloped right-of-way includes boulevards, slopes adjacent to city
streets, unpaved shoulders, and dedicated streets not yet developed.



4.   Private use of undeveloped public right-of-way will be by permit only.



(Amended by Ord. #2010-05, adopted April 5, 2010)



1125.015.  Procedure.



1.   The engineering department will decide whether to issue a permit. 
The criteria for evaluating a permit request includes guidelines established
by the city council, safety of the public, need to maintain access for
emergency services, the use for which the permit is requested, compatibility
with surrounding uses and neighborhood, and other factors reasonably related
to health, safety and welfare of the community.



2.   The engineering department may impose conditions on a permit.



3.   A permit must contain notice to the permit holder that the permit may
be revoked by the city manager at any time when continued private use of the
undeveloped public right-of-way is contrary to the public interest.  When
revoking a permit for a private driveway that provides the only access to a
property, the city must still allow some reasonable access to the property. 
After a permit revocation, the property owner may petition the council for
construction of a public street.  The council may not deny the property
owner access to his/her property if no other access is available, but may
choose the manner in which it is given.



4.   An aggrieved party may appeal any decision regarding a permit or
application to the city council by submitting a written request to the city
manager.



(Amended by Ord. #2010-05, adopted April 5, 2010)



SECTION 1130.  SNOW REMOVAL RESTRICTIONS.



1130.005.  Definition.



“Street” as used in this section means the traveled portion of any city
street, alley, and highway, county road and state highway within the city of
Minnetonka, including curb and gutter.



1130.010.  Prohibitions.



1.   A person must not deposit snow or ice, plowed or removed from private
property, onto a public street, public sidewalk or other public property.
Street boulevards are intended to provide storage for snow and ice that is
removed from city streets.  Snow or ice that is plowed or removed from
private property may be deposited within the boulevard abutting the property
from which it was removed but must not be deposited in non-abutting boulevard
areas.



2.   A person must not deposit snow or ice, regardless of place of origin,
onto a public street or public sidewalk in a manner that unreasonably
obstructs the use of the street or sidewalk, or interferes with city
snowplowing operations.



3.    An owner or occupant of private property must not permit or allow
anyone who is plowing or removing snow or ice from the owner or occupant's
property to deposit snow or ice in violation of this ordinance.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-02, adopted February 9, 2015)



SECTION 1135.  PARK REGULATIONS.



1135.005.  Purpose.



The rules in this section are enacted to ensure the quiet, orderly, and
responsible use and enjoyment of the city's public park facilities.  The
rules apply in all areas owned or operated by the city as park facilities.



1135.010.  Definitions.



For the purpose of this section, the following terms have the meanings given
below.



1.   “Director” means the department director to whom the specific
duties have been assigned by the city manager.



2.   Domestic animal" means any animal that would be allowed by this code
to reside in a residential dwelling of the city.



3.    "Park facility" means any area owned or operated by the city of
Minnetonka as a public park, beach, recreational trail, athletic field,
skating rink, or other outdoor recreational facility.



4.   "Picnic shelter area" means that portion of a park facility
containing a picnic shelter and picnic tables and all area within 50 feet of
the shelter and tables.



5.   "Public swimming beach" means any public land adjoining public
waters, which has been or may be used in connection with swimming in the
adjacent water.



6.   "Watercraft" means any device designed or used to transport a person
on water, whether motorized or not.  It does not include a device which is
designed to have a portion of the person in the water at all times during use.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-04, effective June 3, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2003-05,
adopted March 17, 2003)



1135.015.  Hours of Operation.



1.   Public parks will be open for public use only between 5:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. of each day, except that Big Willow Park athletic fields may
remain open to the extent provided in city council policy 11.10.



2.   Public swimming beaches at Shady Oak Park and Libbs Lake Park will be
open for swimming only during the times and days designated and posted by the
director.



3.   Recreational trails will be open for public use only between 5:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of each day.



4.   Further restrictions on the hours and days of operation may be
adopted by the director on a temporary basis when deemed necessary in the
public interest and will become effective upon posting in each affected area.



5.   No person and no vehicle, except authorized city personnel and
vehicles, are permitted in or on any park facility when it is not open to the
public.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-04, effective June 3, 2017)



1135.020.  General Rules.



The following rules apply in and on all park facilities.



Animals



1.    Except as allowed in this subdivision, a person may not transport
any animal to or be accompanied by any animal at any park.



   a.   Domestic animals are allowed in the following areas only,
subject to the restrictions in this subdivision:



      (1)   improved trails;



      (2)   maintained turf areas other than athletic fields;



      (3)   unimproved and unmaintained areas; and



      (4)   parking lots as necessary to transport the animal to and
from the park areas specified above.



   b.   At all times while present in the park, a domestic animal must
be accompanied by a competent person in the immediate vicinity of the animal,
who is responsible for the animal.



   c.   When on improved trails, maintained turf areas other than
athletic fields, or parking lots, domestic animals must be either kept in a
secure container from which the animal cannot escape or must be kept on a
leash no longer than six feet in length. Tethering animals is not permitted.



   d.   Unless otherwise signed, dogs may be off-leash within areas of
a park that are unimproved and unmaintained, provided the following
conditions are met:



      (1)   the person responsible for the dog must maintain sight
of the dog at all times;



      (2)   the maximum number of dogs that any person may accompany
off-leash at any time is two;



      (3)   the person must be able to demonstrate that the dog will
respond to the person's voice command on the first command given.



   e.   No person may allow a domestic animal under his or her
responsibility to disturb, harass, or interfere with any park visitor, a park
visitor's property or a park employee.



   f.   A person may not have custody or control of any domestic animal
in a park without possessing an appropriate device for cleaning up the
animal's feces and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner.



   g.   Paragraphs a. and b. above do not apply to service animals as
defined by the federal Americans with Disabilities Act, or to law enforcement
animals.



2.   Wild animals including birds may not be fed, except pursuant to a
city sponsored program.



3.   Wild animals may not be killed, trapped, pursued, caught, or removed,
except when necessary to protect the immediate safety of a person or domestic
animal.  This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person authorized by the director, who is performing official duties.



Damage to Park Property



4.   A person must not plant, cut, burn, damage, disturb, or remove any
vegetation, except as permitted by the city.



5.   A person must not start or maintain a fire, except in grills, fire
slabs, or fire rings provided as part of the park facility.  A person
responsible for a fire must safely and completely extinguish the fire before
leaving.  The smoking of cigarettes, cigars and pipes is regulated elsewhere
in this section.



6.   A person must not deposit or discard upon land or water any bottles,
glass, cans, paper, ashes, garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, snow or other
substance that would mar the appearance, create a stench or a nuisance,
adversely affect the cleanliness or safety of the land, or be likely to
injure any person, property, or animal.  A person must not discard large
items and items unrelated to use of the park facilities into dumpsters or
other garbage containers located at the park facilities.



7.   A person must not distribute leaflets or other written or printed
materials without first notifying the director of the proposed activity and
depositing an amount determined by the director to be sufficient to reimburse
the city for any cleanup costs resulting from the activity.



Vehicles



8.   Only motorized vehicles that are currently licensed to travel on
public streets may be in or on a park facility, and those are allowed only on
parking lots and roadways that provide access to the park facilities.  The
following vehicles are excepted from the provisions of this subdivision:



   a.   authorized maintenance and public safety vehicles;



   b.   electric-assisted bicycles as defined by state law; and



   c.   wheelchairs and "other power driven mobility devices" as
defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act and associated regulations, to
the extent necessary to accommodate reasonable and safe use of trails by
persons with disabilities dependent on motorized transport.



9.    A person must not operate a snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, or
motorized trail bike anywhere within a park.



10.   A person must park motorized vehicles only within designated parking
stalls in parking lots.  If parking is allowed by permit only, the city
permit must be conspicuously displayed on the vehicle at all times while it
is parked.



11.   A person must not operate a motorized vehicle at a speed in excess
of 15 miles per hour or other posted speed limit.



12.    Non-motorized bicycles are allowed only on parking lots, roadways,
and trails established and maintained by the city and in areas designated and
signed for bicycle use. A person must not ride a bicycle in other areas of a
park.



Specific Activities



13.   A person must not use recreational equipment, including but not
limited to flying discs, snowboards or skateboards, on parking lots and
driveways. Skateboards may be used only on improved trails and designated
skateboard areas.



14.   A person must not use a golf club to hit, drive, or otherwise propel
a golf ball or other object.



15.   A person must not camp in or erect a tent or other structure, except
as part of a city-sponsored program or as authorized by a permit issued by
the director.



16.   A person must not use a sled, toboggan, or other means of sliding on
snow and ice in areas where this activity is prohibited by signs.



17.   A person must not sell or offer for sale any item or service, except
as authorized by the director.



18.   Use of tobacco-related products, as defined at section 625.005 of
this code, is prohibited within 50 feet of park areas designated for use by
youth, including playgrounds, youth athletic fields, skating rinks, tennis
courts, basketball courts, multipurpose courts and informal ball fields.



19.   A person must not have any glass container in a park facility.



Noise



20.   A person must not use or operate a radio, musical instrument, or
other device used for reproduction of sound, in a manner to disturb the peace
or comfort of others in its vicinity.  Prima facie evidence of a violation
of this provision exists when the device is operated so that it is plainly
audible 50 feet away in any direction.



21.   A person must not use loudspeakers or other amplifying systems
without obtaining and being in compliance with a permit from the city, as
provided below in section 1135.030.



Permit Required



22.   A person must not possess, consume, or serve any alcoholic beverage
without obtaining and being in compliance with a permit from the city, as
provided below in section 1135.030.



23.   A group of 25 people or more must not gather for any reason without
obtaining and being in compliance with a permit from the city, as provided
below in section 1135.030.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-04, effective June 3, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2011-08,
adopted June 6, 2011; amended by Ord. #2001-11, adopted April 16, 2001;
amended by Ord. #2003-05, adopted March 17, 2003)



1135.025.  Special Rules.



In addition to the general rules, the following special rules are applicable
to the areas designated.



1.   In or on Shady Oak Lake Park and Libbs Lake Park, a person must not
engage in the following conduct:



   a.   be in water within 50 feet of the shoreline that is not
specifically designated for swimming;



   b.   be in the designated swimming area adjacent to a public
swimming beach when the beach is closed to public use or when a lifeguard is
not on duty or outside of posted "no lifeguard on duty" hours;



   c.   be in the designated swimming area adjacent to the Shady Oak
Lake Park public swimming beach when no lifeguard is on duty or after written
or verbal notice that the lifeguard is going off duty;



   d.   use floatation devices beyond the areas designated for their
use;



   e.   fish in water designated as a swimming area or no fishing area;



   f.   take cans or glass objects of any kind onto a public swimming
beach;



   g.   possess, use, or launch a watercraft on any land within the
parks, except as part of a city-sponsored program or by authorized city
personnel in the performance of life-saving or law enforcement duties; and



   h.   occupy a watercraft in the designated swimming area adjacent to
a public swimming beach or in water up to 50 feet away from that area, except
authorized city personnel in the performance of life-saving or law
enforcement duties.



2.   On any recreational trail, each person must:



   a.   provide sufficient room for other trail users traveling in the
opposite direction;



   b.   use caution when passing another user traveling in the same
direction;



   c.   stay on the improved portion of the trail;



   d.   when riding a bicycle, yield the right of way to pedestrians
and comply with state laws governing the use of bicycles on public roads;



   e.   obey all official signs and traffic control markings and
signals;



   f.   yield to motor vehicle traffic at intersections with roadways;



   g.   comply with the following prohibitions:



      (1)   no lurking and loitering in violation of section 508 of
the city code;



      (2)   no motorized vehicles except those allowed in section
1135.020(8).



3.    Use of Minnetonka Mills park and the Burwell site must comply with
city council policy 11.6.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-04, effective June 3, 2017)



1135.030.  Permits.



1.   Applications for permits for alcoholic beverages, large group events,
and sound amplification must be submitted to the city in accordance with
procedures and fees prescribed by the director.  The director may deny a
permit application when the proposed activity may adversely affect the public
health, safety, or welfare, or the condition of the park facility.  The
director may add conditions to any permit to mitigate potential adverse
effects or to ensure the quiet and orderly use and enjoyment of the park
facility.  Any person aggrieved by action of the director may appeal to the
city council by submitting a request in writing to the director within 10
days after notice of the action.



2.   Permits for alcoholic beverages are subject to the following
requirements.



   a.   Permits will be only for beer and wine in non-glass containers.



   b.   Permits will be issued only for use at a picnic shelter for
which a reservation has been made.



   c.   Permitted alcoholic beverages may be possessed and consumed
only in picnic shelter areas.  Alcoholic beverages are not permitted on any
athletic field, tennis court, skating rink, or adjacent areas and not in any
parking lot.



   d.   The person responsible for the gathering must remain within the
area for which the permit was issued at all times that alcoholic beverages
are being served, must have the permit in possession, and must display it
upon the request of authorized city personnel.



   e.   Alcoholic beverages are not permitted before 10:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-04, effective June 3, 2017)



1135.035.  Park Administration.



1.   The director may regulate the use of recreational facilities such as
picnic shelter areas and ballfields within a park facility.  This includes
the authority to require advance reservations.



2.   Upon recommendation of the park board and approval by the city
council, the director may require permits for the parking of vehicles in any
of the park facilities and may establish fee schedules for those permits. 
The requirement for a parking permit must be conspicuously posted at the
facilities affected.



3.   The director or any city law enforcement officer may declare that any
part or all of a park facility is closed to the public for any interval of
time or for any particular use, as reasonably determined necessary in the
public interest.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-04, effective June 3, 2017)



1135.040.  Penalty.



A violation of a provision of these park rules and any regulations
established by the director is a petty misdemeanor, except that the following
are misdemeanors:



1.   a violation which is committed in a manner or under circumstances
which endanger or are likely to endanger a person or property; and



2.   a violation of any of these park rules when preceded by two or more
violations of these rules within the previous 12 months.



Violations are punishable in accordance with chapter 13 of the city code.



SECTION 1140.  VACATION OF PUBLIC STREETS, EASEMENTS AND GROUNDS.



1140.005.  Purpose; council authority.



This section is adopted pursuant to section 12.06 of the city charter.  The
city council may vacate all or a part of any street, alley, public easement,
public way or public ground, either upon its own motion or upon application
as provided in this section.



1140.010.  Application for vacation.



1.   An application for vacation must be filed with the city engineer on a
form provided by the city. An application must be signed by the owner of
property that directly abuts the street, alley or public way to be vacated,
or by an owner of property that is encumbered by the street, alley, public
easement, public way or public ground to be vacated. 



2.   The applicant must provide the following information with the
application:



   a.   Information, written and graphic, that describes the reason
for, and the location of, the proposed vacation, including whether the
application relates to a pending request for subdivision, rezoning, or other
land use approval;



   b.   A legal description of the area to be vacated;



   c.   A copy of the instrument that created the interest to be
vacated, except that copies of plats are not required to be provided;



   d.   Proof of the applicant's ownership of property that abuts or is
encumbered by the interest to be vacated;



   e.   Names and addresses of other property owners whose properties
the applicant knows are directly benefited by the easement to be vacated.



3.   Upon receipt of the application, the engineer will determine the
estimated costs for publication of the hearing, postage for the mailed
notices, and recording fees for a notice of completion of proceedings.  The
application will not be processed until the applicant has paid those
estimated costs, together with the fee specified in section 710 of this code.
If the application is denied, the city will reimburse to the applicant the
estimated amount of recording fees.



4.   If the application relates to a pending request for subdivision,
rezoning or other land use approval, the city engineer will refer the
application to the community development department to process in conjunction
with the land use application.



1140.015.  Public Hearing Required.



1.   The city engineer must notify every right of way user, as defined by
Minnesota Rules 7819.0050, that has registered with the city of any
application or council proposal for vacation, not less than two weeks in
advance of the public hearing.



2.   Notice of the public hearing must be published in the official means
of publication at least two weeks in advance of the public hearing.



3.   Notice of the public hearing must be mailed at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing to (a) the owner of each property that abuts the area
to be vacated; and (b) if the interest to be vacated was dedicated as part of
a plat, the owner of each property in the plat; and (c) to owners of other
properties, if any, that city staff determines receive public services from
the area to be vacated and do not have alternate means of receiving the
public services. For the purposes of giving mailed notice, the city engineer
or community development department may use any appropriate records. 
Defects in the mailed notice will not invalidate the proceedings.



4.   The council will conduct the hearing, consider the request, and
render its decision. A street, alley, public easement, public way or public
ground, or portion thereof, may not be vacated unless the city council
determines, by resolution, that there is no existing or future public need
for the real estate interest that is vacated. The resolution must specify
whether there are any existing utility facilities located within the area
vacated and whether an easement for continued operation and maintenance of
the facilities is reserved.  The resolution must be adopted by a majority of
all members eligible to vote.



1140.020.  Notice of completion.



Upon the adoption of a vacation resolution, the city engineer will prepare
and record in the county land records a notice of completion of vacation.



(Amended by Ord. 2016-01, effective February 13, 2016)



CHAPTER 12:  PUBLIC UTILITIES



Section



   1200.   WATER AND SANITARY SEWER.



   1205.   STORM SEWERS.



SECTION 1200.  WATER AND SANITARY SEWER.



1200.005.  General.



The municipal water system and the municipal sanitary sewer system will be
operated as public utilities.  All revenues and operating expenditures of
these utilities will be properly accounted for in a separate municipal fund,
which will be a combined water and sewer utility fund.  The council may, by
ordinance or resolution, establish fees for connection to and use of the
municipal water and sanitary sewer systems.



1200.010.  Definitions.



The following words and terms when used in this section have the meanings
given below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:



1.   “Municipal water system” or “city water”  means the
municipal water system of the city of Minnetonka.



2.   “Sewage” means a combination of the water carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.



3.   “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



4.   “Public sewer” or “municipal sewer” means the municipal
sanitary sewer system of the city of Minnetonka.



5.   “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial
processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.



6.   “Garbage” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



7.   “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



8.   “City” means city of Minnetonka or its duly appointed agents or
representatives.



9.   “Person” means any individual, firm, company, association,
society, corporation or group.



10.   “Individual sewage disposal system” means a sewage disposal
system other than a public or municipal system, which receives sewage from an
individual establishment.



11.   “Designated low lots” means lots which because of elevation were
designated to receive sanitary sewer service by means of an individual house
lift pump unit.



1200.015.  Connections Required.



1.   The owner of any property presently developed for residential use
which is not connected to the municipal water system must connect the
property before its sale or other legal transfer of ownership.  If the owner
fails to do so, the buyer must make the connection immediately after the sale
or transfer.  All property presently developed for non-residential use must
be connected to the municipal water system.  All new structures must be
connected to the municipal water system at the time of construction.  The
community development director may grant an extension of time for compliance
with this ordinance not to exceed 6 months.  The director may impose
appropriate stipulations including the posting of a performance bond or other
financial security if desirable.  If compliance with the requirements of
this paragraph is not timely achieved, the city may make the necessary
connection, and the city's costs will be a lien against and may be assessed
against the property in the same manner as delinquent utility bills.  The
city may file an appropriate document in the chain of title for non-complying
properties providing notice of these requirements.



2.   The owner of property where a cesspool or septic tank was in
existence before construction of the municipal sanitary sewer must connect
with the public sanitary sewer when the cesspool or septic tank is in need of
repair or reconstruction, or within two years after the date that municipal
sanitary sewer service is available to the premises, whichever occurs
first.  If the necessary connection is not timely made, the city may make
the connection, and the city's costs will be a lien against and may be
assessed against the property in the same manner as delinquent utility bills.
Any property owner who can demonstrate that connection to municipal sewer is
not feasible due to distance, topography or pending land use change may apply
in writing for a variance, stating the circumstances that make connection
infeasible. The council may waive the requirement as long as no health,
safety or welfare hazard exists or would result.  Before requesting the
variance and periodically thereafter as determined by the city, the property
owner must test the current cesspool or septic tank at the owner's expense to
ensure that a potential health hazard does not exist and is not likely to
occur.  The results of the test must be filed with the community development
director along with a fee of $10 for each test.  Failure to conduct the
testing or pay the fee is grounds for the revocation of any variance granted
under this section.  The city may file an appropriate document in the chain
of title for non-complying properties providing notice of these requirements.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-01, adopted January 26, 2009)



1200.020.  Proportionate Share of Capital Costs.



No permit will be issued to connect with any municipal water or sewer
facility either directly or indirectly unless:



1.   the land to be served has been individually assessed for its
proportionate share of the cost of constructing the facilities to which the
connection is made;



2.   proceedings for levying the assessment have been or will be commenced
in due course;



3.   a connection fee equal to the proportionate share of the construction
costs has been paid to the city; or



4.   the land that was originally assessed has been further subdivided,
and a connection fee equal to a proportionate share of the construction
costs, in comparison with other premises, has been paid to the city.



The city council may adopt a policy establishing the method of calculating an
appropriate connection fee.



1200.025.  Fees and Permits.



1.   No person may connect to the city water or sanitary sewer systems
without first obtaining a permit from the city. The permit will not be
granted unless the fees required by adopted council policy have been paid or
deferred in accordance with that policy. The person must also obtain any
other permits required by other provisions of this code for plumbing work,
electrical work, excavations in city streets, or other work.  On designated
low lots where the lift pump unit is provided by the city, the cost of the
electrical permit is waived.  The person must comply with all terms of the
permits that are issued. 



2.   The amount of the water meter fee and any connection charges must be
paid when applying for service before the service is installed.  No service
will be turned on until all fees and charges are paid.



3.   The city fees for turning water on or off at the request of the
property owner and for raising or lowering stop box tops to correspond with a
ground level change made by the property owner are specified in section 710.



A violation of this ordinance is subject to the penalties and provisions of
Chapter XIII of the city code.



(Amended by Ord. 2017-08, effective July 12, 2017; Amended by Ord. 2006-20,
adopted November 6, 2006)



1200.030.  Rates and Charges.



1.   Rates and charges for the collection and treatment of sewage and for
water from the water system will be established by the council.  The rates
may not exceed an amount reasonably calculated to cover the cost of the
proper maintenance and operation of the systems, including the cost of
amortization of any indebtedness and a reserve for capital replacement.



2.   The owner of a property is responsible for all bills accruing through
the use of water and sewer facilities on that property, whether the property
is occupied by the owner or by someone else. Unpaid charges constitute a lien
against the benefiting premises on and after the date they were incurred and
may be certified to the county auditor for collection with taxes in
accordance with subdivision 6 below.



3.   Premises that are not connected to municipal water and sanitary sewer
will be billed a minimum charge for sewer and water service.  This minimum
billing will in no way restrict or prevent other civil and criminal sanctions
applicable for failure to comply with ordinance provisions.



4.   Statements for water and sewer charges for the preceding quarterly
period will be mailed to each customer within 10 days after the first day of
each quarter.  They will also include any amounts due for repairs on meters,
fines, penalties, or other indebtedness.  These statements are deemed
sufficient notice of the charges to the consumer and to the property owner. 
The statements will be due and payable before the end of the month in which
they are billed. A person may appeal the amount of a charge by submitting it
in writing to the city manager. If not satisfied by the city manager's
response, the person may request that the matter be heard before the city
council. The city council will have the final determination on appeals. No
appeal is permitted for a charge that has already been assessed under
paragraph 6 below or that was paid more than two years previously.



5.   At the end of 30 days after the date of the statements, all bills not
paid become delinquent.  It is the duty of the city manager to promptly
collect delinquent accounts.  The city will notify each delinquent consumer
or, in case he/she cannot be found, then the property owner or other person
in charge of the premises, of the amount due.  If the amount due is not paid
or satisfactory payment arrangements are not made within 10 days after this
notice, the city may notify the delinquent consumer or person in charge of
the premises that the water service will be shut off.  If satisfactory
payment arrangements are not made within 72 hours after the shut-off notice,
the city may shut off service at the stop box.



6.   If the efforts to obtain voluntary payment fail, any amounts due for
municipal water or sewer charges plus penalty and interest may be collected
in an action brought for that purpose in the name of the city, or may be
certified as an assessment against the property that was served. The council
will establish the appropriate penalty and rate of interest, taking into
consideration such market conditions as the prime rate of interest generally
charged by the major twin cities banks.  Before certification against the
property, notice of the impending certification and an opportunity to be
heard by the council must be given to the taxpayer of record.  Failure of
the taxpayer to receive the notice does not invalidate the certification,
however.  After approval of the city council, the clerk may certify to the
county auditor the amount due together with the legal description of the
premises served.  The county auditor will enter the amount with the tax levy
on those premises, collectible with the taxes for the following year. These
remedies are in addition to the right to shut off water for the non-payment
of a water bill.



7.   When there is a change of property ownership or other change in
responsibility for paying the charges, the consumer must notify the city. 
The meter will be read at that time to determine the final bill.  A consumer
may request that the city suspend service for a period of time, but during
that time the consumer must still pay the minimum billing amount.



8.   In all cases where water has been turned off for the non-payment of
bills or for violation of any regulations of the city, the water will not be
turned on again until all delinquent charges and bills, plus penalty and
interest, have been paid and a charge for turning the water on has been paid.
The additional fees and charges are specified in section 710.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-19, adopted December 3, 2012; amended by Ord. 2008-33,
adopted October 27, 2008; amended by Ord. #2006-20, adopted November 6, 2006)



1200.035.  Industrial User Strength Charge.



1.   The metropolitan council environmental services division (the
“council”) provides sewage disposal for the twin cities metropolitan
area.  In order to comply with federal law, the council has imposed an
industrial user sewer strength charge to recover operation and maintenance
costs of treatment facilities attributable to the strength of the industrial
waste.  This is in addition to the charge based on the volume of discharge.



2.   Each industrial user receiving waste treatment services must pay the
strength charge to the council if billed directly by the council, or to the
city if the city has been required by the council to pay the charge. 
Payment and collection of the strength charge to the city will follow the
procedure applicable to normal sewer and water charges.



1200.040.  Sprinkling; Limitations.



1.   The use of lawn hoses is permitted at all hours of the day, but when
there is a fire in any area served by the water system, all lawn hoses must
be shut off and all other unnecessary use of water must be stopped.



2.   Whenever the city determines that a shortage of water supply
threatens the city, it may, by published notice, limit the times and hours
during which water may be used for lawn or garden sprinkling, irrigation, car
washing, swimming pools, air conditioning or other uses.  Notice of the
limitations must be mailed or delivered to a violator, and the person may not
violate the limitations after receipt of the notice.  In addition, the city
may discontinue water service to any customer who causes or permits water to
be used in violation of the provisions of the notice.



3.   To conserve water resources, prevent the wasteful and harmful effects
of sprinkling during mid-day hours, and allow the city's water system
adequate opportunity to replenish the water supply in the city's water
storage tanks, certain limitations must be placed on the use of the city's
water supply.  During the period of May 1 through September 30 of any year,
a person may only sprinkle or irrigate lawns, sod, seeded areas, gardens,
shrubs, or other vegetation in the city:



   a.    before 11:00 a.m. and after 5:00 p.m.; and



   b.   on calendar dates ending in an odd number on property with
street addresses ending in an odd number, or on calendar dates ending in an
even number on property with street addresses ending in an even number.



   No use of water for these purposes may occur between the hours of 11:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any day or in violation of the odd/even system
established above.



4.   Exceptions.  The restrictions established in paragraphs 2 and 3 do
not apply to the use of water:



   a.    from a hose that a person holds by hand;



   b.   under the conditions of a permit issued by the public works
director for special situations such as the watering of new sod; or



   c.   from a source of water other than the city's water system if
the water user has registered the other source with the city, obtained a
water appropriation permit if required under Minn. Stat.§ 103B.211, Subd. 4,
and posted a sign provided by the city that clearly informs the public of the
alternative water source.



   If a person claims the privilege of an exception, the city may inspect
the person's property during reasonable times to ensure that there is
compliance with this provision.



5.   Penalties.



   a.   A violation of the restrictions contained in paragraphs 1
through 3 is a petty misdemeanor, except that a violation that is preceded
within the previous 12 months by two or more violations of these paragraphs
is a misdemeanor.



   b.   In addition, a civil penalty may be imposed for each day of
violation.  This penalty will be collected with water usage charges for the
premises where the violation took place.  The penalty will be $50.00 for the
first violation and will increase by the sum of $25.00 each time for each
succeeding violation.  A penalty may be appealed in the same manner as false
alarm charges, pursuant to city code section 915.035.



(Amended by Ord. #2001-28, adopted October 22, 2001; amended by Ord.
#2002-22, adopted September 9, 2002; amended by Ord. # 2003-01, adopted
January 6, 2003)



1200.045.  Meters.



1.   The city will exclusively own, control and supply the water meters to
be used in the city water system.  The city may remove and change a meter as
to size and type whenever deemed necessary.  A meter charge will be made to
each consumer connecting to the city water system.  This charge will be the
actual cost of the meter to the city plus 15 percent to cover the cost of
handling.



2.   The city will keep an accurate record of each meter in use, read all
meters at the end of each quarter and calculate the amount of water used by
each consumer.



3.   The amount of sewer charges will be estimated by the city for all
commercial, industrial and institutional buildings connected to the sanitary
sewer system but not connected to the city water system.  If the owner
disagrees with the estimate, the owner may purchase from the city and install
a water meter of adequate size.  The meter will be attached to the private
fresh water supply system of a building for the purpose of determining the
amount of water that is discharged into the sanitary sewer.



4.   Meters in use that do not have a remote reader must have the remote
reader installed by the city.  The actual cost of the remote reader will be
paid through the addition of a portion of the cost to the quarterly water
bill until the total cost of the remote reader has been paid.  The amount to
be paid quarterly will be determined by the council.



5.   If any meter is damaged by carelessness or neglect of the owner or
occupant of the premises or their agents, the owner or occupant must pay for
the repair.  The cost of ordinary maintenance and repairs of all meters
owned by the city will be borne by the city.



6.   Upon request of any property owner or consumer, the city will test
the meter at the person’s premises.  The deposit specified in section 710
will be required before the meter is disconnected.  The deposit will be
returned to the owner or consumer if the meter is not found to be registering
correctly within 10 percent; otherwise the deposit will be retained by the
city to cover the cost of the test.  The owner or consumer may be present at
the time of the test.  The result of any the test will be reported to the
owner or consumer.



7.   If the testing of a meter indicates that it registers in excess of 10
percent error, the charge for water used during the quarter in which the test
is made will be the charge for the corresponding quarter of the previous
year. If the charge for the corresponding period cannot be fairly used, the
charge will be equitably adjusted by the city.  Any other adjustment of
charges for water supplied through meters will be made by authorized
personnel or by the council upon appeal.



8.   No person will be allowed city water until a meter supplied by the
city has been installed so that it will register all water consumed, and
until all other parts of the plumbing on the premises are in full compliance
with city regulations.



9.   The bottom of a meter may not be less than 4 inches, nor more than 12
inches, from the top of the finished basement floor line. The meter may not
be more than 12 inches measured horizontally from the inside line of the
basement wall.



10.   All meter installations must have a valve on the house side and on
the street side of the meter.



11.   The water pipe that connects with the city watermain must have no
joints where it is located under the basement or slab floor.



12.   No person may obstruct a meter so as to interfere with the reading
or repairing of the meter.  No person may tamper with a meter to cause it to
incorrectly measure the amount of water.  No person may obtain water from
the city water system without having the amount of water measured by a
city-supplied water meter.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-20, adopted November 6, 2006)



1200.050.  Access to Premises.



An owner or occupant of any property must allow an authorized city
representative to enter upon all properties at reasonable times for meter
reading and inspecting and testing the city sanitary sewer and water
systems.  The city will promptly notify the owner or occupant in writing of
any required repairs.  If the required repairs are not made within 10 days,
the city may shut off the water.



1200.055.  Connection Requirements.



1.   No person may make any replacement connection to the city water or
sewer system without first removing the old service in a manner satisfactory
to the city.



2.   The applicant must assist the city in making any measurements
necessary in locating the tap in the main and curb cock.



3.   Lift pumps.



   a.   The addresses or legal descriptions of lots that are very low
in elevation and are designed to receive sanitary sewer service via an
individual home lift pump unit will be on file at city hall.  When
connection to the sewer is made, the lift pump units will be provided by the
city at no cost to owners of designated low lots.  The owner is responsible
for installation but must use a licensed contractor.



   b.   Unless the city expressly approves the use of an individual
lift pump unit or lift station, all sanitary sewer service to existing
portions of the city's sanitary sewer system must be by gravity flow.  This
requirement applies to all residential, commercial and industrial
construction.  The depth of the service will be noted by the city on each
site plan when reviewed and on each building permit when approved.  The
owner and developer will be responsible for providing proper elevations to
assure gravity flow.



   c.   Any owner or developer wishing to design a building contrary to
the provisions of subparagraph b must apply in writing to the city engineer
for approval of the design.



   d.   If any construction is designed and approved to receive
sanitary sewer service via a lift pump unit or lift station, the owner of the
property must supply and install the unit or design and construct the
station.  The plans for installation and construction must first be approved
by the city.  The property owner will be responsible for the cost of the
installation or construction and all operation and maintenance.



4.   The minimum size water service is one-inch tube of any material
permitted by the state plumbing code with the exception of type "L" copper,
which is not permitted.  Plastic services must be a minimum of 160 p.s.i.
rating.  Cast iron pipe will not be permitted in the system.  No flared
fittings will be permitted on plastic services.



5.   The corporation cock inserted in the distributing pipe must be of the
size specified on the permit order.  Every copper service pipe must be laid
sufficiently waving to allow at least one foot of extra length to prevent
rupture by settlement.  The service pipe must be placed at least seven feet
below the surface in all cases, and arranged to prevent rupture from freezing.



6.   The service pipe must extend from the main to the inside of the
building, or if not taken into a building, then to the hydrant or other
fixture that it is intended to supply.  A stop cock accessible through a
sleeve from the surface without digging must be placed outside in a box at
the property line, and a shutoff or other stop cock must be placed close to
the inside wall of the building, well protected from freezing.  All stop
boxes and cocks must be approved by the city.  All stop boxes at the
property line must be set in front of the building intended to be supplied,
unless otherwise approved by the city.



7.   The service pipe from the city watermain to the meter must enter the
building so that the meter and horn are in a horizontal position.  No more
than 12 inches of pipe may be exposed between the point of the entrance
through the basement floor and the valve on the street side of the meter. 
The valve must be connected directly to the meter.



8.   If a person laying the service pipe fails to insert the corporation
cock or make the connection to the curb stop at the time specified in the
person’s application, the person must notify the community development
department of another day to make the connection.  Notice must be given at
least two days before the excavation for the laying of a service pipe, and
the connection must be made before 4:00 p.m., except as otherwise approved in
writing by the city.



(Amended by Ord. 2012-07, adopted June 25, 2012)



1200.060.  Stop Box City Property.



The stop cock at main and property or curb line, together with box and cover,
are the property of the city.  All unauthorized persons are prohibited from
interfering with them.



1200.065.  Disconnecting City Water Service.



1.   When reasonably necessary to protect public health, safety, the
public water supply, or private property, the chief building official or the
public works director may disconnect the city water service to a property if
any of the following conditions exists:



   a.   The property is vacant;



   b.   The property is unsecured;



   c.   The property is determined to be uninhabitable or unsuitable
for occupancy;



   d.   Other utilities to the property providing heat or light have
been shut off;



   e.   The property has plumbing that is failing or unsafe;



   f.   Water service to the property creates or contributes to an
unsanitary or unsafe condition for anyone who enters the property;



   g.   Water service to the property has the potential to adversely
affect the city's water system; or



   h.   The property owner or occupant has refused access to a city
representative as authorized by this code.



2.   When there is no immediate emergency, disconnection cannot occur
until five days after the city has provided written notice of the impending
disconnection to the property owner of record by mail and by posting on the
building.



3.   After the city has disconnected the water service, the service cannot
be re-connected to the property until it has passed an inspection by the
chief building official and the necessary permits have been issued and fees
have been paid.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-37, adopted November 24, 2008)



1200.070.  Connection Prohibited.



1.   No more than one building or in the case of townhouses, one unit, may
be supplied from one water service pipe, except by special permission of the
city.  Whenever two or more parties are supplied from one pipe connecting
with the distribution main, each building or part of the building must have a
separate stop box at the curb.



2.   No part of the city water supply system may be connected with any
other source of water, except adjoining municipal water systems.  Failure to
immediately disconnect such a connection upon notice from city is a violation
of this ordinance. If the connection is not terminated, the city may turn off
the city water supply.



3.   If any person wishes to use a private well system in conjunction with
city water, that well system must not be connected to the city water and
sewer systems.  The private well system may supply only spigots located on
the outside of the building, one cold water faucet inside the building
located only on a kitchen sink, and any other location approved by the city
that is served by means of a separate line run from the well.  Water
obtained from those spigots may be used only for watering lawns, gardens and
shrubs, washing cars and other similar uses.  None of the drainage from
those uses may go into the city sewer system.



4.   No building located on property lying outside the city may be
connected to the city sanitary sewer system unless there is a proper contract
between the city and the municipality containing the building.



5.   No sanitary sewer connection may be made to any structure unless the
structure has at least a vented main line.



6.   The water service to a building must not be turned on in freezing
weather unless the temperature inside the building is 50 degrees Fahrenheit
or above.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-37, adopted November 24, 2008)



1200.075.  Maintenance.



1.   The property owner must bear the cost of installing the sanitary
sewer service line between the building and main service stub.  The property
owner is also responsible for all maintenance and repairs to the sanitary
sewer service line between the street main and the building being served.



2.   No owner, occupant or other person having charge of any building that
drains into the city sanitary sewer may permit any substance to pass into the
sewer if it might form a deposit or obstruction.  Within five days after
written notice from the city, the owner, occupant or other person must remove
a deposit or obstruction caused by the person and provide a means to prevent
substances that cause a deposit or obstruction, from passing into the city
sanitary sewer.



3.   The service pipe to the watermain beginning at the corporation
connection belongs to the owner of the premises and must be protected and
maintained by the owner.



4.   The city will warrant the "individual home lift pump units" against
normal wear for the designated low lots requiring them.  The property owner
must repair at the owner’s own expense any damage to the lift pump unit
caused by the owners' negligence or abuse.  Negligence and abuse includes
depositing into the sewer system the prohibited substances in section
1200.095 or substances not normally intended to be deposited into the
sanitary sewer system.



1200.080.  Breaks, Interrupted Service.



No claim may be made against the city because of any breaking of any
watermain, service pipe, or fixture or for any other interruption of the
supply.



1200.085.  Sewage Disposal.



1.   No person may deposit or permit to be deposited any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste upon public or private
property within the city in any unsanitary manner.



2.   No person may construct or maintain any privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage,
except when used in connection with construction projects, temporary
recreation programs, or residences that are not connected to the city
sanitary sewer system.



3.   Until connection with the city sanitary sewer system, the owners of
properties not required to be connected to the city system must comply with
all regulations applying to individual sewage disposal systems and their use.



(Section 1200.085(4) was repealed by Ord. #2006-20, adopted November 6, 2006)



1200.090.  Individual Sewage Disposal Systems.



All properties not required to be connected to the city sanitary sewer system
must have individual sewage disposal systems that are operating
satisfactorily.  The installation of, and alteration to, an individual
sewage disposal system must be in compliance with building, electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating and sewerage regulations of the city and the
state of Minnesota.



1200.095.  Discharge of Prohibited Substances; Sump Pumps.



1.   Definition.  "Clear water" for the purpose of section 1200 is
defined as storm water; natural precipitation; melting snow; ground water;
water flow from a roof, ground surface, subsurface drainage, down spout, eave
trough, rainspout, yard drain, sump pump, foundation drain, yard fountain,
pond, swimming pool that is not operated on a year-round basis, cistern
overflow, or air conditioning unit or system; or any other water that is not
required to be treated by state or federal law.



2.   Prohibited Discharges. No person may directly or indirectly
discharge, or permit to be discharged, any of the following substances into
the city sanitary sewer system:  clear water; gasoline, naphtha, benzine,
kerosene, turpentine or any spirit gas or fluid; any material of an explosive
or suffocating nature, or that may possibly create combustible or suffocating
gases or vapors; and gravel, sand, dirt or any other heavy material in
anything other than nominal quantities.



3.   Sump Pumps.  Any sump pump system in a structure within the city
must have a permanently installed discharge line from the pump that meets the
following requirements:



   a.   It must not at any time discharge water into the municipal
sanitary sewer system;



   b.   It must provide the capability for year-round discharge to the
outside of the structure, to the city's storm sewer system, or to a city
street if street drainage has been approved by the public works director; and



   c.   It must consist of a rigid discharge line, without any
connections for altering the path of discharge, and if connected to the
city's storm sewer line, must also include a check valve.



4.   Inspections.  All inspections provided for in this section must be
at times that are reasonably convenient for ordinary citizens. City staff may
apply to the district court for an appropriate administrative search warrant
if a property owner refuses to allow an inspection of the owner's property.



   a.   Regular inspections.  Within 30 days after written notice from
the city, every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the
city's sanitary sewer system must allow the city or a designated city
representative to inspect the buildings to determine whether there is a
prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system. In lieu of having the
city inspect the property, a person may furnish an inspection report in a
form acceptable to the public works director from a licensed plumber approved
by the public works director.



   b.   Re-inspections. A property that is found to be not in
compliance with this section is subject to re-inspections to confirm that the
property is subsequently brought into compliance. Thereafter, the property is
subject to re-inspections on an annual basis to confirm continued compliance.
Properties that are in compliance may also be subject to re-inspections to
confirm continued compliance.



   c.   Inspections with building permits.  If a city inspector is on
a property for the purpose of inspecting for compliance with a building
permit, the city inspector has the authority to also inspect the property for
compliance with this section.



5.   Corrections.  The owner of a property found to be in violation of
this section must make the necessary corrections to comply with this section
within the time specified in the written notification from the city. If the
owner fails or refuses to make the required corrections within the specified
time, the city may make the necessary corrections and charge the cost to the
property owner. Costs that are not paid are a lien against the property and
may be certified for collection as a special assessment in the same manner as
delinquent utility bills.



6.   Surcharges.  A monthly surcharge in the amounts specified in section
710 of this code will be added to each sewer and water bill for property
where (a) an inspection has not been allowed or certification provided within
30 days after notice by the city, (b) the necessary corrections have not been
made within the time specified, or (c) there has been a reconnection of a
previously disconnected prohibited discharge when the property is owned by
the same or a related owner who owned the property when disconnection
occurred. A surcharge will be added for every month during which the property
is not in compliance, whether the non-compliance has been  for the entire
month or a portion of it. The surcharge for a reconnection will be charged
beginning with the month after the inspection or certification that confirmed
the previous disconnection.



7.   Suspension of service.  The city may suspend water service to a
property that is not in compliance with this section or when the owner has
not allowed a required inspection or provided an alternative certification.



8.   Temporary waiver.  The public works director may allow or require a
temporary waiver from the provisions of this section where strict enforcement
would cause a threat of damage to other property, the environment, or public
safety because of circumstances unique to the individual property. A written
request for a temporary waiver must be first submitted to the public works
director specifying the reasons for the request. If a waiver is required or
granted, the property owner must pay an additional fee for sanitary sewer
services based on the number of gallons discharged into the sanitary sewer
system as estimated by the public works director. The public works director
may terminate the waiver upon a failure to comply with any conditions imposed
in the temporary waiver or may take appropriate legal action to enforce those
conditions. The director must give five-days advance written notice of the
termination to the property owner with the reasons for the action. After
expiration or termination of a temporary waiver, the property owner must
comply with the provisions of this section.



9.   Remedies.  The remedies provided in this section are cumulative and
do not limit the right of the city to pursue any available legal remedy.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-15, adopted October 26, 2009; amended by Ord. 2009-01,
adopted January 26, 2009; amended by Ord. #2006-22, adopted November 6, 2006)



1200.100.  Correction Required.



The city may notify any person who has done work that does not comply with
the provisions of this ordinance, who has failed to do work required by this
ordinance, or whose service line connecting to the city's system is defective
and require correction within a reasonable time.  Failure to make a timely
correction is a violation of this ordinance.  If a timely correction is not
made, the city may enter onto the property to make the necessary
correction.  The person responsible for making the correction must reimburse
the city for its costs.  If reimbursement is not made, the city may certify
the unpaid amount against the property where the violation occurred, for
collection in the same manner as unpaid water and sewer charges.



(Amended by Ord. 2008-37, adopted November 24, 2008)



1200.105.  Tampering with Systems Prohibited.



No person may willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is a part of the
city sanitary sewer or water system.



1200.110.  Opening Hydrants.



No person, except authorized city employees or fire department members, may
open any fire hydrant in the water system for any purpose, without first
obtaining permission from the city.



1200.115.  Variances.



The council may permit variances from the provisions of this ordinance if
there are special circumstances affecting the premises for which the variance
is requested and the granting of the variance will not materially affect
adversely health, safety or general welfare or public or private property. 
Any variance must be writing.



1200.120.  Violations.



Except as otherwise provided, any person violating a provision of this
ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable in accordance with state
law.  Any person violating a provision of this ordinance will also be liable
to the city for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the city as a result.



SECTION 1205.  STORM SEWERS.



1205.005.  Obstruction Prohibited.



A person must not without prior approval of the city engineer, block,
obstruct, or impede to any extent the flowage of waters:



1.   through any portion of a storm sewer system owned and maintained by
the city of Minnetonka; or



2.   to or from a lake, pond, designated storm water detention area,
stream, creek, ditch, backwater, other open body of water, or wetlands
designated on the city's wetlands map.



The city engineer may not approve action when, in his/her professional
judgment, it violates the standards in city code section 300.23, 300.24,
300.25 or the city's water resources management plan as defined in city code
section 300.02, creates the potential for unreasonable flooding or property
damage, or otherwise creates a danger to the public health and safety.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-07, adopted March 2, 2015; amended by Ord. #2004-25,
adopted August 23, 2004)



1205.010.  Storm Sewer Costs.



Every property owner in the city has the obligation to pay a proportionate
share of the costs of the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement,
improvement, maintenance, operation, and use of the storm sewer systems in
the city that accommodate stormwater from the owner’s property.  This may
be accomplished through the imposition of storm sewer utility charges. 
Storm sewer charges will be established by the council through a uniform
policy, in compliance with Minn. Stat. § 444.075.  The charges are a lien
against each property and will be collected under city code section 1200.030.



(Amended by Ord. 2009-01, adopted January 26, 2009)



1205.015.  Illicit Discharge and Connections.



1.   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following terms have
the meanings provided below:



   a.   "Illicit connection" means (i) any drain or conveyance, whether
on the surface or subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the
storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow
any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash
water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an
authorized enforcement agency or (ii) any drain or conveyance connected from
a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not
been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an
authorized enforcement agency.



   b.   "Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect non-storm
water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted by this section.



   c.   "Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4)" means the system
of conveyances (including road with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or
conveying storm water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying
sewage.



   d.   "Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to
pollution.  Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints,
varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or
other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances and accumulations, so that
the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal
coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes;
wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure;
and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.



2.   Illicit discharge prohibition.  No person shall throw, drain, or
otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw,
drain, or otherwise discharge into the MS4 any pollutants or waters
containing pollutants, other than storm water.



3.   Exemptions.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this section:



   a.   Water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream
flows, rising ground waters, uncontaminated ground water infiltration,
uncontaminated pumped ground water, discharges from potable water sources,
foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs,
water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual
residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands,
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, and water used in street sweeping
activities.



   b.   Discharges or flow from firefighting, and other discharges
specified in writing by the city engineer or designee as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.



   c.   Discharges associated with dye testing, however this activity
requires a verbal notification to the city engineer or designee prior to the
time of the test.



   d.   The prohibition does not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with
all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws
and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.



4.   Prohibition of illicit connections.



   a.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



   b.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



   c.   A person is considered to be in violation of this ordinance if
the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a
connection to continue.



   d.   Improper connections in violation of this ordinance must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater
management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city
engineer or designee.



   e.   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system,
shall be located by the owner of occupant of that property upon receipt of
written notice of violation from the city engineer or designee requiring that
such locating be completed.  The notice will specify a reasonable time
period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be
determined, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer,
sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection
to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be
identified.  Results of these investigations are to be documented and
provided to the city engineer or designee.



5.   Compatibility with other regulations.  This section is not intended
to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision
of law.  The requirements of this section are in addition to the
requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of
law.  In case of conflicts in provisions, the provision that is more
restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the
environment shall control.



(Amended by Ord. 2015-07, adopted March 2, 2015)



CHAPTER 13:  GENERAL PROVISIONS; PENALTIES



Section



   1300.   TITLE; GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   1305.   DEFINITIONS.



   1310.   PENALTIES.



   1315.   ORDINANCES.



SECTION 1300.  TITLE; GENERAL PROVISIONS.



1300.005.  Title.



This codification of the ordinances of the city of Minnetonka is known as
“the Minnetonka city code” or “the city code.”  It may also be
referred to within this codification as “this code,” or “the code,”
or “the ordinance code.”



1300.010.  Interpretation.



1.   This code must be construed liberally to carry out its purposes. 
The rules of statutory construction contained in Minn. Stat. §§ 645.08
through 645.43 apply to the interpretation of this code.



2.   Use of the words “chapter” or “section” is a clear reference
to all the sections, including paragraphs and subparagraphs, that have the
same number appearing before the decimal point.  Use of the words
“chapter” or “section” does not expand the meaning of the citation
unless the meaning clearly refers to more than one chapter or section.



3.   All headings used in divisions of this code are not part of the
subject matter of the code and are intended for convenience only.



4.   Grammatical errors do not negate an ordinance.  A transposition of
words and clauses may be used when a sentence is without meaning as
written.  Words and phrases that may be necessary for the proper
interpretation of an ordinance may be added if they do not conflict with its
obvious intent and do not affect its scope and operation.



5.   The singular includes the plural, and all pronouns include the
masculine, feminine and neuter.



1300.015.  Adoption by Reference.



Various state laws and rules and certain codes are adopted by reference into
this code.  At least one copy of the adopted item will be kept for public
review by the city clerk or the clerk's designee.  Adoption of a state law
or rule includes any subsequent amendments.



1300.020.  Relation to State Law.



When this code imposes a more stringent rule or standard of conduct than
contained in similar provisions in state laws or rules, the provisions of
this code will prevail to the extent permitted by law.



1300.025.  Inconsistent Provisions.



The regulatory provisions of this code are minimum requirements.  If the
provisions in one section of this code differ from those in any other
section, the provisions that are more restrictive or that impose the higher
standard will prevail.



1300.030.  Separability.



Every section, subdivision, paragraph, and subparagraph of this code is
separable from every other code provision.  If a provision of the code is
held invalid, it will not affect any other code provision.



SECTION 1305.  DEFINITIONS.



1305.005.  Definitions.



1.   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words and phrases
below are defined for the purpose of this code as follows:



   a.   “City” and “municipality” means the city of Minnetonka,
located in Hennepin county, Minnesota, including all territory lying within
its boundaries.



   b.   “Clerk” means the Minnetonka city clerk.



   c.   “Council” means the city council of the city of Minnetonka.



   d.   “County” means Hennepin county, Minnesota.



   e.   The term “et seq.” following a section or subsection means
the sections or subsections designated, together with the following sections
or subsections that pertain to the same subject matter or that are related.



   f.   “Health authority” means the Minnetonka environmental
health supervisor.



   g.   “Intersection” has the same meaning as that contained in
Minn. Stat. § 169.01.



   h.   “Manager” means the Minnetonka city manager.



   i.   “This ordinance” means the chapter or section in which it
appears and related sections, subsections, paragraphs and subdivisions under
the same chapter or section.



   j.   “Person” means a natural person of either sex, a firm,
partnership, corporation, any other association of people, and includes the
manager or agent of that person or organization.



   k.   “Public property” and “public place” means any place or
property dedicated to public use, or owned or occupied by the city or any
other governmental agency.



   l.   “Private property” means all property not included within
the definition of public property or public place.



   m.   “State” means the state of Minnesota.



   n.   “Street” has the same meaning as that contained in Minn.
Stat. § 169.01.



2.   In addition to the definitions in paragraph 1, the definitions
contained in Minn. Stat. § 609.02 are adopted by reference as the
definitions for words or phrases in this code, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



3.   References to elected or appointed city officials and employees
include their duly authorized representatives.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006)



SECTION 1310.  PENALTIES.



1310.005.  Prohibited Acts.



1.   A person must not do any of the following:



   a.   violate, fail to comply with, or assist, authorize or permit
the violation of a provision of this code;



   b.   violate, fail to comply with, or assist, authorize, or permit
the violation of the terms and conditions of a city approval, including
permits and licenses, required and granted under this code; or



   c.   knowingly make or submit a false statement, document, or
material omission in connection with an application or procedure required by
this code.



2.   No section or part of this code designating the duties of an
official, employee, or appointee of the city may be construed to make that
person liable for the penalties provided below.



1310.010.  Penalties.



1.   A person who violates section 1310.005 is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction will be punished in accordance with state law; provided, that
if a different punishment is stated in this code, that provision governs the
punishment for the violation.



2.   Designation as a petty misdemeanor means that upon conviction the
sentence will be in accordance with state law.  If not designated as
“petty misdemeanor,” a violation is a misdemeanor as set forth above in
paragraph 1.



3.   Each calendar day that section 1310.005 is violated constitutes a
separate offense.



4.   A person who violates section 1310.005 must pay twice the applicable
fee related to the violation.



5.   A violation of section 1310.005 constitutes sufficient grounds for
denial of an application required by this code that is related to the
violation.



6.   Action prohibited by section 1310.005 may, at the option of the city,
void a city approval that is related to the violation.



7.   The city attorney may institute a legal proceeding in the name of the
city of Minnetonka to prevent, restrain, remedy, or abate a violation of
section 1310.005.



8.   Nothing in this section prevents the city from taking other action
permitted by law, and the penalties and remedies provided here and under
other law are cumulative.



(Amended by Ord. #2006-09, adopted May 8, 2006)



1310.015.  Administrative Citations and Civil Penalties.



Sections 1310.015 through 1310.055 govern administrative citations and civil
penalties for violations of the city code.



1310.020.  Purpose.



The city council finds that there is a need for alternative methods of
enforcing the city code.  While criminal fines and penalties have been the
most frequent enforcement mechanism, there are certain negative consequences
for both the city and the accused.  The delay inherent in that system does
not ensure prompt resolution.  Citizens resent being labeled as criminals
for violations of administrative regulations.  The higher burden of proof
and the potential of incarceration do not appear appropriate for most
administrative violations.  The criminal process does not always regard city
code violations as being important.  Accordingly, the city council finds
that the use of administrative citations and the imposition of civil
penalties is a legitimate and necessary alternative method of enforcement. 
This method of enforcement is in addition to any other legal remedy that may
be pursued for city code violations.



1310.025.  General Provisions.



1.   A violation of a provision of the city code or the acts prohibited in
section 1310.005 is an administrative offense, that may be subject to an
administrative citation and civil penalties. Each day a violation exists
constitutes a separate offense.



2.   An administrative offense may be subject to a civil penalty not
exceeding $2000.00.



3.   The city council must adopt by resolution a schedule of fines for
offenses initiated by administration citation.  The city council is not
bound by that schedule when a matter is appealed to it for administrative
review.  The city council may adopt a schedule of fees to be paid to
administrative hearing officers.



4.   The city manager must adopt procedures for administering the
administrative citation program.



1310.030.  Administrative Citation.



1.   A person authorized to enforce provisions of the city code may issue
an administrative citation upon belief that a code violation has occurred. 
The citation must be issued in person or by mail to the person responsible
for the violation or attached to the motor vehicle in the case of a vehicular
offense.  The citation must state the date, time, and nature of the offense,
the name of the issuing officer, the amount of the scheduled fine, and the
manner for paying the fine or appealing the citation.



2.   The person responsible for the violation must either pay the
scheduled fine or request a hearing within seven days after issuance. 
Payment of the fine constitutes admission of the violation.  A late payment
fee of 10 percent of the scheduled fine amount may be imposed under section
1310.050.



1310.035.  Administrative Hearing.



1.   The city council will periodically approve a list of lawyers, from
which the city manager will randomly select a hearing officer to hear and
determine a matter for which a hearing is requested.  The accused will have
the right to request no later than five days before the date of the hearing
that the assigned hearing officer be removed from the case.  One request for
each case will be granted automatically by the city manager.  A subsequent
request must be directed to the assigned hearing officer who will decide
whether he or she cannot fairly and objectively review the case.  The city
enforcement officer may remove a hearing officer only by requesting that the
assigned hearing officer find that he or she cannot fairly and objectively
review the case.  If such a finding is made, the officer shall remove
himself or herself from the case, and the city manager will assign another
hearing officer.  The hearing officer is not a judicial officer but is a
public officer as defined by Minn. Stat. § 609.415.  The hearing officer
must not be a city employee.  The city manager must establish a procedure
for evaluating the competency of the hearing officers, including comments
from accused violators and city staff.  These reports must be provided to
the city council.



2.   Upon the hearing officer's own initiative or upon written request of
an interested party demonstrating the need, the officer may issue a subpoena
for the attendance of a witness or the production of books, papers, records
or other documents that are material to the matter being heard.  The party
requesting the subpoena is responsible for serving the subpoena in the manner
provided for civil actions and for paying the fees and expenses of a
witness.  A person served with a subpoena may file an objection with the
hearing officer promptly but no later than the time specified in the subpoena
for compliance.  The officer may cancel or modify the subpoena if it is
unreasonable or oppressive.  A person who, without just cause, fails or
refuses to attend and testify or to produce the required documents in
obedience to a subpoena is guilty of a misdemeanor.  Alternatively, the
party requesting the subpoena may seek an order from district court directing
compliance.



3.   Notice of the hearing must be served in person or by mail on the
person responsible for the violation at least 10 days in advance, unless a
shorter time is accepted by all parties.  At the hearing, the parties will
have the opportunity to present testimony and question any witnesses, but
strict rules of evidence will not apply.  The hearing officer must tape
record the hearing and receive testimony and exhibits.  The officer must
receive and give weight to evidence, including hearsay evidence, that
possesses probative value commonly accepted by reasonable and prudent people
in the conduct of their affairs.



4.   The hearing officer has the authority to determine that a violation
occurred, to dismiss a citation, to impose the scheduled fine, and to reduce,
stay, or waive a scheduled fine either unconditionally or upon compliance
with appropriate conditions.  When imposing a penalty for a violation, the
hearing officer may consider any or all of the following factors:



   a.   the duration of the violation;



   b.   the frequency or reoccurrence of the violation;



   c.   the seriousness of the violation;



   d.   the history of the violation;



   e.   the violator's conduct after issuance of the notice of hearing;



   f.   the good faith effort by the violator to comply;



   g.   the economic impact of the penalty on the violator;



   h.   the impact of the violation upon the community; and



   i.   any other factors appropriate to a just result.



   The hearing officer may exercise discretion to impose a fine for more
than one day of a continuing violation, but only upon a finding that (1) the
violation caused a serious threat of harm to the public health, safety, or
welfare or that (2) the accused intentionally and unreasonably refused to
comply with the code requirement.  The hearing officer's decision and
supporting reasons must be in writing.



5.   Except for matters subject to administrative review under section
1310.040, the decision of the hearing officer is final without any further
right of administrative appeal.  In a matter subject to administrative
review under section 1310.040, the hearing officer's decision may be appealed
to the city council by submitting a request in writing to the city clerk
within 10 days after the hearing officer's decision.



6.   The failure to attend the hearing constitutes a waiver of the
violator's rights to an administrative hearing and an admission of the
violation.  A hearing officer may waive this result upon good cause shown. 
Examples of “good cause” are:  death or incapacitating illness of the
accused; a court order requiring the accused to appear for another hearing at
the same time; and lack of proper service of the citation or notice of the
hearing.  “Good cause” does not include:  forgetfulness and intentional
delay.



1310.040.  Administrative Review.



1.   The hearing officer's decision in any of the following matters may be
appealed by a party to the city council for administrative review:



   a.   an alleged failure to obtain a permit, license, or other
approval from the city council as required by an ordinance;



   b.   an alleged violation of a permit, license, other approval, or
the conditions attached to the permit, license, or approval, that was granted
by the city council; and



   c.   an alleged violation of regulations governing a person or
entity who has received a license granted by the city council.



2.   The appeal will be heard by the city council after notice served in
person or by registered mail at least 10 days in advance.  The parties to
the hearing will have an opportunity to present oral or written arguments
regarding the hearing officer's decision.



3.   The city council must consider the record, the hearing officer's
decision, and any additional arguments before making a determination.  The
council is not bound by the hearing officer's decision, but may adopt all or
part of the officer's decision.  The council's decision must be in writing.



4.   If the council makes a finding of a violation, it may impose a civil
penalty not exceeding $2000.00 per day per violation, and may consider any or
all of the factors contained in section 1310.035(4).  The council may also
reduce, stay, or waive a fine unconditionally or based on reasonable and
appropriate conditions.



5.   In addition to imposing a civil penalty, the council may suspend or
revoke a city-issued license, permit, or other approval associated with the
violation, if the procedure in city code section 700.035 has been followed. 
The hearing required in that section will be satisfied by the hearing before
the hearing officer with the right of appeal to the city council.



1310.045.  Judicial Review.



An aggrieved party may obtain judicial review of the decision of the hearing
officer or the city council by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Amended by Ord. #2015-19, effective January 29, 2016)



1310.050.  Recovery of Civil Penalties.



1.   If a civil penalty is not paid within the time specified, it will
constitute:



   a.   a lien on the real property upon which the violation occurred
if the property or improvements on the property was the subject of the
violation and the property owner was found responsible for that violation; or



   b.   a personal obligation of the violator in all other situations.



2.   A lien may be assessed against the property and collected in the same
manner as taxes.



3.   A personal obligation may be collected by appropriate legal means.



4.   A late payment fee of 10 percent of the fine may be assessed for each
30-day period, or part thereof, that the fine remains unpaid after the due
date.



5.   During the time that a civil penalty remains unpaid, the provisions
of city code section 210 apply to a license, permit, or other city approval
sought by the violator or for property under the violator's ownership or
control.



6.   Failure to pay a fine is grounds for suspending or revoking a license
related to the violation.



1310.055.  Criminal Penalties



The following are misdemeanors, punishable in accordance with state law:



1.   failure, without good cause, to appear at a hearing that was
scheduled under section 1310.035;



2.   failure to pay a fine imposed by a hearing officer within 30 days
after it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the hearing
officer, unless the matter is appealed under section 1310.040; and



3.   failure to pay a fine imposed by the city council within 30 days
after it was imposed, or such other time as may be established by the city
council.



If the final adjudication in the administrative penalty procedure is a
finding of no violation, then the city may not prosecute a criminal violation
in district court based on the same set of facts.  This does not preclude
the city from pursuing a criminal conviction for a violation of the same
provision based on a different set of facts. A different date of violation
will constitute a different set of facts.



SECTION 1315.  ORDINANCES.



1315.005.  Ordinance Enactment.



Ordinances must be enacted in accordance with state law, city charter and
this code.  Ordinances will be integrated into this code in accordance with
this chapter.



1315.010.  Form.



An ordinance amending this code must specify the number of the provision to
be amended.  Only the text of a separately identified provision need be
included for an amendment; the larger section of which it is a part may be
omitted.  An ordinance repealing an entire provision must either contain the
stricken language in the body of the ordinance or attach the deleted text in
an appendix.



1315.015.  Integration into Code.



1.   Matters omitted.  When an ordinance is integrated into this code,
the following may be omitted:



   a.   title;



   b.   enacting clause;



   c.   section numbers;



   d.   validation and repealing clauses;



   e.   validating signatures and dates;



   f.   penalty provisions; and



   g.   punctuation and other matters not an integral part of the
ordinance text.



2.   Post-adoption changes.  When integrating ordinances into the code,
the city clerk may:



   a.   correct obvious grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors;



   b.   change reference numbers to conform with applicable sections of
the code;



   c.   substitute figures for written words and vice versa;



   d.   substitute the actual date for the words "the effective date of
this ordinance"; and



   e.   take other similar actions to ensure a uniform code of
ordinances if they do not alter the meaning of the ordinances enacted.



3.   Source notes.  When an ordinance is integrated into the code, a
source note should be added at the end of the section affected.  The note
should indicate the action taken, the ordinance that authorized the action,
and the effective date of the ordinance.



4.   Other standards.  The city clerk may establish and implement other
standards to ensure the expeditious integration of ordinances into this
code.  He/she may also establish and implement further policies regarding
the preparation, editing and format of ordinances.



1315.020.  Recordkeeping; Special Ordinances.



The city clerk is responsible for the safe and orderly keeping of
ordinances.  The clerk must maintain a current record of ordinances that
have been adopted. An ordinance not included in this code is a special
ordinance.  Examples of special ordinances are those that rezone property,
name streets, and grant franchises.  The council may direct that a special
ordinance be included in an appendix to this code.



Ordinance Disposition



Ord. #        Adopted Date      Disposition




----   3-26-84   400.050(4)





----   4-2-84   400.035(8, 9)





----   9-24-84   400.080





86-426   6-23-86   300.01(5a-5c)





86-448   12-22-86   400.030





87-450   1-20-87   300.02, 300.10, 300.11(4h, 5e, 5f1), 300.12(5f),
300.13(f), 300.15(9a), 300.16(3h9, 3i), 300.21(4b6, 40), 300.22(3g),
300.24(7c), 300.28(12a1, 12b, 12b4, 12ed, 12ce,  12c2m, 12c2bb, 12c3, 12c4,
14), 300.29(7), 300.30(3a4a)





87-473   9-21-87   600.035(9)





87-481   11-16-87   300.02, 300.22(4, 4A), 300.27(21), 300.28(15)





88-488   2-1-88   400.025(2)





88-500   7-20-88   300.10(5, 7), 300.11(5b), 300.12(5b), 300.13(5b),
300.14(5b), 300.15(9a), 300.17(5b, 5c, 5g), 300.18(4b, 4g), 300.19(4b, 5c,
5g), 300.20(4h, 5b, 5g), 300.21(4c3, 4q8, 4q9, 4r, 5q, 5r, 6h), 300.22(3g,
4Aa), 300.27(21), 300.28(12b, 16, 17)





88-508   8-1-88   300.02, 300.10(5), 300.16(3i4, 36)





88-517   9-19-88   300.10(3, 4q), 300.11(4h, 4m), 300.12(4k),
300.13(3f, 4m), 300.16(3q9), 300.17(3a, 4n), 300.18(3b, 4p), 300.19(3b, 4p),
300.20(3f, 4i, 4j), 300.21(4p, 5p, 6i, 6jl3)





88-542   11-7-88   300.31(7a6)





89-556   - -   300.31(13 TAD 4)





89-559   7-13-89   300.01(2g), 300.02, 300.08(4), 300.10(5h),
300.16(3q5), 300.17(4n), 300.18(3c, 4i, 4p, 4q), 300.19(3c, 4i, 4p, 4s),
300.20(4i), 300.21(4i, 4s, 5i, 5s, 6ji, 6j4), 300.25(8b), 300.27(10),
300.28(12a6, 12b4a, 12c2x), 300.31(2b, 2c, 2e, 4a, 4q, 6b, 7a6)





89-560   6-19-89   600.025, 600.040(n), 600.070(13)





89-565   9-18-89   600.050, 600.070(10)





90-573   1-16-90   400.010(26), 400.015





90-582   6-13-90   300.10(4r)





90-585   8-20-90   300.23(2, 3, 4), 300.24(2, 4)





90-586   8-20-90   600.070(9)





90-589   11-21-90   300.02, 300.06(5), 300.10(3, 4r, 6), 300.11(3h),
300.12(3j), 300.13(3i), 300.15(13), 300.17(3b), 300.18(4q), 300.19(3d, 4q),
300.20(3g, 4k), 300.21(4b7, 4c8, 4q, 4q1, 4q9, 5c, 6k24), 300.27(13a),
300.28(12a7, 12c2b, 12c2o, 12c2p, 12d, 22), 300.31(3a, 3b, 4a2, 4b2o, 13 TAD
15)





91-594   3-4-91   300.23





91-600   5-6-91   600.070(10)





91-605   6-17-91   300.31(4r15)





91-607   7-1-91   600.070(10)





91-608   9-28-91   300.23(2, 5a, 7, 9)





91-614   12-16-91   600.065





92-618   3-19-92   300.23





92-621   4-16-92   300.03(l), 300.04(2), 300.05, 300.07, 300.18(3d)





92-637   2-3-93   300.02, 300.10(3, 4s), 300.11(3b, 4n), 300.12(3f,
41), 300.13(4n), 300.15(9f), 300.16(3s), 300.17(3a, 4o), 300.18(3b, 4t),
300.19(3b, 4t), 300.20(3f, 4l), 300.21(3o, 4u, 5u, 6l), 300.23, App.(7h),
300.24(7h), 300.25(6j), 300.29(6)





93-643   5-24-93   600.040(lr, 4)





93-656   8-9-93   600.060(3)





93-663   11-5-93   300.31(4a3)





95-705   1-9-95   300.02, 300.10(2f, 2m), 300.11(3j), 300.12(3k),
300.13(3j), 300.16(3a, 3b1, 3f1), 300.28(12c2j)





95-708   4-10-95   300.10(2e, 3m), 300.13(3i)





95-713   6-12-95   300.17(4b), 300.18(4u), 300.19(4u), 300.21(3b, 4t,
5t)





95-715   6-26-95   300.21(4b6, 4b8, 46, 5b)





95-726   10-23-95   625.005 - 625.060





96-734   1-22-96   400.030(2, 5)





96-739   2-26-96   300.04(l)





96-741   3-4-96   300.16(3r4)





96-748   6-10-96   300.33





96-759   9-24-96   300.21(6j3)





96-760   9-24-96   300.10(4t), 300.11(4o), 300.12(4m), 300.13(4o),
300.16(3t)





96-776   2-24-97   300.11(4p), 300.13(4p)





97-768   1-13-97   300.07(le, 4)





97-773   2-10-97   300.02, 300.10(5h, 6e, 7e), 300.11(6e, 6e5)





97-776   2-24-97   300.10(4u), 300.12(4n), 300.16(3u)





97-778   3-17-97   300.02, 300.10(1), 300.11(1), 300.12(1), 300.13(1),
300.14(1), 300.24(8, 9), 300.27(6), 300.28(16b, 18, 19)





97-783   6-9-97   600.035, 600.040





97-784   6-9-97   300.28(12c2b, 12c2c)





97-786   6-23-97   300.02, 300.22(3a), 300.28(19h, 20, 21, 22, 23)





97-790   7-28-97   300.16(3q6, 3ql2), 300.17(4n), 300.18(4p, 5p, 6i),
300.31(4r, 4r2, 4r10, 4r12, 4r14, 4rl5)





97-791   8-11-97   300.30(10r)





97-792   8-11-97   300.02, 300.30(3a4b2, 3b4)





97-800   11-24-97   625.005(4), 625.015, 625.035, 625.045 - 625.060





97-801   11-24-97   600.060(2b)





97-970   7-29-97   300.20(4i), 300.21(3m6 - 11, 4p)





98-4   2-23-98   300.32(4ba)





98-6   3-30-98   950.005 - 950.030





98-17   9-14-98   300.28(12w)





99-2   1-11-99   300.16(3e)





Res. 99-014   1-25-99   300.02





99-5A   2-8-99   125.005 - 125.030





99-6   2-22-99   300.15(13a6)





99-7   2-22-99   300.11(6d2), 300.28(12c2a)





99-9   - -99   Charter 6.05, 6.06, 7.10





99-13   4-12-99   300.10(5c, Fig. 13)





99-14   4-26-99   925.005, 925.025, 925.035, 925.065, 925.080, 925.085,
925.100, 925.105, 925.110, 925.115, 925.120





99-15   5-10-99   300.30(3b4)





99-17   5-24-99   300.18(4g), 300.19(4g), 300.21(4b5, 4g)





99-19   7-12-99   300.21(4o7), 710.005(8)





99-21   8-30-99   300.28(12b1)





99-23   9-27-99   600.075(5)





99-25   10-11-99   300.10(4q), 300.11(4m), 300.12(4k), 300.13(4m),
300.16(3q), 300.21(3n, 4p, 5p, 6i), 300.31(4b2r)





99-28   11-8-99   300.23(1-10), 845.030(3b1)





2000-9   5-22-00   905.015(1)





2000-14   7-10-00   710.005(9), 925.035, 925.045, 925.050, 925.055,
925.060





2000-16   8-14-00   600.075(1)





2000-17   9-11-00   400.015





2000-19   10-16-00   300.10(2, 3c, 4n), 300.11(2, 3b, 4l), 300.12(2,
3f, 4j), 300.13(2, 3f, 4l), 300.16(3n), 300.17(2, 3a, 4m), 300.18(2, 3b, 4n),
300.19(2, 3b, 4n), 300.20(2, 3f, 4e), 300.21(3m, 4n, 5n. 6e), 300.31(4a, 4b2h)





2000-21   11-27-00   915.010(1, 5), 915.020, 915.030, 915.031, 915.035,
915.040, 915.045





2001-05   2-26-01   135.010(3)





2001-06   3-19-01   925.065(4)





2001-07   3-19-01   815





2001-10   3-19-01   Charter 2.02





2001-11   4-16-01   1135.020(23)





2001-14   5-21-01   135.015(1)





2001-15   5-21-01   300.04(1)





2001-20   8-27-01   Entire charter





2001-21   8-27-01   Charter 2.02





2001-22   8-27-01   Charter 2.03(1)





2001-23   8-27-01   Charter 3.09(3)





2001-25   9-24-01   300.09(4)





2001-26   10-22-01   710.005





2001-28   10-22-01   1200.040(2, 3, 4)





2001-29   11-13-01   850.010(8)





2001-31   11-13-01   400.15(14)





2001-33   12-17-01   135





2002-03   1-7-02   300.10(4q), 300.11(4m), 300.12(4k), 300.13(4m),
300.16(3q), 300.17(4n), 300.18(4p), 300.19(4p), 300.20(4i,j), 300.21(3n, 4p,
5p, 6i, 6j), 300.31(4b2r), added 300.34





2002-04   2-11-02   300.10(5b), 300.11(5b), 300.12(5b), 300.13(5b),
300.15(5b), 300.17(5b), 300.20(5b), 300.22(3g), 300.31(a1)





2002-06   4-22-02   Repeals 120





2002-07   4-22-02   900.010(1, 4), 900.015





2002-08   4-22-02   300.16(3s), 300.21(3o)





2002-09   4-22-02   105.010





2002-10   5-6-02   845.010(2), 845.020(1a1, 5), 845.045(1), 845.050





2002-12   5-20-02   230.025(3a, 3b)





2002-13   5-20-02   925.005, 925.025, 925.045, 925.065, 925.075,
925.085, 925.095(1), 925.115





2002-14   5-20-02   300.33





2002-15   5-20-02   615.015, 615.020, 615.040, 615.050, 615.060, 615.065





2002-16   5-20-02   Charter Chapter 5 & Appendix





2002-17   5-20-02   Charter 1.04, 2.03, 2.04, 2.06, 2.07, 3.05, 3.06,
3.09, 6.01, 6.02, 6.04, 7.08, 7.12, 11.05, 12.01, 12.05, 12.06





2002-18   5-20-02   300.20(2, 3)





2002-20   8-12-02   300.28(15, 17a)





2002-21   8-12-02   300.30(9, 10h)





2002-22   9-9-02   1200.040(4)





2002-23   9-9-02   400.030(2)





2002-24   10-14-02   300.10(5h2b)





2002-25   10-14-02   300.23(4-12)





2002-26   10-28-02   300.30(9a)





2002-27   10-28-02   710.005





2002-28   12-16-02   205.020(1, 2)





2002-29   12-16-02   100.005





2003-1   1-6-03   520.025, 520.030, 930.025, 930.090, 950.025,
1105.060, 1200.040





2003-2   1-27-03   625.0405, 625.055





2003-5   3-17-03   1045.015, 1135.010





2003-6   3-17-03   615.050





2003-7   3-17-03   815.45, 815.50





2003-09   4-14-03   Charter 2.02, 2.03, 6.06





2003-10   4-14-03   100.030





2003-11   4-14-03   300.28





2003-12   4-14-03   845.010, 1105.060





2003-15   5-12-03   846.005, 846.010, 846.015, 846.020, 846.025,
846.030, 846.035, 846.040, 846.045, 846.050, 846.055, 846.060, 846.065





2003-20   8-25-03   930.031, 930.105





2003-24   9-29-03   1045.015





2003-25   10-27-03   300.03, 300.06, 300.07, 300.15, 300.27, 300.28





2003-26   11-24-03   710.005





2003-27   11-24-03   915.005 - 915.030





2003-29   12-15-03   850.005, 850.010, 850.015





2003-30   12-15-03   710.005





2004-01   1-5-04   300.27





2004-02   1-5-04   300.31





2004-05   2-9-04   500.005 - 500.015, 500.040, 505.005, 505.010,
505.020, 505.030, 510.005 - 510.030, 515.005 - 515.025, 525.005, 700.015,
715.020





2004-07   3-15-04   300.02, 300.031





2004-10   4-12-04   1020.02





2004-15   4-26-04   915.031





2004-21   6-28-04   135.010





2004-24   8-23-04   300.02, 300.04, 300.24





2004-25   8-23-04   500.045, 1205.005





2004-26   8-23-04   300.25





2004-27   8-23-04   300.25 - 300.27





2004-28   8-23-04   300.23





2004-33   11-8-04   710.005





2004-34   11-8-04   300.29





2004-37   12-20-04   300.06, 300.10, 300.27, 300.28, 300.16





2005-05   2-14-05   300.30





2005-06   2-28-05   615.050, 710.005





2005-07   3-21-05   845.010





2005-09   4-11-05   300.21





2005-10   4-25-05   600.010, 600.015, 600.025, 600.030, 600.035,
600.040, 600.060, 600.061, 600.070





2005-12   5-9-05   610.005 - 610.075, 710.005





2005-14   5-23-05   900., 900.005 - 900.055





2005-15   5-23-05   Charter 2.05





2005-18   11-14-05   710.005





2005-19   11-28-05   845.020, 930.030, 1105.060, 1105.080





2005-21   12-5-05   500.015, 500.040





2006-01   1-9-06   300.02





2006-05   3-27-06   300.10(2)





2006-06   04-10-06   115.010





2006-08   04-10-06   Charter 12.06, 12.13





2006-09   05-08-06   925.005, 925.105, 930.065, 945.005, 1040.005,
1040.015, 1305.005, 1310.010





2006-10   05-08-06   300.02(71)





2006-15   08-07-06   1005.016, 1005.025





2006-16   09-11-06   300.30 (2), 300.30(3)





2006-17   09-25-06   710.010, 810.005, 810.010, 810.015, 810.020,
810.025, 810.026, 810.030, 810.045, 810.045, 810.055, 810.065, 810.085





2006-18   09-25-06   610.040(2), 700.015, 820.015, 820.020





2006-20   11-06-06   300.15, 400.015, 400.035, 520.015, 635, 640,
805.030, 1200.025,1200.030(8), 1200.045(6), 1200.085(4)





2006-21   11-06-06   710.005





2006-22   11-06-06   1200.095, 710.005





2006-24   12-18-06   520.015, 520.020





2006-25   12-18-06   705.011





2007-01   01-22-07   710.005





2007-02   01-22-07   810.040





2007-03   01-22-07   300.02, 300.10, subd. 5(e) and5(h)(2)(b)





2007-04   02-05-07   135





2007-05   02-05-07   140





2007-10   03-05-07   Charter 2.09, 7.01, 6.08





2007-11   03-26-07   100.005





2007-12   04-09-07   645, 710, 835, 845





2007-16   05-07-07   830.025





2007-17   05-07-07   300.07, 300.24, 300.29





2007-18   05-21-07   710, 845.020





2007-19   05-21-07   630





2007-21   06-25-07   300.30





2007-23   08-06-07   500.005





2007-25   08-06-07   400.030





2007-27   08-20-07   300.29 subd. 3





2007-28   08-20-07   300.30 subd. 9





2007-33   10-22-07   925.045, 925.115





2007-36   11-05-07   710.005





2008-06   03-24-08   600.070





2008-08   03-24-08   300.25





2008-09   03-24-08   300.26





2008-10   03-24-08   300.01, 300.02, 300.06, 300.07, 300.22, 300.23,
300.24, 400.020, 925.080





2008-11   03-24-08   1045.16





2008-12   03-24-08   1045.020, 1045.025





2008-16   05-19-08   1045.010





2008-17   05-19-08   845.045





2008-19   07-14-08   300.10, 300.11, 300.12, 300.13





2008-21   07-28-08   300.31, 300.32





2008-22   08-25-08   600.030, 600.035, 600.040, 600.045, 600.055,
600.070, 710.005





2008-23   08-25-08   910





2008-24   08-25-08   300.28





2008-25   08-25-08   300.02, 300.22, 300.27, 300.28, 300





2008-29   10-13-08   710.005, 925.005, 925.105





2008-30   10-13-08   520





2008-31   10-13-08   905 repealed and new one added





2008-32   10-13-08   845.045





2008-33   10-27-08   1200.030





2008-34   10-27-08   920.010





2008-36   11-10-08   710





2008-37   11-24-08   1200.065, 1200.070, 1200.100





2008-38   12-22-08   135 repealed; 140.005, 140.010, 140.020





2009-01   01-26-09   705.015, 840.035, 845.045, 846.045, 915.029,
915.030, 1105.070, 1115.015,





      1200.015, 1200.095, 1205.010





2009-02   02-09-09   910.025 and 910.030 repealed; 910





2009-04   04-06-09   300.31





2009-06   05-18-09   added 1006





2009-08   07-13-09   710





2009-09   07-13-09   600.35, 600.45, 600.070, and 710.005





2009-10   08-03-09   805, 815, 830





2009-11   09-14-09   205.035, 700.040





2009-12   09-14-09   300.29





2009-13   09-14-09   300.10, 300.11, 300.12, 300.13





2009-14   09-14-09   300.34





2009-15   10-26-09   805.055, 1200.95





2009-17   12-07-09   300.35





2010-02   03-08-10   Charter 2.06, 3.04, 7.09, 7.18





2010-03   04-05-10   600.060, 600.071





2010-04   04-05-10   1120 repealed and new one added





2010-05   04-05-10   1125





2010-06   04-05-10   300.34





2010-11   08-16-10   300.29, 710.005





2010-12   09-13-10   600.055





2010-13   09-13-10   710.005, 820





2010-14   09-13-10   625.005





2010-17   10-25-10   710.005





2010-18   12-20-10   300, 400, 405





2011-02   04-18-11   300.08, 300.16, 300.18, 300.19, 300.21





2011-03   04-18-11   400.050





2011-04   04-18-11   300.22, 300.31





2011-05   05-02-11   1045.056





2011-08   06-06-11   925.085, 1135.020





2011-09   06-06-11   300.30





2011-10   06-20-11   300.07





2011-11   06-20-11   300.34





2011-12   06-20-11   610, 710.005





2011-13   06-20-11   850.020, 850.025





2011-14   08-01-11   910.020





2011-15   08-01-11   915.029





2011-16   08-22-11   610.060





2011-18   08-22-11   300.36





2011-19   08-22-11   300.05, 300.18, 300.19, 300.20, 300.21, 710.005





2011-22   10-03-11   835.035





2011-23   10-24-11   710.005





2011-25   12-19-11   300.33, 615.015, 810





2011-26   12-19-11   925.085





2011-28   12-19-11   300.24





2011-29   12-19-11   300.02, 300.28 subd. 15, 16, 17, & 18 are repealed
and replaced





2011-30   12-19-11   300.23, 300.25, 300.27, 845.010





2012-03   03-26-12   105.10





2012-04   03-26-12   300.01





2012-05   03-26-12   300





2012-06   04-30-12   Charter 2.06, 6.07, 12.03





2012-07   06-25-12   "And/or" deleted throughout code book





2012-09   08-06-12   810.015





2012-13   09-18-12   300.02, 300.18, 300.19





2012-14   10-08-12   205.035, 700.040





2012-16   10-08-12   710.005





2012-18   12-03-12   1015.005





2012-19   12-03-12   915.029, 915.030, 1200.030





2012-20   12-03-12   300.28, 805.010





2013-01   01-28-13   Charter 2.04, 3.06, 4.02, 4.03, 6.05





2013-03   03-04-13   Repealed section 140





2013-07   06-03-13   Added 215.020





2013-08   06-24-13   115.010





2013-10   06-24-13   300.10, 300.11, 300.12, 300.13, 300.16





2013-13   08-05-13   1025.025





2013-16   09-16-13   925.005, 925.065





2013-18   10-28-13   930.030, 930.032





2013-19   11-18-13   710.005





2014-01   02-10-14   100.005 - effective January 1, 2016





2014-06   03-24-14   600.025, 600.030, 600.035, 600.070





2014-07   03-24-14   300.02, 300.18, 300.19, 300.20, 300.21, 300.31





2014-11   04-07-14   810.022





2014-12   04-21-14   Charter 6.05





2014-14   05-05-14   710.005





2014-17   05-19-14   300.22 repealed and replaced





2014-18   05-19-14   300.02





2014-19   08-04-14   710.005





2014-21   09-15-14   815.025





2014-22   09-15-14   300.37





2014-23   09-15-14   300.11 repealed and replaced





2014-24   09-15-14   section 400 repealed and replaced





2014-25   12-01-14   710.005





2014-27   12-15-14   625.005, 625.040





2015-01   01-05-15   Charter 12.06





2015-02   02-09-15   1130.05, 1130.010





2015-04   03-02-15   300.23





2015-05   03-02-15   300.28





2015-06   03-02-15   300.28





2015-07   03-02-15   1205 and 300.28





2015-13   07-27-15   600.010, 600.020, 600.035, 600.040, 600.070,
600.080, 710.005





2015-14   08-31-15   added 955, effective January 1, 2016





2015-15   10-26-15   910.031, 910.032, 910.033





2015-18   11-09-15   710.005 amended, effective January 1, 2016





2015-19   12-31-15   615.050, subd. 2; 925.110, subd. 3; 1025.030,
subd. 3(c); 1310.045





2016-01   01-04-16   added 1140, and amended 710.005, effective
February 13, 2016





2016-03   01-25-16   925.105 amended, effective March 3, 2016





2016-05   02-29-16   300 amended, 300.02 amended, effective February
29, 2016





2016-06   02-29-16   300.37 amended, effective February 29, 2016





2016-08   05-23-16   300.30 repealed, section 325 added; effective May
23, 2016





2016-14   10-24-16   300.24 amended, effective October 24, 2016





2016-15   11-14-16   710.005 amended, sections 620 and 635 repealed,
effective January 1, 2017





2017-03   01-23-17   710.005 amended, section 515.010, subdivision 4,
amended; effective January 23, 2017





2017-04   04-24-17   1135.010, 1135.015, 1135.020, 1135.025, 1135.030
and 1135.035 amended; effective June 3, 2017





2017-05   04-24-17   1045.020 and 1145.025 amended; effective June 3,
2017





2017-06   05-08-17   Chapter 5, section 525 amended; effective June 17,
2017





2017-07   05-08-17   910.005, 910.010. 910.015 and 910.020 amended;
effective June 24, 2017





2017-08   06-12-17   1200.025, subdivision 1 amended; effective July
12, 2017





2017-12   09-11-17   910.020 amended; effective October 20, 2017





2017-17   11-13-17   220.010 amended, subdivision 2; effective December
23, 2017





2017-18   11-22-17   710.005, paragraphs 3, 9, 10, 13, 15, 16, 29, 31;
effective January 1, 2018





2018-03   03-19-18   300.34 repealed; section 310.03 added; effective
March 19, 2018





2018-01   02-26-18   1120.015, 1120.035, 1120.045, 1120.055, and
1120.060 amended; 1120.062 new section; 710.005, paragraph 8 amended;
effective April 9, 2018





2018-07   06-18-18   840 and 845.010 amended; effective July 28, 2018





2018-12   08-27-18   130.010 amended; effective Oct. 13, 2018





2018-17   11-05-18   Section 325 repealed and replaced; effective Nov.
5, 2018





2018-13   09-17-18   Section 625.000 added and Sections 625.040 and
625.045 amended; effective Jan. 1, 2019





2018-14   09-17-18   Sections 625.010, 625.015, 625.025, and 625.040
amended, effective Jan. 1, 2019



2019-01   04-17-19   Sections 2.03 and 2.06 amended, effective April
17, 2019



