
Mayer, MN Code of Ordinances


MAYER, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 225, passed 10-8-18
(including Ordinance 228, passed 3-11-19)






Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.  Code title, chapter, and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance:



      (1)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other
as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting
the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter
genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the
plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense
shall include the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term.  A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Mayer as presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or
other legal actions at a future time.  The term CITY when used in this code
may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized
representatives.



      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This city code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY.  Carver County, Minnesota.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the
context clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or
WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents
thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway right-of-ways, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection.  The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a
reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.



   It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this
Minnesota Basic Code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and
statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are
hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at
the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in
the code to the contrary.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed
for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota
Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more
than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference,
which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be
guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any
petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of
not more than $300.



   (C)   In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor,
the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION



      31.   CITY COUNCIL



      32.   CITY OFFICIALS



      33.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



      34.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      35.   TAXATION



      36.   FINANCE



CHAPTER 30:  GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION



Section



   30.01   Optional Plan A government



   30.02   Elections



§ 30.01  OPTIONAL PLAN A GOVERNMENT.



   In accordance with M.S. Chapter 412, as it may be amended from time to
time, the city shall be governed under the plan of government known as
“Optional Plan A.”  As provided by statute, the city shall be governed
by the Council composed of the Mayor and four Council members.



('82 Code, § 2.111)



§ 30.02  ELECTIONS.



   A regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday in November in every even-numbered year.  Two Council members
shall be elected for four-year terms at each election. The Mayor shall be
elected for a two-year term at each election.



('82 Code, § 2.121)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY COUNCIL



Section




Meetings




   31.01   Regular meetings



   31.02   Special and adjourned meetings



   31.03   Location of meetings



   31.04   Compensation




Hearings




   31.15   Conduct



   31.16   Notice required



   31.17   Opportunity to be heard



   31.18   Adoption of rules



   31.19   Summary record




MEETINGS




§ 31.01  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the second and fourth
Mondays of each calendar month. The time of the meeting shall be set by the
Council at the first meeting in January. Any regular meeting falling upon a
holiday shall be rescheduled and held at the time and place set by the
Council. All meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall be
held at City Hall unless otherwise set by motion duly made and passed at a
Council meeting.



('82 Code, § 2.311)  (Am. Ord. 111, passed 12-13-04)



§ 31.02  SPECIAL AND ADJOURNED MEETINGS.



   The Council may, at any regular meeting, establish a date, time and
place for holding an adjourned or special meeting.  At other times, special
meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any two members of the Council by
writing and filed with the City Clerk, who shall then mail or deliver a
notice to each Council member of the time and place of the meeting at least
24 hours before the meeting.  Notice of any special meeting called at the
time of a regular meeting shall be posted at the City Hall and two other of
the most public places in the city, and when time permits, given to the
official newspaper.  Written notice of any special meeting shall be posted
giving the date, time, place and purpose of the meeting at least three days
before the meeting.  Written notice shall be mailed at least three days
before the meeting to anyone who has filed a written request for notice of
special meetings. In calculating the three days, if the last day falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the next regular business day shall be
counted as the third day.



('82 Code, § 2.312)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 31.03  LOCATION OF MEETINGS.



   All meetings, including special and adjourned meetings, shall be held
at the Mayer Community Center, except that the Council may adjourn a meeting
to some other place, or hold a special meeting at some other place for the
convenience of the public or where the nature of the matter under
consideration makes it reasonably necessary to consider the matter at some
other place.



('82 Code, § 2.313)



§ 31.04  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The Mayor and Council members shall be compensated at a rate
as set forth from time to time by ordinance.



   (B)   Unless a later date is established in any ordinance changing
the salary of the Mayor and of the Council, no change in salary enacted,
pursuant to the authority granted in M.S. § 415.11, as it may be amended
from time to time, shall take effect until after the next succeeding
municipal election, and until that date the salaries of the Mayor and of the
Council shall remain as last previously established.



('82 Code, § 2.323)




HEARINGS




§ 31.15  CONDUCT.



   Unless otherwise provided in this code or by law, every public hearing
required by law, ordinance or resolution to be held on any legislative or
administrative matter shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter.



('82 Code, § 2.211)



§ 31.16  NOTICE REQUIRED.



   At least ten days mailed notice of every hearing shall be given to all
persons entitled to notice by law, ordinance or resolution, except that
published or posted notice may be given where permitted by law, ordinance or
resolution.  Personal notice may be given in lieu of mailed or published
notice, and shall be given when required.  The notice shall state the time,
place and purpose of the meeting.  Failure to give the notice or defects in
it shall not invalidate the proceedings if a good faith effort was made to
give the notice required, if due to special circumstances giving the notice
was impractical or impossible, or if the person not receiving notice or
receiving defective notice was not prejudiced thereby.



('82 Code, § 2.212)



§ 31.17  OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD.



   At the hearing, each party in interest shall have an opportunity to be
heard and to present evidence as is relevant to the hearing.



('82 Code, § 2.213)



§ 31.18  ADOPTION OF RULES.



   The body charged with conduct of any hearing may adopt rules governing
the conduct of hearings, records to be made and other matters as it may deem
necessary or the proper conduct of hearings to be held by it.



('82 Code, § 2.214)



§ 31.19  SUMMARY RECORD.



   Upon the disposition of any matter after hearing, the body conducting
the hearing shall cause to be prepared a written summary of its findings and
decisions and enter the summary in the official minutes of meetings.



('82 Code, § 2.215)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section



   32.01   City Clerk and City Treasurer



   32.02   Annual audit



   32.03   Bonds may be required



   32.04   City Administrator



§ 32.01  CITY CLERK AND CITY TREASURER.



   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 412.581, as it may be
amended from time to time, separate offices of City Clerk and City Treasurer
are hereby established. The duties of each office shall be as provided by law.



   (B)   The Clerk, with the consent of the Council, may appoint and
remove a Deputy Clerk to perform the duties of the Clerk under the
supervision of the Clerk. The Treasurer, with the consent of the Council, may
appoint and remove a Deputy Treasurer to perform the duties of the Treasurer
under the supervision of the Treasurer.



   (C)   The combined office of the Clerk-Treasurer is abolished.



('82 Code, §§ 2.112 and 2.113)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99; Am. Ord.
118, passed 9-12-05)



§ 32.02  ANNUAL AUDIT.



   There shall be an annual audit of the city’s financial affairs by the
state auditor or a public accountant in accordance with minimum auditing
procedures prescribed by the state auditor.



(Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 32.03  BONDS MAY BE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The Council may require any officer or employee to furnish a
bond conditioned upon the faithful exercise of the duties of the officer or
employee and the proper application of, in payment upon demand of, all monies
officially received by the officer or employee.  Unless otherwise prescribed
by law, the amount of bond may be fixed by the Council.  The bonds furnished
by the Clerk shall be corporate surety bonds.



('82 Code, § 2.221)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



   (B)   The Council may require that the officer or employee pay the
bond premium, or it may, by any appropriate means, provide for the payment
from city funds of the premium on the official bond of any officer or
employee of the city.



('82 Code, § 2.222)



§ 32.04  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Establishment of position. The position of City Administrator
for the City of Mayer, Minnesota, is hereby established. The City
Administrator shall be the chief administrator for the City of Mayer. The
position of City Administrator as previously existing is hereby ratified.



   (B)   Appointment; removal. The City Administrator shall be
appointed by a majority of the City Council for an indefinite term and may be
removed from the position by affirmative action by a majority of the full
Council with or without cause. The Council may enter into an employment
contract with the City Administrator.



   (C)   Qualifications. The City Administrator shall be selected
solely on the basis of the person’s executive and administrative
qualifications, experience, formal education, and knowledge of accepted
practices pertaining to the duties of the position.



   (D)   Direction. The City Administrator shall be subject to the
supervision and direction of the Mayor and the Council as a collective body
pursuant to Minnesota Statutes and consistent with applicable laws. The
Council shall, at least once annually, undertake a review of the City
Administrator’s performance.



   (E)   Functions; duties. The City Administrator shall be the chief
administrative officer of the city, and shall be responsible for the proper
administration of all affairs of the city; shall oversee and direct the
operations of all departments, divisions, and offices of the city except as
otherwise provided by law. In fulfilling the responsibilities of the position
of the City Administrator, the City Administrator shall be empowered and
required in general to do as follows:



      (1)   Supervise and direct the administration of all
departments, divisions, offices, municipal functions, and services under the
control of the Council, except as otherwise provided by law.



      (2)   Develop and issue administrative policies, rules,
regulations and procedures necessary to ensure the proper management of all
departments, divisions, and offices.



      (3)   Enforce all laws, city ordinance provisions, and
resolutions of the city and, as necessary, make recommendations for revisions
or additions.



      (4)   Attend and participate in all discussions at all
meetings of the Council and other bodies as required. Prepare the agenda for
Council meetings with supporting materials and recommend action to be taken.
The City Administrator shall represent the city at all functions as
appropriate and not in conflict with the prerogatives of the Mayor and the
Council.



      (5)   Prepare and submit an annual budget to the Council and
administer it after receiving Council approval.



      (6)   Administer and manage the finances of the city subject
to Council approval.



      (7)   Advise the Council as to the financial condition of the
city.



      (8)   Supervise city employees and direct all personnel
matters as provided for by the personnel policies established by the Council.
Oversee planning and zoning issues.



      (9)   Recommend and submit to the Council for consideration of:



         (a)   Approval or disapproval of employment promotions,
transfers, suspensions, discipline or removal of city employees.



         (b)   Wages, salaries and other benefits.



         (c)   Hiring of new employees including recruitment,
screening and interviewing of prospective employees.



      (10)   Supervise purchasing, including the making or letting
of purchases and contracts in accordance with policies established by the
Council and applicable laws; provide for the receipt of estimates,
quotations, and sealed bids and submit to the Council as appropriate.



      (11)   Monitor all consultant and contract work performed for
the city.



      (12)   Coordinate the City Attorney’s activities for the
city.



      (13)   Recommend the adoption of such measures as may be
necessary or expedient for the health, safety, and welfare of the community
or for the improvement of the organization and operation of municipal
government.



      (14)   Prepare and/or provide periodic reports, summaries,
information, and recommendations relating to municipal services, projects,
and issues for sumittal to the Council.



      (15)   Perform such other duties as may be placed under the
City Administrator’s jurisdiction by Council action, job description or as
required by law.



   (F)   General supervision. No member of the Council or the Mayor
shall interfere with, or prevent the City Administrator from exercising the
City Administrator’s own good faith judgment in the administration of the
city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, no member of the Council or the
Mayor shall individually dictate to or exercise control over the
administration of the city, and no member shall give orders to any department
head or employee except through a majority vote of the Council.



(Ord. 139, passed 8-27-07)



CHAPTER 33:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   Additional offices and employees




Police Department




   33.10   Officers; police protection




Fire Department




   33.15   Volunteer Department; members



   33.16   Fire Chief; selection and duties



   33.17   Assistant Fire Chief; selection and duties



   33.18   Training Officer



   33.19   Duties of Department




Planning Commission




   33.40   Policy



   33.41   Establishment; members



   33.42   Rules and records; expenditures



   33.43   Powers and duties




Parks and Recreation Commission




   33.50   Establishment of Commission



   33.51   Membership



   33.52   Organization; meetings



   33.53   Powers and duties




Street Department




   33.60   Establishment; members and duties



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  ADDITIONAL OFFICES AND EMPLOYEES.



   In addition to the departments, boards, commissions, agencies and other
offices created by this chapter or other provisions of this code, the Council
may create additional offices and may designate other employees and agents as
may be necessary or helpful to the efficient governance of the city and
operation and maintenance of the public facilities.



('82 Code, § 2.491)



Cross-reference:



   Building Department, see § 150.04




POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 33.10  OFFICERS; POLICE PROTECTION.



   The Council may hire the Chief of Police and other police officers as
it may deem necessary.  In lieu of hiring the Chief of Police and other
police officers, the Council may enter into an agreement for the provision of
police protection to the city by any appropriate law enforcement agency, and
any existing agreement is hereby continued until modified or to terminated in
the proper manner.



('82 Code, § 2.411)




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 33.15  VOLUNTEER DEPARTMENT; MEMBERS.



   (A)   There shall be a city volunteer Fire Department.



('82 Code, § 2.421)



   (B)   The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief, the
Assistant Fire Chief, the Training Officer and other members as may be
determined.  All members of the Department shall be able-bodied, not less
than 18 years of age, and shall be a high school graduate or have an
equivalent general education diploma.  Members shall be appointed by the
Fire Chief, subject to confirmation by the City Council.  Firefighters shall
continue as members of the Volunteer Fire Department during good behavior
until retirement, but may be removed by the City Council for cause after a
public hearing.



('82 Code, § 2.242)



§ 33.16  FIRE CHIEF; SELECTION AND DUTIES.



   The members of the Department shall select one of their members to be
the Fire Chief.  Selection shall be approved or disapproved by the
Council.  The Fire Chief shall serve until another Chief is elected by
members of the Department, unless earlier removed by Council.  The Fire
Chief shall have full control of and over the Department and shall have other
powers and duties, and keep records, as are prescribed by law, and as the
Council may determine.



('82 Code, § 2.243)



§ 33.17  ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF; SELECTION AND DUTIES.



   The members of the Department shall select one member as the Assistant
Fire Chief.  Selection shall be approved or disapproved by the Council. 
The Assistant Fire Chief shall serve until another Assistant Fire Chief is
selected by members of the Department, unless earlier removed by the
Council.  In case of the absence or disability of the Fire Chief, the
Assistant Fire Chief shall perform all the functions and exercise all the
authority of the Chief.



('82 Code, § 2.244)



§ 33.18  TRAINING OFFICER.



   The members of the Department shall select one of their members as the
Training Officer.  Selection shall be approved or disapproved by the
Council.  The Training Officer shall serve until another Training Officer is
selected by members of the Department, unless earlier removed by the
Council.  The office of the Training Officer may be held by any member of
the Department, including the Fire Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief.  The
Training Officer shall have duties respecting the training of fire fighters,
fire prevention, fire fighting and rescue, as may be established by the Fire
Chief.



('82 Code, § 2.245)



§ 33.19  DUTIES OF DEPARTMENT.



   Members in the Fire Department shall perform the duties relating to the
extinguishment and prevention of fires and protection of life and property
from fires and have other powers and duties relating to fire fighting and
fire prevention as are prescribed by law and as the Council may determine.



('82 Code, § 2.246)




PLANNING COMMISSION




§ 33.40  POLICY.



   The Council desires to encourage sound and harmonious growth of the
community and its environment, to encourage efficiency and economy in the
provision of facilities and services, to ensure maximum return for
expenditures of public funds, and to avoid errors and waste resulting from
unplanned and uncoordinated development.  To these ends and for these
purposes, the Council finds it necessary that there should be prepared and
maintained in current form, a comprehensive plan with related studies,
statements of policies, regulations and ordinances to guide the development
of the city. Pursuant to the authority granted by statute, the Council hereby
intends to provide for comprehensive municipal planning activities or guiding
the future development and improvement of the city.



('82 Code, § 2.441)



§ 33.41  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS.



   (A)   There shall be the Planning Commission of the city.



('82 Code, § 2.442)



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Council from among the residents of the city and neighboring
townships.  One member shall be ex-officio, to be appointed by the Council
from its own membership, to serve as liaison with the Planning Commission. 
Members other than ex-officio shall be appointed from among persons in a
position to represent the general public interest, and no person shall be
appointed with private or personal interests likely to conflict with the
general public interest.



('82 Code, § 2.443)



   (C)   Terms of office for members other than ex-officio shall
commence on February 1 and shall be for three years, or until the member's
successor is appointee and qualified.  The ex-officio members shall serve at
the pleasure of the Council.  Ex-officio membership on the Commission shall
terminate upon termination of the office from which ex-officio membership is
derived.



('82 Code, § 2.444)



   (D)   At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, or as soon
as thereafter may be done, the Council shall appoint members for any term
which will then expire.



('82 Code, § 2.445)



   (E)   When the private or personal interest of a member is involved
in any matter before the Commission, the member shall not take part in action
on the matter.  If the member fails to do so, the member may be disqualified
by the Chairperson of the Commission.



('82 Code, § 2.446)



   (F)   Any member, for just cause and upon written charges, may be
removed from office by a two-thirds vote of the entire Council.  The member
shall be entitled to a public hearing before the vote is taken.  Any member
may be removed for nonattendance at Commission meetings, without action of
the Council, according to rules adopted by the Commission.



('82 Code, § 2.447)



   (G)   The Chairperson of the Commission shall notify the Council
promptly of any vacancies occurring upon the Commission.  The Council shall
fill any vacancy for the unexpired portion of the original term of
appointment.



('82 Code, § 2.448)



   (H)   The Commission shall elect the Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson from among those of its members who are not ex-officio
members, and may create other offices as they may determine.  It shall
provide itself with a secretary, either by election from among its members or
by appointment of an officer or employee of the city who is not a member of
the Commission.  Terms of all officers shall be for one year, or until their
successors are qualified.  Any officer shall be eligible for reelection.



('82 Code, § 2.449)



   (I)   All members, including the Chairperson and the ex-officio
members, shall be entitled to vote and shall otherwise have full rights and
privileges of a member of the Commission.  A secretary who is not a member
of the Commission shall not be entitled to vote or to exercise the other
rights and privileges of a member.



('82 Code, § 2.450)



   (J)   Members of the Commission may receive payment for their
services upon the Commission. The amount of the payment shall be established
by the Council by resolution from time to time.  Members may receive
necessary travel and other expenses while on official business for the
Commission, as approved by the Council.



('82 Code, § 2.455)



§ 33.42  RULES AND RECORDS; EXPENDITURES.



   (A)   The Commission shall adopt rules for its governance and for
the transaction of its business.



('82 Code, § 2.451)



   (B)   The Commission shall keep a record of attendance at its
meetings and resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations showing
each member on each question requiring a vote including whether the member
was absent or abstained.  The records of the Commission shall be a public
record.



('82 Code, § 2.452)



   (C)   Within limits set by appropriations or other funds made
available, subject to approval of the Council, the Commission may incur
expenses as it may deem necessary and proper for the conduct of its affairs.



('82 Code, § 2.454)



§ 33.43  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The powers and duties of the Commission shall be, in general:



      (1)   To acquire and maintain in current form, basic
information and background data as is necessary to an understanding of past
trends, present conditions and forces at work, to cause changes in these
conditions;



      (2)   To prepare and keep current a comprehensive general plan
for meeting present requirements and future needs as may be foreseen;



      (3)   To establish principles and policies for guiding action
affecting development in the city and its environs;



      (4)    To prepare and recommend to the Council, ordinances,
regulations and other proposals promoting orderly development along lines
indicated by the comprehensive plan;



      (5)   To determine whether specific proposed developments
conform to the principles and requirements for the comprehensive plan and the
ordinances;



      (6)   To keep the Council and the general public informed and
advised as to planning and development matters;



      (7)   To conduct hearings as may be required to gather
information necessary for the drafting, establishment and maintenance of the
comprehensive plan and ordinances and regulations related to it, and to
establish public committees or the pose of collecting and compiling
information necessary to the plan, or for the purpose of promoting the
accomplishment of the plan in whose or in part; and



      (8)   To perform other duties which may be lawfully assigned
to it, or which may have a bearing on the preparation or accomplishment of
the plan.



('82 Code, § 2.456)



   (B)   The Commission, city employees, or agents may in the
performance of official utilities enter upon lands and make examinations or
surveys in the same manner as authorized city agents or employees, and shall
have other powers as are required for the performance of official functions
in carrying out the purposes of the provisions of this code relating to the
Planning Commission.



('82 Code, § 2.457)



   (C)   In connection with its duties, and within the limit of its
funds, the Commission may request the city to make, cause to be made or
obtain, maps, aerial photograph, surveys, special studies and other data
reasonably necessary to the Commission in carrying out its comprehensive
municipal planning activities.  Its activities may include, without
limitation, study of the location, condition and adequacy of housing,
commercial and industrial facilities, economic development, parks,
playgrounds and other recreational  facilities, schools, public and private
utilities, traffic to transportation, parking and other matters in
furtherance of its planning facilities.



('82 Code, § 2.458)



   (D)   After the Council has adopted subdivision regulations, any
subdivision plat submitted to the Council for approval shall, prior to
consideration by the Council, be referred to the Planning Commission for
review and recommendation.  Any plat so referred shall be returned to the
Council by the Commission with its recommendations within 30 days.  If the
Commission fails to act within that time, the Council may proceed with its
consideration of the matter.



('82 Code, § 2.459)



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations, see Chapter 150



PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION



§ 33.50  ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.



   There shall be a Parks and Recreation Commission of the city.



(Ord. 112, passed 1-24-05)



§ 33.51  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of five members who
are residents of the city, except one member may be a non-resident who is the
owner of property within the city on which real estate taxes are paid. One of
the members shall be a member of the City Council.



   (A)   All members shall be appointed by the City Council and may be
removed by a three-fifths vote of the Council.



   (B)   (1)   Of the Parks and Recreation Commissioners first
appointed, other than the City Council member, one shall be appointed for a
one-year term, one shall be appointed for a two-year term, and two shall be
appointed for a three-year term. All terms shall expire on February 1 of the
appropriate year. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three
years, expiring February 1 of the appropriate year. Both original and
successive appointees shall hold their offices until their successors shall
be appointed and qualified.



      (2)   The City Council member shall serve at the pleasure of
the Council. City Council members on the Commission shall terminate upon
termination of the office from which Council membership is derived.



      (3)   Every appointed member shall before entering upon the
discharge of his or her duties take an oath that he or she shall faithfully
discharge the duties of his or her office.



      (4)   Compensation shall be set by resolution of the City
Council.



(Ord. 112, passed 1-24-05; Am. Ord. 164, passed 5-24-10)



§ 33.52  ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its
appointed members for a term of one year; and the Commission may create and
fill such other offices as it may determine. A Commission member shall act as
Secretary of the Commission.



   (B)   The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, and
findings, which record shall be a public record. Expenditures of the
Commission shall be within amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City
Council. The Commission shall submit to the City Council a monthly report of
its work during the preceding month.



(Ord. 112, passed 1–24-05)



§ 33.53  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be the park and recreational
planning and maintenance advisory agency for the City of Mayer.  The duties
of the Commission are as follows, but not exclusively:



   (A)   Advise the City Council in park acquisition, development and
abandonment matters.



   (B)   Advise the City Council in regard to recreational programming.



   (C)   Recommend to the City Council rules and regulations for use of
any park, recreational or leisure facilities.



   (D)   Maintain the City of Mayer Master Parks Plan.



   (E)   Consider proper names for park and recreation areas and make
such recommendations to the City Council.



   (F)   Conduct studies and investigations as specifically directed or
delegated by the City Council.



   (G)   Represent the City Council at appropriate meetings.



   (H)   Review special requests for the use of recreational facilities
for the City Council.



(Ord. 112, passed 1-24-05)




STREET DEPARTMENT




§ 33.60  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   There shall be a Street Department.



   (B)   The Street Department shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Street Commissioner, who shall be appointed by the Council.  The
Commissioner, and all employees of the Department, shall receive compensation
as the Council may fix, and serve at the pleasure of the Council.  The
Street Department shall perform the duties respecting streets, alleys,
sidewalks and other areas within the city, as the Council may provide.



('82 Code, § 2.481)



Cross-reference:



   Assessable current services, see § 93.01



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Chapter 94



CHAPTER 34:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   34.01   Purpose



   34.02   Interpretation and effect



   34.03   Definitions



   34.04   Establishment of emergency management organization



   34.05   Powers and duties of Director



   34.06   Local emergencies



   34.07   Emergency regulations



   34.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics



§ 34.01  PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds or other natural causes, from sabotage or hostile
action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure; and in
order to insure that preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with
disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense and to protect
the public peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property
of the people of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters;



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters;



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency-preparedness functions; and



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which require that each political subdivision of
the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 34.02  INTERPRETATION AND EFFECT.



   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions.  The provisions of this
section shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which
he or she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter, the workers'
compensation law, or any pension law, nor the right of any person to receive
any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 34.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER.  A situation which creates an immediate and serious
impairment to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has
resulted in or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for
which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area
are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY.  An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.  The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado and other acts of
nature or from sabotage, hostile action or from industrial hazardous material
mishaps.  These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological and chemical, evacuation, congregate
care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions.  EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT includes those activities sometimes referred to as “civil
defense” functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES.  The total personnel resources engaged in
city-level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder.  This includes personnel
from city departments, authorized volunteers and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.  The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. 
This organization provides city liaison and coordination with federal, state
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 34.04  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government, the Emergency
Management Organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director.  The Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term and may be removed at
any time.  The Director shall serve with a salary and shall be paid
necessary expenses.  The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor.



§ 34.05  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director, with the consent of the Mayor, shall represent
the city on any regional or state conference for emergency management.  The
Director shall develop proposed mutual aid agreements with other political
subdivisions of the state for reciprocal emergency management aid and
assistance in an emergency too great to be dealt with unassisted, and shall
present these agreements to the Council for its action. These arrangements
shall be consistent with the state emergency plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster.  The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions, subject to the approval of the Mayor.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the
Council for its approval.  When the Council has approved the plan, it shall
be the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved. 
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time.  The Director
shall coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end
that they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans
of the federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans
of the county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the state and city emergency plans, the
Director shall institute training programs and public information programs
and conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be
necessary to assure prompt and effective operation of the city emergency plan
when a disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable.  The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city's Emergency Management
Organization and to the Governor upon request.  The head of each department
or agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the
planning and programming of emergency activities as will involve the
utilization of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state.  To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations
issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 34.06  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor.  It shall not be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the Council.  Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Administrator.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions.  However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide
aid and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



§ 34.07  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate regulations
consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulations respecting the
conduct of persons and the use of property during emergencies, the repair,
maintenance and safeguarding of essential public services, emergency health,
fire and safety regulations, drills or practice periods required for
preliminary training, and all other matters which are required to protect
public safety, health and welfare in declared emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing,
shall be dated, shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Administrator. 
A copy shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during
business hours.  Notice of the existence of these regulation and their
availability for inspection at the City Administrator's Office shall be
conspicuously posted at the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of
the city or at other places in the affected area as the Council shall
designate in the resolution.  By resolution, the Council may modify or
rescind a regulation.



   (C)   The Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at any
time.  If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end of
30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which it
relates, whichever comes first.  Any resolution, rule or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.31, as it may be amended from time to time, and notwithstanding
any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its
Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to enter
into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster by
protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster.  The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time- consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by
law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment
agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not
limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirement for bids.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The Emergency Management Organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



CHAPTER 35:  TAXATION



Section




Service Districts




   35.01   Establishment of districts



   35.02   Urban service district



   35.03   Rural service district



   35.04   Lands included within rural service district



   35.05   Transfer from rural service district to urban service
district



   35.06   Benefit ratio; tax rate



   35.07   Annual review



   35.08   Connection charges



   35.09   Services provided



Cross-reference:



   Planning Commission, see §§ 33.40 through 33.43



   Subdivisions, see Chapter 151



   Zoning, see Chapter 152




SERVICE DISTRICTS




§ 35.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   Pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. § 272.67, the City of Mayer
hereby divides the area within its municipal limits into an urban service
district and a rural service district constituting separate taxing districts
for the purpose of all municipal property taxes except those levied for the
payment of bonds and judgments and interest thereon.



(Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



§ 35.02  URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT.



   The urban service district shall include all land within the boundaries
of the City of Mayer which are not included in the rural service district
established by this subchapter.



(Ord. 62A, passed 10-21-82; Am. Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



§ 35.03  RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   The rural service district shall include only such unplatted
lands, which need not be contiguous to one another, as in the judgment of the
City Council at the time of the adoption of Ord. No. 137 are rural in
character, and are not developed for commercial, industrial, or urban
residential purposes, and for these reasons are not benefitted to the same
degree as other lands by municipal services financed by general taxation.



   (B)   The City Council by amendment to this subchapter in the
future, may designate lands outside the City of Mayer which, if annexed,
shall be included within the rural service district.



(Ord. 62A, passed 10-21-82; Am. Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



§ 35.04  LANDS INCLUDED WITHIN THE RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.



   The following lands are hereby designated to be included in the rural
service district of the City of Mayer:



   (A)   PID No. 50-002-0110 (Benjamin and Lila Quaas Property).



   (B)   PID No. 50-006-0330 (William and Sandra Drew Property).



(Ord. 62A, passed 10-21-82; Am. Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



§ 35.05  TRANSFER FROM RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT TO URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Whenever any parcel of land included in the rural service
district is platted, in whole or in part; or whenever application is made for
a permit for construction fo a commercial, industrial, residential, or
agricultural building or improvement, except for the purpose of repairing or
replacing a pre-existing structure; or whenever such improvement or building
is commenced without a permit; or whenever, at the request of the owner, any
parcel is provided additional municipal services such as sewer, water,
streets, or the like; the City Council shall make and enter an order by
resolution transferring such parcel or any part thereof from the rural
service district to the urban service district.



   (B)   Grading of land is not considered as an improvement providing
such grading is limited to that which is required to minimize storm water
drainage problems and provided grading areas are placed into agricultural use
or reseeded within one year. Any new fill placed on the land shall be graded
and seeded within one year.



(Ord. 62A, passed 10-21-82; Am. Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



§ 35.06  BENEFIT RATIO; TAX RATE.



   (A)   It is the judgment of the City Council that the approximate
ratio that exists between the benefits resulting from the tax supported
municipal services to parcels of land of like market value, situated in the
rural service district and in the urban service district, respectively, is
22.52%. However, in no event shall the tax rate for the rural service
district be less than what the tax rate for such parcel would be if taxed by
the township in which the parcel is located. Any taxes levied for the
payments of bonds and judgments and interest thereon shall be in addition to
such tax.



   (B)   By amendment to this subchapter, the benefit ratio may be
changed, and lands may be added to or removed from the rural service
district, but not amendment shall be required to remove land by the procedure
provided in § 35.05.



(Ord. 62A, passed 10-21-82; Am. Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



§ 35.07  ANNUAL REVIEW.



   Once each year the City Council shall review the status of all lands in
the rural service district to determine whether such lands continue to
qualify for inclusion in the rural service district and shall also review the
tax ratio applicable to such lands as determined under § 35.06.



(Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



§ 35.08  CONNECTION CHARGES.



   At such time as a parcel of land is transferred from the rural service
district to the urban service district and/or a structure on such parcel is
connected to the sewer and water system of the City of Mayer, the owner of
such parcel shall pay to the City of Mayer such connection and availability
charges of the city that are then in effect at the time of such connection.



(Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



Cross-reference:



   Cost of connections, see § 51.40



§ 35.09  SERVICES PROVIDED.



   Except for fire, police and planning services, the City of Mayer will
provide no other services to the lands in the rural service district beyond
those customarily provided by the township in which the lands are located.



(Ord. 137, passed 7-23-07)



CHAPTER 36:  FINANCE



Section




Uniform System of Fees, Charges, Costs and Rates




   36.01   Authorization and establishment of fees



   36.02   Fee schedule



   36.03   Conflict



   36.04   Non-exclusivity



Cross-reference:



   General licensing regulations, see Ch. 110



UNIFORM SYSTEM OF FEES, CHARGES, COSTS AND RATES



§ 36.01  AUTHORIZATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES.



   The City of Mayer is authorized by law and does hereby establish and
impose certain fees, charges, costs and rates for licenses, permits,
applications, information, services and other matters required or provided by
the city.



(Ord. 117, passed 5-23-05; Am. Ord. 127, passed 12-17-05; Am. Ord. 132,
passed 12-11-06; Am. Ord. 190, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 198, passed 1-26-15;
Am. Ord. 213, passed 1-9-17; Am. Ord. 217, passed 1-8-18)



§ 36.02  FEE SCHEDULE.



    (A)   The fees, charges, costs and rates for such licenses,
permits, applications, information, services and other matters are adopted as
set forth on Schedule A to Ord. No. 217, passed 1-8-18. These fees and
charges are deemed appropriate and reasonable. Such fee schedule may be
amended or revised from time to time by subsequent ordinance adopted by the
City Council.



   (B)   The fees and charges shall be collected by city staff as
required and collected prior to the issuance of a license or permit or
acceptance of an application as the case may be. Fees are not refundable
unless otherwise provided by ordinance or Council action.



(Ord. 117, passed 5-23-05; Am. Ord. 127, passed 12-17-05; Am. Ord. 132,
passed 12-11-06; Am. Ord. 142, passed 12-10-07; Am. Ord. 153, passed 12-8-08;
Am. Ord. 162, passed 1-11-10; Am. Ord. 171, passed 1-10-11; Am. Ord. 176,
passed 1-9-12; Am. Ord. 190, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 198, passed 1-26-15;
Am. Ord. 213, passed 1-9-17; Am. Ord. 217, passed 1-8-18)



§ 36.03  CONFLICT.



    In the event of any conflict between this subchapter and any other
provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mayer, this subchapter
shall control.



(Ord. 117, passed 5-23-05; Am. Ord. 127, passed 12-17-05; Am. Ord. 132,
passed 12-11-06; Am. Ord. 190, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 198, passed 1-26-15;
Am. Ord. 213, passed 1-9-17; Am. Ord. 217, passed 1-8-18)



§ 36.04  NON-EXCLUSIVITY.



    This subchapter shall not limit or preclude any other fees, charges,
costs or rates as required by the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mayer or
as otherwise established by ordinance or resolution.



(Ord. 117, passed 5-23-05; Am. Ord. 127, passed 12-17-05; Am. Ord. 132,
passed 12-11-06; Am. Ord. 190, passed 1-13-14; Am. Ord. 198, passed 1-26-15;
Am. Ord. 213, passed 1-9-17; Am. Ord. 217, passed 1-8-18)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GARBAGE



      51.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS



      52.   WATER



      53.   SEWERS



      54.   DRAIN TILE CONNECTIONS



      55.   STORMWATER UTILITY



      56.   AREA CHARGES



CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE



Section



   50.01   Disposal by burning prohibited



   50.02   Proper disposal



   50.03   Accumulation prohibited



   50.04   Scattering prohibited



   50.05   Garbage collection required; use of city approved hauler or
collector required; payment by owner of premises for charges required;
penalty for violation



§ 50.01  DISPOSAL BY BURNING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dispose of any garbage or other refuse by open burning,
nor shall any person owning or having control of any premises cause or permit
the same, in the city, except upon application to and approval by the
appropriate state agency, and in the manner and under the conditions and
restrictions established by law and administrative regulation.



('82 Code, § 8.211)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Open burning, see § 93.03



§ 50.02  PROPER DISPOSAL.



   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse upon any
street, alley or other public property, or upon any private property, except
in proper containers for collection.  No person shall throw or deposit
refuse in any stream or other body of water.



('82 Code, § 8.212)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.03  ACCUMULATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall cause or allow any unsanitary or unsightly accumulation
of refuse upon any property owned or occupied by that person.



('82 Code, § 8.213)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.04  SCATTERING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep or haul, or allow to be kept on or hauled from
premises owned by that person, refuse in a manner that it may be carried or
deposited by the elements upon any other premises.



('82 Code, § 8.214)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.05  GARBAGE COLLECTION REQUIRED; USE OF CITY APPROVED HAULER OR
COLLECTOR REQUIRED; PAYMENT BY OWNER OF PREMISES FOR CHARGES REQUIRED;
PENALTY FOR VIOLATION .



   Every person who owns or occupies a residential dwelling, including a
house, apartment house, multiple residential dwelling, manufactured home, or
any other place of residence, and every person who owns or occupies a
commercial establishment, must have weekly collection or disposal of garbage
or other refuse. Residential owners or occupants must use the services of the
hauler or collector approved by the city. The owner of each residence shall
be liable for the payment of the service charge, whether or not the owner
occupies the residence. Any violation of this section shall constitute a
petty misdemeanor offense and subject the violator to a fine or
administrative citation of a maximum penalty of $300 for each occurrence.



(Am. Ord. 160, passed 9-14-09)



CHAPTER 51:  GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS



Section




Administration and Enforcement




   51.01   Applicability



   51.02   Utility Superintendent



   51.03   Information required



   51.04   Authority; access to premises



   51.05   Additional requirements



   51.06   Damages and violations




Billing and Collection; Charges




   51.20   Statements



   51.21   Payments



   51.22   Discontinuance of service



   51.23   Liability for charges



   51.24   Collection of amounts due



   51.25   Service rates



   51.26   Industrial wastes; unusual discharge rates




Connection Requirements




   51.40   Cost of connection



   51.41   Connection when service available



   51.42   Notice; city authority



   51.43   Installation prior to street surfacing



   51.44   Permit required; application and fee; outdoor water and
sewer connections and inspections



Cross-reference:



   Connection requirements, see § 53.06



   Separate service connection required, see § 52.01



   Zoning, see Chapter 152



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 51.01  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions Chapters 51, 52, and 53 respecting municipal utility
service, including amendments which may from time to time be enacted shall be
considered a part of the terms of service for every service customer and
every owner, lessee and occupant of premises served.  Every customer served
and every owner, lessee and occupant of premises served shall be considered
to express consent to and to be bound by all requirements.



('82 Code, § 3.111)



§ 51.02  UTILITY SUPERINTENDENT.



   The Utility Superintendent shall, subject to the direction of the
Council, enforce all provisions of this chapter relating to the city water
and sewer systems and private sewage disposal systems, except  for duties
conferred upon the Building Inspector.  Any powers and duties conferred in
this chapter upon either of them may be exercised by any other employee of
the city when so authorized by them.



('82 Code, § 3.112)



§ 51.03  INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   The owner, lessee, occupant or other person in charge of any premises,
or the applicant for any municipal utility service, shall provide the city
with information as may be reasonably required related to the provision of or
the use of municipal utility services upon the premises.  No person shall
willfully fail to provide information or willfully falsify information.



('82 Code, § 3.113)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.04  AUTHORITY; ACCESS TO PREMISES.



   The customer or other person in control of any premises connected to
the city water supply system or served by the city sewer system shall permit
authorized meter readers to read meters at reasonable hours of any day, shall
permit authorized employees or agents of the city to have access to all parts
of any building or premises connected with the city water supply system or
the city storm or sanitary sewer system at times as may reasonably be
necessary for repairs and at reasonable hours of any day for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measuring, sampling and testing.  If access cannot
be obtained to read a meter, the customer's bill may be estimated.  Refusal
to permit access or continued inability to obtain access to the premises
shall be grounds for discontinuance of service.  In such cases, service
shall be discontinued in the same manner as service is discontinued for
failure to pay amounts owed.



('82 Code, § 3.114)



§ 51.05  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Building Inspector may establish and enforce any
additional requirements not contained in this title as may be necessary or
convenient for the adequate, safe, efficient and healthful provision of
municipal utility services and of private sewage disposal and for protection
of the municipal utility service facilities.  No person shall violate any
requirements, or any requirements of law or any other agency respecting
municipal utility service or private sewage disposal systems.



('82 Code, § 3.115)



   (B)   The Building Inspector may, in writing, vary any requirements
contained in this title in favor of alternate methods, designs and
requirements when, in the judgment of the Inspector, the alternate methods,
designs and requirements will fully provide for the adequate, safe, efficient
and healthful provision of city water and sewer service and private sewage
disposal facilities.



('82 Code, § 3.116)



§ 51.06  DAMAGES AND VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Unauthorized acts.  No person shall make any municipal
service connection, fail to make any required connection or use, damage or
interfere with any municipal utility installation contrary to the
requirements of this code.  No person shall install or use any private
sewage disposal system contrary to the requirements of this title.



('82 Code, § 3.121)



   (B)   Liability for damages.  Any person violating any provision of
this title relating to any municipal utility or any person who negligently or
intentionally causes damage to any municipal utility or appurtenance thereto,
shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned
thereby.  In addition, the customer and owner may each also be held liable
if the expense, loss or damage could have been avoided by due care on their
part.



('82 Code, § 3.122)



   (C)   Correction of violations.



      (1)   Upon finding any violation of any provision of this
title relating to municipal utility services or private sewage disposal
facilities, the Superintendent, Building Inspector shall notify the Clerk.
The Clerk shall serve notice upon the occupant or other person in charge of
the premises, and upon the owner if not occupying the premises, specifying
the nature of each violation and the work which is required to be done. The
notice shall also specify the reasonable time considering the nature and
amount of work to be done, and the nature of the violations, within which
each violation or all the violations must be remedied. If each violation is
not corrected within the time specified, the official reporting the violation
may cause the violation to be corrected at the expense of the occupant or
other person in charge or the owner or both.



      (2)   Any person who fails to correct any violation when
required to do so shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The
provisions of this section shall not limit the power or of any officer or
agency to act pursuant to authority given elsewhere in this code or by law.



('82 Code, § 3.123)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)




BILLING AND COLLECTION; CHARGES




§ 51.20  STATEMENTS.



   The Clerk shall compute the amount due to the city for each customer
for the city water and sewer service and for any other municipal utility
charges. The Clerk shall mail a statement of charges to the customer as soon
as practicable after the end of each month of service to the customer. 
Payment shall be due by the first of the month.  If payment is not received
by the tenth of the month following the date of the bill, a penalty shall be
charged in an amount that the Council by resolution may establish from time
to time.



('82 Code, § 3.131)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 51.21  PAYMENTS.



   Amounts owed for municipal utility service shall be due and payable to
the Clerk on or before the due date specified in the statement.



('82 Code, § 3.132)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 51.22  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.



   (A)   In any case where charges for municipal utility service have
not been paid within 30 days after the date due, and where satisfactory
payment arrangements have not been made, water and other municipal utility
service to the premises may be discontinued in accordance with the
requirements of this section.  Discontinuance of service for any other
reason shall be made in accordance with requirements set forth in other parts
of this title which deal with discontinuance of service for the reasons set
forth in other parts of this title.



   (B)   The Clerk shall cause written notice of intent to discontinue
service for nonpayment of amounts owed to be served upon the customer
personally, by certified mail or by leaving a copy of the notice at the
premises served.  A mailed notice shall also be given to the owner, if the
owner is not the customer served.  The notice shall state that if payment is
not received on or before a date stated in the notice, services specified in
the notice will be discontinued.  The date shall be not less than three days
after the date upon which the notice is given. The notice shall also state
that the person may, before that date, file with the Clerk a demand for
hearing on the matter, in which case service will not be discontinued until
the hearing has been held.



   (C)   If a hearing is demanded by the date specified, a hearing
shall be held on the matter by the Council at least three days after the date
on which the request was made.



   (D)   Pursuant to M.S. § 216B.097, as it may be amended from time
to time, no service of a residential customer shall be disconnected if the
disconnection affects the primary heat source for the residential unit when
the disconnection would occur during the period between October 15 and April
15, the customer has declared inability to pay on forms provided by the city,
the household income of the customer is less than 185 percent of the federal
poverty level as documented by the customer to the city, and the customer’s
account is current for the billing period immediately prior to October 15 or
the customer has entered into a payment schedule and is reasonably current
with payments under the schedule. The city shall, between August 15 and
October 15, of each year, notify all residential customers of these
provisions.



   (E)   If, as a result of the hearing, the Council finds that there
is an unpaid charge for service and that there is no legal reason why service
should not be discontinued, the Council may order that service be immediately
discontinued. Unless payment arrangements satisfactory to the Clerk have been
made, service shall not be restored until all delinquent charges including
recommendation charges are paid.



('82 Code, § 3.133)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 51.23  LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   In addition to being enforceable against the customer in whose name the
account is carried, charges for municipal utility services, including
connection charges, re-connection charges and all other charges, may be
enforced against the owner, lessee or occupant, or any of them, or the
property benefitted by the service.  In addition, the charges shall be a
lien on the property benefitted by the service.



('82 Code, § 3.134)



§ 51.24  COLLECTION OF AMOUNTS DUE.



   Any amounts due for municipal utility services, including connection
charges, re-connection charges and all other charges, may be collected in an
action brought for that purpose in the name of the city, or the Clerk may
certify to the County Auditor, the amount due, together with the legal
description of the premises served, for collection with other taxes upon the
property served as provided by law, or the city may take any other action
permitted by law to collect the amount owed.



('82 Code, § 3.135)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 51.25  SERVICE RATES.



   The Council shall, by resolution, establish water and sewer rate
charges and tapping fees.  The Council may also, by resolution, establish a
late payment charge, a re-connection charge, a meter testing charge, a
required deposit and any other charges for municipal utility services and the
availability thereof, and for making connections thereto.



('82 Code, § 3.141)



§ 51.26  INDUSTRIAL WASTES; UNUSUAL DISCHARGE RATES.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish rates to be
charged for the discharge of industrial wastes into the sewage system.



('82 Code, § 3.142)



   (B)   In the case of any user discharging into the sewer system any
waste which is unusual in either character or amount, the Superintendent
shall make a study of the particular use and propose to the Council an
individual supplemental sewage rate charge as may be reasonable and warranted
on the basis of all relevant factors.  The Council shall thereupon consider
the matter and establish supplemental or individual charges as may be
appropriate under the circumstances.



('82 Code, § 3.143)



   (C)   All special sewer connection fees shall be paid into the sewer
bond redemption fund for payment of principal and interest on bonds
outstanding or into the general fund of the city to reimburse advances  made
to the sewer system by the city, until the time as all bonds and advances
have been entirely repaid.



('82 Code, § 3.144)




CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS




§ 51.40  COST OF CONNECTION.



   The cost of connections to the city water and sanitary sewer systems,
including the cost of any necessary excavations, connections, taps,
installations of pipes, appurtenances and street repairs shall be borne by
the owner or other applicant for service.  When the city has agreed to
assume part of the cost, the amount or portion of the cost to be borne by the
owner or applicant shall be an amount as is determined to be the owner’s
share of the cost.



('82 Code, § 3.151)



§ 51.41  CONNECTION WHEN SERVICE AVAILABLE.



   As soon as a service line becomes available to a property required to
be connected thereto, the owner shall connect the property within 90 days and
shall discontinue use of any other service line or facility.



('82 Code, § 3.153)



§ 51.42  NOTICE; CITY AUTHORITY.



   Whenever service for which a required connection becomes available or
is about to become available to a property, the Clerk may notify the owner of
the connection requirement.  If that notice has not been given and the owner
has failed to make the required connection within the time allowed for making
connection, the Clerk shall give notice that connection must be made within a
specified time of the mailing or delivery of the notice.



('82 Code, § 3.154)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 51.43  INSTALLATION PRIOR TO STREET SURFACING.



   The Council may, by resolution, require that water and sewer lines be
installed from the main property line to be served before any permanent
street surfacing is completed. Thereafter, if any property owner fails to put
in the service line, the Clerk shall give the owner notice to do so within a
specified time of the mailing or delivery of the notice.  If the owner fails
to install the line, the Council may cause the line to be installed and
charge the costs against the property as a special assessment in the same
manner as for connecting the premises to the city sanitary sewer lines.



('82 Code, § 3.156)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 51.44  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEE; OUTDOOR WATER AND SEWER
CONNECTIONS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   No person/developer shall make a connection to the city water
system line and/or sanitary sewer system line without a permit from the City
of Mayer. The application for the permit must state the location of the
proposed connection, the time when the connection(s) is to be made, and by
whom the work is to be completed. The permit will not be issued until the
application is approved by the city and until the applicant has complied with
the provisions of this code and other applicable ordinances and laws. A
permit shall be issued only to a state-licensed plumber or an established
plumber exempted from having to obtain a state license.



('82 Code, § 3.161)



   (B)   Any application for a permit to make a connection to the city
water system line and/or sanitary sewer system line shall be premature and no
action shall be taken by the city until such time that a development
agreement approved by the city is executed by the person/developer making the
application.



   (C)   All applications for water or sewer construction permits shall
be made to the city by the person employed to do the work before beginning
the work involved. The application shall be made in the form prescribed by
the city. The applicant shall state whether an assessment on the subject
premises has been made and, if so, the amount so assessed and a legal
description of the premises as originally assessed.  The applicant shall
submit with the application a plan showing the course of the service pipe or
drain between the connection with the city water or sewer line and the
building to be served by it. The applicant shall submit other drawings and
plans of the proposed construction as may be required.



('82 Code, § 3.162)



   (D)   The Council shall, by resolution, establish reasonable fees
for water and sewer construction permits, and also for repair of that portion
of a tarred or hard surface street damaged by excavation.  The applicant
shall submit with the application payment of the required fee.  In its
resolution, the Council may provide for an annual fee which may be paid in
lieu of the fee for each permit issued.  Payment of an annual fee shall not
exempt any person from submitting the required application.



('82 Code, § 3.163)



   (E)   If the proposed construction meets all requirements of this
code and all other applicable requirements, the city shall authorize issuance
of the permit.  If applicable requirements are not met, the city shall
reject the application and give the applicant a written statement of the
reasons for the rejection.  After an application has been approved by the
city, the permit shall be issued.



('82 Code, § 3.164)



   (F)   Tapping of any water main must be cleared through the Public
Works Superintendent.  Hydrants and curb stops are to be operated by city
employees only, unless otherwise specified by Public Works.



      (1)   Water service requirements.



         (a)   House service pipe must be laid with sufficient
slack to allow not less than one foot extra length per 200 feet and in such
manner as to prevent rupture by settlement.



         (b)   Water service lines must be type “K” copper
with flared fittings and a minimum of one inch in diameter for residential
installations.  Type “K” copper of one and one-half inches in diameter
shall be used for runs from 150 to 300 feet.  Check with Building Inspector
regarding multiple family, commercial, and industrial connections.



         (c)   All service lines over two inches will be ductile
iron pipe, having continuity straps and a hydrostatic test, and must hold 150
pounds for one hour.



         (d)   Water service lines shall be installed at a depth
of seven feet or, if less, be sufficiently insulated to protect against
freezing.



         (e)   Joints in copper tubing shall be kept to a maximum
of not more than one joint per 70 feet in length.  Joints are not allowed
within ten feet of the building.



         (f)   The curb stop must be brought to proper grade.



         (g)   All joints and connections shall be left uncovered
until inspected and tested at normal water line pressure.  (Service lines
over two inches in diameter inspected and tested at 150 pso.)



         (h)   No water pipe shall be connected with any pump,
well, tank, or piping that is connected with any other water supply other
than the municipal system.



         (i)   No person shall permit water from the water system
to be used for any purpose except upon the person’s own premises unless
written consent is first obtained from the city.



         (j)   No water pipe shall be laid under a garage.



         (k)   Castings are required when curb stops are located
in driveways.  See city specifications for casting requirements.



         (l)   As an alternative to copper tubing set forth
hereinabove, the following material may be used for water services on private
property for pipe up to and including two inches in diameter as follows:



            1.   Polyethylene.  The tubing shall be made from
virgin, ultra high molecular weight polyethylene resin meeting the
requirements of Type III, Grade P3, Class C materials as described in ASTM
D-2737.  Standard dimension ration shall be SDR-9.



            2.   Pressure rating.  Tubing shall be rated for
160 PSI working pressure at 73.4 degrees Fahrenheit for water.



            3.   Workmanship.  Surface shall be homogenous
inside and outside and completely free from irregularity.  Random testing
shall be performed at intervals during all production runs to assure
uniformity in all respects.  The tubing shall carry the National Sanitation
Foundation Seal of Approval for drinking water.



            4.   Marking.  Pipe or tubing shall be marked
with embossed lettering at intervals of not more than two feet, and marking
shall include nominal size, manufacturer’s name or trademark, machine
identity, pressure rating for water at 73 degrees Fahrenheit, 160 PSI, ASTM
material specifications, standard dimension ratio, the National Sanitation
Foundation seal of approval for drinking water, and the ASTM specification
reference.



            5.   Trace wire.  Trace wire shall be laid with
all PVC water line and shall be #12 copper-insulated and rated for
underground service.  The trace wire shall be connected from the curb box to
a point above grade in the basement terminating at the water meter and
connected securely to the pipe using nylon tie straps.  Splicing trace wire
shall be accomplished by twisting the two ends and heat shrink wrapping the
splice.  Splicing shall not be more frequent than one splice per 250 feet;
wire nut splices are not allowed.



      (2)   Sewer service requirements.



         (a)   Four-inch sanitary sewer services are required on
residential homes from the property line to the house.  Commercial
applications must be approved by the Building Inspector.



         (b)   Plastic pipe must be Schedule 40 for residential
and commercial installations.



         (c)   The sewer service line must be installed at a
minimum of six feet or, if less, insulated sufficiently.



         (d)   Services shall be installed at a slope not less
than one-fourth inch per foot.



         (e)   Ninety-degree (90°) bends are not permitted on a
sanitary sewer service.  The use of two 45-degree (45°) bends and a length
of pipe to make a sweeping bend are permitted.



         (f)   Use of a rubber donut gasket to connect to city
sewer is NOT acceptable.  A 4" × 4" or 6" × 4" glued fitting is acceptable.



         (g)   Glued or mechanical gasketed joints are acceptable
but must pass the air test, 5-PSI for five minutes.



         (h)   All sanitary sewers must be air tested at 5-PSI
for five minutes.



         (i)   Cleanouts must be installed every 100 feet on
lengthy sewer services.  Cleanout caps must be metal and weather tight.



         (j)   If any pipe is laid across a septic tank, the tank
must be filled, and the portion of pipe over the tank must be D.I.P.



         (k)   All excavations required for the installation of
the building sewer shall be open trench work unless approved by the Inspector.



         (l)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.  The depth
shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.



         (m)   No sewer service line shall be installed under a
garage.



      (3)   Water and sewer inspections.



         (a)   Sewer and water inspections can be scheduled
during working hours, Monday through Friday, 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., by
calling 952-442-7520.  A 24-hour notice is required prior to performing an
inspection.



         (b)   The orange building inspection card must be on
site before an inspection will be performed.



         (c)   If a job cannot be completed by the end of the day
and a trench must be left open overnight or over the weekend, the contractor
must make arrangements to fence or cover the trench so that it is safe and
secure.



         (d)   All inspections of water and sewer lines from the
property line to the building structure and any tests involved are performed
by the contractor and witnessed by the Building Inspector or Utility
Superintendent.



         (e)   Using the standard tie card from the city
specifications, the contractor must supply a drawing of water and sewer
installation, to include location of sewer and water line, swing tie
measurements of sewer cleanouts, and curb box.  The drawing must be
submitted to the Building Inspector before a final is granted.



      (4)   Additional information and requirements.



         (a)   Curbs must be bridged when backing over them with
equipment.



         (b)   The contractor is responsible for keeping the
street clean of dirt, mud, and/or debris. This will be charged out if Public
Works has to do any clean up.



         (c)   A street deposit is required on the building
permit if any digging in the right-of-way is to occur, in an amount
determined by the City Council from time to time.



   (G)   All construction shall be subject to the supervision of the
Inspector.  All connections with any water main, all tapping of mains and
the installation, opening and closing of stopcocks shall be made by
authorized city employees done under the supervision of the city. All
connections with the sanitary sewer system shall be made by authorized city
employees. All pipes laid in the streets, alleys or on public property shall
be laid by authorized city employees or under the supervision of the city.



('82 Code, § 3.168)



   (H)   The following conditions shall be deemed to be incorporated in
each permit granted whenever any excavation is made in or along any public
street, alley, sidewalk or other public property:



      (1)   The work shall be done so as to occasion the least
possible inconvenience to the public.



      (2)   Provision shall be made for the passage of water along
the gutters.



      (3)   At least half of the street shall be left clear for
vehicles.



      (4)   Safe bridgeways on sidewalks shall be provided for foot
passengers.



      (5)   All excavations and piles of dirt or other materials
shall be adequately guarded with barriers and lights so as to protect others
from hazards.



      (6)   Excavations shall be refilled as soon as reasonably
possible.



      (7)   Streets, sidewalks and other property disturbed shall be
restored as nearly as practicable to their condition prior to the work.



      (8)   All rubbish and dirt shall be promptly removed.



(‘82 Code, § 3.170)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99; Am. Ord. 123, passed
11-14-05; Am. Ord. 189, passed 12-9-13)



CHAPTER 52:  WATER



Section



   52.01   Separate service connection required



   52.02   Responsibility for service line



   52.03   Repair of leaks



   52.04   Unauthorized use of water



   52.05   Private water supply; connections



   52.06   Restricted use periods



   52.07   Water meters; reader installation and inspections



   52.08   Dual water meters



   52.09   Service requirements



   52.10   Private wells for domestic use prohibited



§ 52.01  SEPARATE SERVICE CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   No more than one house or building shall be supplied from one service
connection.  The Council, or the Building Inspector, when authorized to do
so by the Council, may waive this requirement upon a finding that a separate
service connection to any house or building is impracticable.  Whenever two
or more houses or buildings are supplied from one pipe connecting with a
service main, each house, building or part thereof separately supplied shall
have a separate stop box and a separate meter.



('82 Code, § 3.211)



§ 52.02  RESPONSIBILITY FOR SERVICE LINE.



   All water service lines connecting the city water main to the property
served, including the portion of the line in the public right-of-way between
the main and property served shall be owned by and all expenses of
maintaining, repairing or replacing them shall be borne by the owner of the
property served.



('82 Code, § 3.212)



§ 52.03  REPAIR OF LEAKS.



   The customer, and also the owner, occupant and lessee if not the
customer, shall be responsible for repair of any leaks.  If any leak is not
repaired within the time allowed in the notice after notice to any of them to
repair the leak, including notice left at the premises, the Superintendent
may shut the water off.  When the waste of water is great or damage is
likely to occur from the leak, the Superintendent may turn the water off
immediately and thereafter give notice to repair as provided herein.



('82 Code, § 3.213)



§ 52.04  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER.



   No person, other than an authorized city employee, shall take water
from a fire hydrant, from a city water tank filling station or from any other
city facility without first obtaining authority to do so from the
Superintendent.



('82 Code, § 3.214)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.05  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY; CONNECTIONS.



   No person shall connect any water pipe of the city water supply system
with any pump, well or tank that is connected to any other source of water
supply.  If any connection exists, the customer, owner or person in charge
of the premises shall forthwith sever the connection.  When any connection
is found, the Superintendent may notify the customer, owner or other person
in charge of the premises to sever the connection immediately.  If this is
not done immediately, the Superintendent may turn off the water supply.  All
cross connections shall be eliminated before city water service is restored
to the premises.



('82 Code, § 3.215)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.06  RESTRICTED USE PERIODS.



   Whenever the Council determines that a shortage of water threatens the
city water supply, it may, by resolution, limit the times and hours during
which city water may be used for sprinkling, air conditioning, irrigation,
car washing and other specified uses.  After publication of the resolution,
or delivery to the affected premises, or three days after mailing the
resolution to the affected customer, no person shall use or permit water to
be used in violation of the restrictions imposed in the resolution.  Any
person who does so may be charged an excess use charge, as the Council may
determine by resolution.  Continued violation shall be cause for
discontinuance of water service in accordance with the procedures specified
for discontinuance of service for a leak found upon the customer's premises.



('82 Code, § 3.216)



§ 52.07  WATER METERS; READER INSTALLATION AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Except for extinguishment of fires and uses as may be
authorized by the Council, no person other than an authorized city employee
shall use water from the city water supply system or permit water to be drawn
therefrom unless the water passes through a water meter supplied or approved
by the city.



('82 Code, § 3.221)



   (B)   Whenever any premises is connected to the city water supply
system, the customer shall provide and cause to be installed, at the
customer’s own expense, a water meter which will accurately measure the
amount of water used upon the premises.  Meters shall be installed,
disconnected, taken apart or in any other manner changed only by authorized
city employees or a licensed plumber.



('82 Code, § 3.222)



   (C)   Meters shall be maintained, repaired and replaced at the
customer’s expense.  If any customer fails to replace or repair a
defective or inaccurate meter, the city may do so and add the expense thereof
to the customer’s water bill.



('82 Code, § 3.223)



   (D)   When a customer complains that the bill for the immediate past
service period is excessive and requests that the meter be re-read, the city
shall have the meter re-read.  Any customer who remains dissatisfied may
request that the meter be tested.



('82 Code, § 3.224)



   (E)   The city may test a meter for accuracy at any time.  The
Council may, by resolution, establish a reasonable charge for testing any
meter at the request of any customer.  If any test shows a meter to be
inaccurate, it shall promptly be repaired or replaced by the customer.



('82 Code, § 3.225)



   (F)   If a test shows a meter to be inaccurate by more than 5%, the
tester shall promptly notify the city of the inaccuracy.  The city may
retest any meter at its own expense.  Whenever the city determines that any
meter was inaccurate by more than 5%, the bill for the immediate past service
period and the bill for the elapsed portion of the current service period
shall be adjusted accordingly.  If by reason of stoppage of the meter or any
other reason, it is not possible to determine, with reasonable accuracy, the
amount of water actually used, the city may estimate by any reasonable means,
the amount of water which was used.  In no event, shall any adjustment be
made for any service periods prior to the immediate past service period.



('82 Code, § 3.226)



   (G)   Installation and inspections.



      (1)   Authorized city employees.  No person except authorized
city employees shall turn water on at the street, unless authorized by the
Utility Superintendent.



      (2)   Newly constructed homes.  On a newly constructed home,
water shall not be turned on at the street until the following conditions
have been met:



         (a)   Curb stop must be brought to grade.



         (b)   Water meter and radio read remote have been
installed according to the following specifications:



            1.   The service pipe from the water main to the
meter shall be brought through the floor in a vertical position.  A stop and
waste valve shall be installed about 12 inches above the floor.



            2.   The meter shall be located so that the bottom
is from six to 12 inches above the finished floor line.  The meter shall be
set not more than 12 inches measured horizontally from the inside line of the
basement wall, unless an alternate method is approved by the plumbing
inspector.  A suitable bracket to support the meter in a proper horizontal
position and to prevent noise from vibration shall be provided.



            3.   Radio read remotes should be mounted using
the supplied bracket.  (See attached instructions for installation
procedures.)



            4.   In no case shall there be more than 12 inches
of pipe exposed between the point of entrance through the basement floor and
the gate valve.  A valve must also be installed in the house side of the
meter.  Gate valves shall be brass 125 pounds standard.



      (3)   Inspections.



         (a)   Meter inspections can be scheduled during working
hours, Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., by calling 952-442-7520.



         (b)   A 24-hour notice is required prior to performing
an inspection.



         (c)   All inspections of water meters and any tests
involved are to be done by the Building Inspector or Utility Superintendent.



      (4)   Additional information.  Meters are city property. 
All water meters shall be and remain the property of the city and may be
removed and replaced or changed as to size and type by the city whenever
deemed necessary.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.08  DUAL WATER METERS.



   (A)   The City Council determines that it is in the best interest of
customer fairness and public policy to establish a dual water meter policy.
The goal of this policy is to more accurately reflect residential sewage
usage by eliminating outside water usage that is not contributing to the city
waste water collection system.



   (B)   All new constructions shall require the installation of two
water meters on the premises. The second (dual) meter shall be for the
purpose of metering water usage that does not enter the city sanitary sewer
system. Both meters shall be installed and are subject to all costs,
conditions, and inspections as required by §§ 52.07 and 52.09, as amended
from time to time, and such other reasonable requirements for installation,
usage and inspection as determined by the city to be necessary and
appropriate to effectively implement the purpose of the dual water meter
policy. New construction shall be charged for two meters on the building
permit.



   (C)   Owners of existing structures may apply to the city for
installation of a second (dual) meter to meter non-sanitary sewer water usage
pursuant to regulations established by the city.



   (D)   The city shall read both meters according to city policy and
billing for sewer usage will be calculated by using the reading from the main
water meter.



(Ord. 133, passed 3-12-07)



§ 52.09SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every service pipe shall be laid in a manner as to prevent
rupture by settlement.  Service pipes shall be placed at sufficient depth as
to prevent rupture from freezing.  A shut-off or other stopcock with waste
valve of the size and strength required shall be placed in the location as
the Building Inspector may establish and shall be well protected from
freezing.  Each joint shall be left uncovered until inspected by the
Inspector.  The Inspector may establish further requirements regarding the
size, nature and laying of service pipes.



('82 Code, § 3.231)



   (B)   Every water meter shall be installed at a convenient height at
the point where the service pipe from the water main enters the building. 
The meter shall be installed in a location and in a manner that the reading
and testing of the meter is reasonably convenient.  A bracket or other
suitable support shall be provided to support the meter and prevent noise and
vibration.



('82 Code, § 3.232)



   (C)   Curb stop boxes shall be placed as near as practicable to the
curb if on a street or within one foot of the alley line if the main is
located in an alley.  They shall be installed at an approximate depth of
seven feet below the established grade and shall be left in an accurate
vertical position when backfilling is completed.



('82 Code, § 3.233)



§ 52.10  PRIVATE WELLS FOR DOMESTIC USE PROHIBITED.



    (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DOMESTIC USE.  Water used for drinking or potable water,
non-potable water or irrigation purposes, but does not include water from
wells drilled for such purposes as dewatering, groundwater monitoring,
heating or cooling, elevator borings or environmental bore holes.



      IRRIGATE.  To supply (land) with water by artificial means, as
by diverting streams, flooding, or spraying; to moisten; wet.



      PRIVATE WELLS FOR DOMESTIC USE.  Any well not owned by the City
Water Utility which is drilled for potable water, non-potable water or
irrigation purposes including sand point or drive point wells. PRIVATE WELLS
FOR DOMESTIC USE does not include wells drilled for such purposes as
dewatering, groundwater monitoring, heating or cooling, elevator borings or
environmental bore holes.



      SAND POINT or DRIVE POINT WELT.  A shallow well that is a 1-1/4
to 2-inch steel casing constructed by driving or pounding the casing down
into the ground until an aquifer is encountered.



   (B)   The drilling or installation of new private wells for domestic
use on any property to which City Water Utility Service is available within
1,000 feet is prohibited.



(Ord. 180, passed 5-29-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 53:  SEWERS



Section



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Prohibited discharges



   53.03   Preliminary treatment



   53.04   Grease, oil and sand interceptors



   53.05   Special agreements



   53.06   Connection requirements



   53.07   Standards for strength, size and the like



   53.08   Industrial wastes



   53.09   Private sewage disposal facilities



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  The liquid waste from industrial processes as
distinct from sanitary sewage.



   INSPECTOR.  The person or persons duly authorized by the Council to
inspect and approve the installation of building sewer connections to the
public sewer system.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
businesses, buildings, institutions, industrial establishments and other
buildings served by the sewage system, together with ground, surface and
storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE WORKS.  Facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



      (1)   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain
to the public sewer or other place of disposal.



      (2)   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of
properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.



      (3)   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface and ground waters are not to be intentionally admitted.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The city's Utility Superintendent.



('82 Code, § 3.311)



§ 53.02  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   The following discharges of storm and drainage water
is prohibited.



         (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any storm water, cooling water, surface water, subsurface
drainage, groundwater, roof runoff, yard drainage, yard fountain, pond
overflow or any substance other than sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer
collection system.



         (b)   No roof runoff, sump pump, foundation drain,
swimming pool discharge or surface water drainage shall be connected to the
sanitary sewer system and no building shall hereafter be constructed nor
shall any existing buildings be hereafter altered in a manner that the roof
drainage or any other source of discharge or drainage other than sanitary
sewer shall connect with the sanitary sewer system inside or outside the
building.



         (c)   Any person having a roof, sump pump, foundation
drain, swimming pool discharge, cistern overflow pipe or surface drain now
connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect
and/or remove same prior to October 1, 1994.  Any disconnects or openings in
the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective, workmanlike
manner.



         (d)   All sump pumps shall have a discharge pipe
installed to the outside wall of the building with one inch inside minimum
diameter.  The pipe attachment shall be a permanent fitting such as a P.V.C.
pipe with glued fittings.  The discharge shall not be within ten feet of
property lines.



         (e)   Every person owning improved real estate that
discharges into the city's sanitary sewer system shall allow the city
employee(s) or authorized agents to inspect the improvements to confirm that
there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer
system.  Any person refusing to allow the inspection shall immediately
become subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided. Any person found to
violate this division shall make the necessary changes to comply with this
section and the changes shall be verified by an employee or authorized agent
of the city.



         (f)   The City Council shall determine whether or not
conditions evidence the violation of this division.  Upon identification of
the violation, notification by certified mail shall be issued to the owner as
shown by the city's tax records of the property which evidences any violation
of this division. The notice shall identify the nature of the violation, the
requirements of this division and order compliance with this division no
later than days after receipt of the above notice.



         (g)   The owner may appeal the order to the Mayer City
Council, provided that any appeal shall be submitted in writing to the city
no later than ten days following receipt of the notice of violation.



         (h)   If the owner requests an appeal in compliance with
division (g) above, a hearing shall be scheduled before the City Council. 
Following the hearing, the Council shall determine whether or not a violation
has occurred.  Upon finding of a violation, the Council shall order
compliance with this division no later than ten days from the date of the
order.



         (i)   If an appeal to the City Council order is not made
to a district court within ten days following the City Council's order and a
property owner has not brought the property into compliance as ordered, the
city shall enforce its order.



         (j)   A surcharge of $75 per month is hereby imposed and
shall be added to every sewer billing mailed on and after October 1, 1994, to
property owners who are not in compliance with this division.  The surcharge
shall be added every month until the property is in compliance.  The
imposition of the surcharge shall in no way limit the right of the city to
seek an injunction in the district court ordering the property owner to
disconnect the nonconforming connection from the sanitary sewer system or
from pursuing any other legal remedies available.  Should a property owner
found to be in compliance with this division and during a subsequent
inspection found to have connected or reconnected an illegal source of clear
water to the sanitary sewer system, the surcharge of $75 per month will be
applied for all months between the two inspections.



      (2)   Temporary variances from the applicability of the
provisions of this division may be given where strict enforcement would cause
undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property or
cause a safety problem.  This does not apply to monetary hardship. 
Application for a temporary waiver should be addressed in writing to the City
Council.  The application shall identify the property for which the variance
is being applied for, the name of the property owner/applicant and describe
in detail what characteristics of the subject property create undue hardship
or concern.  Within 30 days after application, the City Council shall make
its order deciding on the matter and serve a copy of the order upon the
applicant by mail.  Upon approval of an application for variance, the city
will allow the property owner to temporarily discharge directly into the
sanitary sewer system during the period of November 1 through March 1. 
Employees or agents of the city will divert the discharge and seal the
connection of the discharge to the sanitary sewer using a meter seal.  The
cost for the connection to the sanitary sewer and subsequent removal will be
$25 per occurrence.



('82 Code, § 3.312)  (Am. Ord. 86, passed 6-13-94; Am. Ord. 90, passed
11-10-97)



   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any
sanitary sewer, any cooling water from any air conditioning unit providing
three tons of refrigeration or larger which does not have a cooling tower or
a recirculating system, or any unpolluted industrial or commercial process
water, without first having secured a permit to do so from the Council. 
Cooling and process water free from bacteria and harmful chemicals may be
discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet.



('82 Code, § 3.313)



   (C)   No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited in
any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement,
garbage or other objectionable waste which ordinarily would be regarded as
sewage or industrial waste.



('82 Code, § 3.314)



   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any
natural outlet within the city, or any area under the jurisdiction of the
city, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except
where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
wastes into any public storm sewer.



('82 Code, § 3.315)



   (E)   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into any public sewer any of the following wastes:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
130° F.;



      (2)   Any water or waste containing more than 100 mg/l by
weight of fats, oils or greases;



      (3)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quality may cause fire or explosion, or be in any other way
injurious to persons, to the sewage works structures or to the operation of
those works;



      (4)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry to sewers for their
maintenance and repair;



      (5)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, bones, feathers, rubber, tires, plastic, wood, paunch manure,
butcher's offal or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage system or sewage treatment works;



      (6)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher
than 9.0 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works, or
affecting the biological treatment of the waste;



      (7)   Any water or waste containing toxic substances in
quantities in excess of the following limits and measured at the point of
discharge into the sewer system:



         (a)   Cyanide (CN):  none;



         (b)   Copper (Co):  0.03;



         (c)   Chromium (hexalent):  0.05;



         (d)   Cadmium (Cd):  0.4;



         (e)   Zinc (Zn):  0.3; and



         (f)   Nickel (Ni):  2.0.



      (8)   Any substance that will pass through the sewage
treatment works and exceed the state or interstate requirements for the
receiving stream;



      (9)   Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle materials at the sewage treatment plant, without a special permit; or



      (10)   Any toxic radioactive isotopes, without special permit.



('82 Code, § 3.316)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.03  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.



   (A)   The customer shall provide and maintain, at the customer's
expense, preliminary treatment facilities as may be necessary to bring the
customer's discharge within the limits specified in § 53.02 (E).  Plans,
specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed
preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted by the customer to the
City Engineer for approval.



   (B)   Preliminary treatment facilities shall also meet all
applicable federal and state requirements.



('82 Code, § 3.317)



§ 53.04  GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when necessary for
proper handling of any liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts,
any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the City Engineer and shall be located
so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
Interceptors shall be installed and maintained by the customer at the
customer's expense and kept in continuously efficient duration at all
times.  Interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units, except that interceptors shall be required in a garage
located on residential property which has a square footage exceeding 1,000
square feet.



('82 Code, § 3.318)



§ 53.05  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.



   The Council may, by special agreement with any customer, and subject to
conditions and payments as it deems proper for protection of the public
health, safety and welfare and protection of the sewage system from damage,
allow any waste of otherwise prohibited strength or character to be admitted
into the city's sanitary sewers for treatment by the city, whether before or
after pretreatment.



('82 Code, § 3.319)



§ 53.06  CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building connected to the sanitary sewer system, except that where
one building stands at the rear of another and it is impractical to provide
separate building sewers or to connect the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building
may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.  Other exceptions may be allowed by the Council upon a showing that
the provision of a separate and independent building sewer is impractical.



('82 Code, § 3.331)



   (B)   An old building sewer or portion thereof may be used to
connect a new building only when found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent or other authorized agent of the city, to meet all
requirements of this code and all other applicable requirements.



('82 Code, § 3.332)



§ 53.07  STANDARDS FOR STRENGTH, SIZE AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The building sewer pipe and fittings shall be made of extra
strength vitrified clay sewer pipe, extra heavy cast iron soil pipe or P.V.C.
plastic pipe meeting the current American Society for Testing and Materials
(A.S.T.M.) or Department of Commerce specifications.  If installed in filled
or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe,
except that vitrified clay or P.V.C. pipe may be used if laid on a suitable
improved bed or cradle approved by the Inspector.  Other materials may be
used if approved by the agency of the state charged with the duty of
approving materials.



('82 Code, § 3.351)



   (B)   (1)   All joints and connections shall be made gas tight
and water tight.  Vitrified clay sewer pipes shall be in conformance with
the latest A.S.T.M. specifications.  Before joining the pipe in the trench,
the ball and spigot surfaces shall be wiped free of dirt and other foreign
matter.  The spigot end shall be positioned into the bell end of pipe
previously laid and shall then be shoved home to assure a tight fit.  Joints
for cast iron soil pipes shall be rubber ring or equal in conformance with
the latest A.S.T.M. specifications.



      (2)   A P.V.C. sewer pipe shall be a solvent weld joint in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.



('82 Code, § 3.352)



   (C)   The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to
the approval of the Inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less
than four inches.  The slope of the pipe shall be not less than - inch per
foot.  A slope of ¼-inch per foot shall be used wherever practical.



('82 Code, § 3.353)



   (D)   All excavations required for the installation of the building
sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Inspector.



('82 Code, § 3.354)



   (E)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor.  The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost.



('82 Code, § 3.355)



   (F)   Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with
A.S.T.M. specifications.  No backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected and approved by the Inspector.



('82 Code, § 3.356)



   (G)   In any buildings in which the building drain is too low to
permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain
shall be lifted by artificial means approved by the Inspector and discharged
to the building sewer.  No water operated sewage ejector shall be used.



('82 Code, § 3.357)



   (H)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall be made at the “Y” branch designated for that property, if the
branch is available at a suitable location.  Any connection not made at the
designated “Y” branch in the main sewer shall be made only as directed by
the Inspector.



('82 Code, § 3.358)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.08  INDUSTRIAL WASTES.



   (A)   The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of
industrial wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized.  However, not all types
and quantities of industrial wastes can be so treated.  It is the policy of
the city to admit to the sanitary sewer system only those types and
quantities of industrial wastes that are not harmful or damaging to the
structure, process and operation of the city sanitary sewer system and that
are not specifically prohibited by this chapter.  To provide treatment for
industrial wastes may require additional facilities, the cost of which should
be borne by the industries which necessitate the additional facilities for
their waste and therefore receive its benefits.



('82 Code, § 3.371)



   (B)   The types and quantities of industrial wastes which may be
admitted into the public sewer system without pretreatment shall established
by the City Engineer and approved by the Council.



('82 Code, § 3.372)



   (C)   In order to control the admission of industrial wastes into
the public sewers, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of
the following waters or wastes into the public sanitary sewers, except upon
approval of the Council:



      (1)   A five-day, 20° C., BOD greater than 400 mg/1;



      (2)   A suspended solids content greater than 350 mg/l;



      (3)   A chlorine demand greater than 15 mg/l;



      (4)   An average daily flow greater than 10% of the average
daily sewage flow at the sewage treatment works;



      (5)   Any toxic substance; or



      (6)   Any waters or wastes which are determined by the
Engineer to offer possibilities of harm to the structures, process or
operation of the sewage works.



('82 Code, § 3.373)



   (D)   Any person desiring to make a new connection to the public
sanitary sewer system for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes, and
any person desiring to discharge industrial waste through an existing
connection, shall complete and file with the City Engineer a questionnaire
furnishing pertinent or predicted data upon the quantity of flow and an
analysis of the industrial waste to be discharged before making the
connection or discharge.  The Engineer may, at any time, require that a user
discharging industrial waste complete a questionnaire showing current
discharges.  Upon notice from the Engineer, the user shall furnish the data
within 30 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the notice.



('82 Code, § 3.374)



   (E)   Samples shall be obtained at the times and in the manner as
will be representative of the actual quantity and quality of waste, and in
all events shall be collected over a three-day period of operation or more. 
Samples for analysis must be collected by the Engineer or by a person
approved to do so by the Engineer.  Analysis of the sample shall be made by
a qualified sanitary engineer using commonly accepted analysis techniques.



('82 Code, § 3.375)



   (F)   Any user discharging industrial wastes into the public
sanitary sewer system shall install a suitable control work hole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of all
waste, including all domestic sewage from the establishment.  The work hole
shall be installed in accordance with plans approved by the City Engineer and
shall be of safe design and in a readily accessible location.  The work hole
shall be installed by the user at the user's expense and shall be maintained
by the user so as to be safe and accessible at all times.  In the event that
no special work hole exists, the control work hole for taking any samples
shall be considered the nearest downstream work hole in the public sewer from
the point where the building sewer is connected.



('82 Code, § 3.376)



§ 53.09  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
private sewage disposal facility.



('82 Code, § 3.381)



   (B)   All buildings which would have to be connected to a public
sanitary sewer pursuant to this chapter, but for the unavailability of a
public sanitary sewer or the impracticability of making a connection, shall
be connected to a private sewage disposal facility.  The private sewage
disposal facility shall comply with and be operated in compliance with all
federal, state and local requirements.  The owner shall operate and maintain
the facility in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.



('82 Code, § 3.382)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 54:  DRAIN TILE CONNECTIONS



Section



   54.01   Mandatory connection to public drain tiles: existing private
systems



   54.02   Mandatory connection to public drain tiles: new developments



§ 54.01  MANDATORY CONNECTION TO PUBLIC DRAIN TILES: EXISTING PRIVATE
SYSTEMS.



   When a publicly owned drain tile system is installed in a street or
rear yard easement, property abutting or adjoining that street or rear yard
easement that has a privately owned foundation or roof drain tile system
shall connect that system to the public system within one year after the
public system is installed under the following circumstances:



   (A)   Water from the private drain tile system is being discharged
onto a city boulevard or street.



   (B)   Water from the private drain tile system is being discharged
onto property not owned by the owner of the private drain tile system.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-9-02)



§ 54.02  MANDATORY CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC DRAIN TILES: NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



   If a public drain tile system has been installed in a street or rear
yard easement before a certificate of occupancy has been issued for a
building on a lot abutting or adjoining the street or rear yard easement, a
certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a foundation drain tile
system has been constructed and connected to the public drain tile system.



(Ord. 105, passed 12-9-02)



CHAPTER 55:  STORMWATER UTILITY



Section



   55.01   Findings; purposes



   55.02   Stormwater utility established



   55.03   Definitions



   55.04   Calculation of fee



   55.05   Billing; payment



   55.06   Fee appeal



   55.07   Establishment of fund



§ 55.01  FINDINGS; PURPOSES.



   The purpose of this chapter is for the efficient, economic and safe
operation of a stormwater system for the protection of the health, safety and
general welfare of the residents of the City of Mayer.



(Ord. 113, passed 2-28-05)



§ 55.02  STORMWATER UTILITY ESTABLISHED.



   A municipal stormwater utility is hereby established and shall be
operated as a public utility pursuant to M.S. § 444.075 from which revenues
will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and Minnesota
Statutes.



(Ord. 113, passed 2-28-05)



§ 55.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RUNOFF EQUIVALENT FACTOR (REF).  Rates and charges for the use and
availability of the system are to be determined through the use of a RUNOFF
EQUIVALENT FACTOR. For the purposes of this chapter, one REF is defined as
the ratio of the average volume of surface water runoff generated by one acre
of a particular land use, to the average volume of runoff generated by one
acre of typical single-family residential land, during a standard one-year
rainfall event.



   STORMWATER UTILITY RATE. The charge to a typical single-family and
duplex residential parcel shall be the STORMWATER UTILITY RATE. All developed
single-family and duplex residential parcels shall be considered to have
acreage of up to one acre.



(Ord. 113, passed 2-28-05)



§ 55.04  CALCULATION OF FEE.



   (A)   Land use classifications. Stormwater drainage fees for land
use classifications 1 and 3 shall be on a per parcel basis. Stormwater
drainage fees for all other land uses shall be determined by multiplying the
REF for a parcel’s land use by the parcel’s acreage and then multiplying
the resulting product by the stormwater utility rate. The REF values for the
various land uses are as follows:



 


Classification

 

Typical Land Uses

 

REF




1

 

Residential single-family, duplex, townhomes and condominiums

 

1.0




2

 

Schools and churches

 

1.25




3

 

Commercial, industrial and apartments

 

3.0




4

 

Vacant land (e.g., undeveloped land, agricultural land without a dwelling)

 

.5




 



   (B)   Other land uses. Other land uses not listed in the foregoing
table shall be classified by the City Council by assigning them to the
classes most nearly like the listed uses from the standpoint of impervious
coverage and runoff produced.



   (C)   Stormwater utility rate. The stormwater utility rate shall be
determined by the City Council on an annual basis in the same manner as for
other utilities, and shall be charged to all parcels not listed as exempt in
division (D) below.



   (D)   Exemptions. Public rights-of-way shall be exempt from
stormwater utility fees.



(Ord. 113, passed 2-28-05)



§ 55.05  BILLING; PAYMENT.



   Stormwater utility charges shall be computed and billed periodically
with, and included as a charge on, bills issued by the city for water and
sewer services. If a parcel of land subject to the stormwater utility is not
served by other utilities, a separate bill shall be issued on a bi-monthly
basis.



   (A)   Penalties and remedies for delinquencies. All stormwater
utility charges shall be due on the date specified by the city for the
respective amount and shall be delinquent 30 days thereafter. Delinquent
accounts will be charged a late fee as provided in § 51.25. The late charge
will be added to the bill effective the first day of each month of the
delinquency. The city shall attempt to collect delinquent accounts promptly.



   (B)   Assessment roll. The Clerk shall prepare an assessment roll
each year providing for assessment of any delinquent accounts against the
respective properties served. The assessment roll shall be delivered to the
Council for adoption on or before the regular City Council meeting in
November of each year for certification to the County Auditor for collection
along with taxes. The city shall also have the right to bring a civil action
or to take other legal remedies to collect unpaid delinquent accounts.



(Ord. 113, passed 2-28-05)



§ 55.06  FEE APPEAL.



   (A)   Written appeal. If a property owner or person responsible for
paying the stormwater utility fee believes that a particular assigned fee is
incorrect, such person may request, in writing, that the fee be recomputed.
Such request shall be made within 30 days of the mailing of the billing in
question, and shall immediately be addressed by appropriate city staff. If
the property owner is not in agreement with the determination of the fee by
the city staff, he or she may appeal the determination in writing by making a
request for a hearing to the Stormwater Utility Board of Appeals within 14
days of the staff’s determination. The City Council shall act as the
Stormwater Utility Board of Appeals.



   (B)   Hearing. A hearing before the Board of Appeals shall be
scheduled to occur within 45 days of receiving the property owner’s request
for a hearing. Notice of the hearing must be served on the property owner at
least 14 days in advance unless a shorter time is accepted by all parties.
Service of the notice shall be by first class mail and will be complete upon
mailing. The property owner shall have the burden of proving that the
stormwater utility fee for his or her property is incorrect. The decision of
the Board of Appeals is final without any further right of appeal. The
property owner may obtain judicial review of the decision of the Board of
Appeals by proceeding pursuant to a writ of certiorari in the appropriate
court.



(Ord. 113, passed 2-28-05)



§ 55.07  ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.



   All fees collected for the stormwater utility shall be placed in a fund
for stormwater purposes. Revenues shall be used to pay for the construction,
reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement, or other obtainment and the
maintenance, operation and use of the facilities, and all other purposes as
permitted by M.S. § 444.075.



(Ord. 113, passed 2-28-05)



CHAPTER 56:  AREA CHARGES



Section



   56.01   Findings; purpose



   56.02   Area charges established



   56.03   Definitions



   56.04   Calculation of area charges



   56.05   Billing; payment



   56.06   Fee appeal



   56.07   Establishment of fund



§ 56.01  FINDINGS; PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is for the efficient, economic and safe
operation of the sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer systems for the
protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
City of Mayer.



(Ord. 119, passed 9-12-05)



§ 56.02  AREA CHARGES ESTABLISHED.



   Area charges are hereby established pursuant to M.S. § 444.075 from
which revenues will be derived subject to the provisions of this chapter and
Minnesota Statutes.



(Ord. 119, passed 9-12-05)



§ 56.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AREA CHARGES. Charges for the use and availability of the sanitary
sewer system, stormwater system and water system.



   DEVELOPABLE ACRES. The gross platted area except for outlots,
unmitigated wetlands and stormwater detention or ponding areas.



(Ord. 119, passed 9-12-05)



§ 56.04  CALCULATION OF AREA CHARGES.



   Area charges shall be calculated based on developable acres and shall
be set by the City Council on an annual basis and included in the annual fee
schedule adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. 119, passed 9-12-05)



§ 56.05  BILLING; PAYMENT.



   Area charges will be due and payable at the time of the signing of the
development agreement. In the event area charges are not paid pursuant to the
development agreement, area charges shall be paid prior to issuance of a
building permit and calculated on a per unit basis.



(Ord. 119, passed 9-12-05)



§ 56.06  FEE APPEAL.



   (A)   Written appeal.  If a property owner or person responsible
for paying the area charge (hereinafter collectively referred to as
“owner”) believes that a particular assigned fee is incorrect, such
person may request, in writing, that the fee be recomputed. Such request
shall be made within ten days of the required date of payment. If the owner
is not in agreement with the determination of the fee by the city staff, he
or she may appeal the determination in writing by making a request for a
hearing to the City Council within 14 days of the staff’s determination.



   (B)   Hearing. A hearing before the City Council shall be scheduled
to occur within 45 days of receiving the request for a hearing. Notice of the
hearing must be served to the owner at least 14 days in advance unless a
shorter time is accepted by all parties. Service of the notice shall be by
first class mail and will be complete upon mailing. The owner shall have the
burden of proving that the area charges for his or her property are
incorrect. The decision of the City Council is final without any further
right of appeal.



(Ord. 119, passed 9-12-05)



§ 56.07  ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.



   All fees collected for the area charges shall be placed in a fund for
sanitary sewer, water and stormwater purposes. Revenues shall be used to pay
for the construction, reconstruction, repair, enlargement, improvement, or
other obtainment and the maintenance, operation and use of the facilities,
and all other purposes as permitted by M.S. § 444.075.



(Ord. 119, passed 9-12-05)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   TRAFFIC RULES



      71.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      72.   SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES



      73.   SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   70.01   Exhibition driving



   70.02   Inattentive driving



   70.03   State highway traffic regulations adopted



   70.04   Use of engine retarding brakes



§ 70.01  EXHIBITION DRIVING.



   No person shall start, turn, accelerate, decelerate or otherwise
operate a motor vehicle on any public or private way within the city in any
manner which causes unnecessary engine noise or backfire, squealing of tires,
skidding, sliding, swaying, throwing of sand or gravel, or in any manner
simulating a race.  Squealing or screeching sounds emitted by the tires or
the throwing of sand, dirt or gravel by the tires is prima facie evidence of
a violation of this section.



('82 Code, § 5.111)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.02  INATTENTIVE DRIVING.



   No person shall operate or halt any motor vehicle upon any public or
private property within the city inattentively or imprudently in light of
circumstances then existing or without reasonable care for the rights of
others or the safety of persons or property.  Any person who violates this
section shall be guilty of the offense of inattentive driving.  Inattentive
driving shall be considered a lesser offense than the offense of careless
driving under state law.



('82 Code, § 5.112)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ADOPTED.



   The Highway Traffic Regulations Act, M.S. Chapter 169, as it may be
amended from time to time, and M.S. § 171.01, 171.02 and 171.24, as they may
be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.  The penalty
for violation of the provisions of M.S. Ch. 169 shall be identical with the
penalty provided in the statutes for the same offense.



§ 70.04  USE OF ENGINE RETARDING BRAKES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck to
intentionally use an engine retarding brake on any public highway, street,
parking lot, or alley within the city which causes abnormal or excessive
noise from the engine except in an emergency.



   (B)   ENGINE RETARDING BRAKE, for the purpose of this section, shall
mean a Dynamic Brake, Jake Brake, Jacobs Brake, C-Brake, Paccar Brake, or
other similar engine retarding brake system which alters the normal
compression of the engine and subsequently releases that compression in a
manner which may cause abnormal or excessive noise from the engine in a
particular vehicle.



   (C)   ABNORMAL OR EXCESSIVE NOISE is noise in excess of that
permitted by:



      (1)   M.S. § 169.69, as it may be amended from time to time,
which requires every motor vehicle to be equipped with a muffler in good
working order; or



      (2)   M.S. § 169.693 and Minnesota Rules parts 7030.1000
through 7030.1050, as this statute and these rules may be amended from time
to time, which establish motor vehicle noise standards.



   (D)   M.S. §§ 169.69 and 169.693 and Minnesota Rules parts
7030.1000 through 7030.1050, as these statutes and rules may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.



   (E)   Signs stating “Vehicle Noise Laws Enforced,” may be
installed at locations deemed appropriate by the City Council to advise
motorists of the prohibitions contained in this ordinance.  The posting of
these signs is deemed to provide adequate notice of the contents of this
ordinance.



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   71.01   Definitions



   71.02   General prohibitions



   71.03   Semi- and tractor-trailers



   71.04   Overtime parking; commercial vehicles



   71.05   No parking zones



   71.06   Parking during snow removals



   71.07   Disabled vehicles



   71.08   Abandoned vehicles



   71.09   Repair of vehicles on streets



   71.10   Moving and impounding vehicles



§ 71.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOWING SNOW.  Any accumulation on a street of two or more inches of
snow which is blowing or has been blowing for the previous 24 hours.



   SNOWFALL.  Any accumulation of two or more inches of snow on a street
when snow is falling or has fallen with in the previous 24 hours.



   STREET.  The entire width of the dedicated or acquired right-of-way of
any street within the city.



   STREET IMPROVEMENT.  Any seal coating, blacktopping, excavating,
grading, graveling, sweeping, new construction or reconstruction of
previously existing roads.



   UTILITY CONSTRUCTION.  The construction, repair or servicing of public
utilities within the street right-of-way.



(Ord. 64, passed 1-14-85)



§ 71.02  GENERAL PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall park or leave a motorized vehicle on any
street within the city during or after a snowfall or period of blowing
snow.  Parking may be resumed on individual streets as soon as the snow has
been removed from these streets, except as may be otherwise restricted by
ordinance or state law.



   (B)   No person shall park or leave a motorized vehicle on any
portion of a street in the city which is part of a street improvement project
from the beginning date of construction to the completion date of
construction.



   (C)   No person shall park or leave a motorized vehicle on any
portion of a street in the city where utility construction is taking place
from the beginning date to the completion date of construction.



(Ord. 64, passed 1-14-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  SEMI- AND TRACTOR-TRAILERS.



   No trailer, whether free-standing or connected with a tractor, will be
permitted to park on any city street unless the trailer is being used in
conjunction with a legitimate service being rendered to a business or
residence or for purpose of loading or unloading.  A tractor which is
freestanding will be permitted to park on any city street, subject to all
parking regulations and ordinances herein.  It will be unlawful to run the
engine for more than 30 minutes in any three-hour period.



(Ord. 64, passed 1-14-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  OVERTIME PARKING; COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, including a semi
tractor-trailer unit or semi trailer, whether attended or unattended, upon
any public street or public lot for a period of time longer than 24
consecutive hours.  No trucks or pickup trucks with the standard body
weighing more than ¾- ton shall be parked on residential zoned streets
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.  No person shall park or leave
standing any vehicle so as to block any public street or alley at any time
unless it is in the process of being loaded or unloaded.



(Ord. 64, passed 1-14-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  NO PARKING ZONES.



   The Council may from time to time, by motion adopted by a majority
vote, designate certain streets or portions thereof as “NO PARKING” zones
or as limited parking zones as to period of time and purpose, such as snow
removal and otherwise, and direct the Street Commissioner to act accordingly
to place proper signs thereon and/or appropriately paint the curbs thereby to
indicate their character.



(Ord. 64, passed 1-14-85)



§ 71.06  PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVALS.



   (A)   During the months of November to April of each year commencing
and ending on the first day of November and April, no motor vehicle shall be
parked on either side of any street or alley within the city limits following
a snowfall of one inch or more, or to otherwise interfere with snow removal
operations following the accumulation of one inch of snow or more, until the
completion of snow removal operations after which time parking can again be
resumed upon these streets which have been cleaned of snow.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand whether
attended or unattended, upon any street or highway within the city within 25
feet from the intersection of the curb lines or if none, within 15 feet of
the intersection of the property lines at any intersection of streets or
highways.



(Ord. 64, passed 1-14-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.07  DISABLED VEHICLES.



   The driver of any vehicle, which becomes disabled when traveling on any
street or alley such that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily
leaving the vehicle on the street or alley, shall move the vehicle as close
to the curb or edge of the roadway as may be done.  If the vehicle cannot be
immediately moved or towed away, the driver shall immediately report the
disability to the law enforcement agency providing police protection to the
city.  No owner or driver of a vehicle which is disabled shall allow it to
remain upon the traveled portion of any street or alley, or allow a disabled
vehicle to be parked along any street or alley even though parking of it
would otherwise be lawful, for any longer than reasonably necessary to cause
the vehicle to be moved or towed away.



('82 Code, § 5.121)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   No driver or owner shall abandon any vehicle upon any street, alley or
public property within the city.  The leaving of any vehicle, not reasonably
capable of being driven for transportation, or which cannot be driven without
being repaired, upon any street, alley or public property for more than seven
days is a prima facie violation of this section.



('82 Code, § 5.122)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned Vehicles, see Chapter 90



§ 71.09  REPAIR OF VEHICLES ON STREETS.



   No person shall repair any vehicle on any street or alley, except to
make emergency repairs necessary to enable removal of the vehicle from the
street or alley.



('82 Code, § 5.123)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.10  MOVING AND IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   (A)   Any vehicle which shall be left parked or standing in
violation of this section or the laws of the state may be summarily removed
without notice to the owner or operator by officers of the Police Department
serving the city or persons employed or designated by them, and stored in an
appropriated place.  All expenses of towing, removing and storage of the
vehicles shall first be paid to the person towing, removing or storing the
vehicles by the person claiming the vehicles before release of same.



   (B)   The city, its agent and employees, shall not be responsible
for any damage to the vehicles removed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 64, passed 1-14-85)



CHAPTER 72:  SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES



Section



   72.01   Intent



   72.02   Definitions



   72.03   Owner responsible



   72.04   All-terrain vehicles prohibited



   72.05   Prohibited operation; exceptions



   72.06   Traffic ordinances and laws to be observed



   72.07   Operation by minors



   72.08   Towing



   72.09   Equipment



   72.10   Emergency use of streets permitted; police; fire departments



   72.11   Securing



§ 72.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent of this chapter to supplement M.S. §§ 84.81 through
84.89, and M.S. Chapter 169, with respect to the operation of snowmobiles.
Such statutes are incorporated in this chapter by reference. This chapter is
not intended to allow what the state statutes prohibit.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)



§ 72.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or VEHICLE (ATV).  A motorized floatation-tired
vehicle of not less than three low pressure tires.



   DEADMAN THROTTLE or SAFETY THROTTLE.  A device which, when pressure is
removed from the engine accelerator or throttle, causes the motor to be
disengaged from the driving mechanism.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile.



   OPERATOR.  Every person who operates or is in actual physical control
of a snowmobile.



   OWNER.  A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or
title to a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle, or entitled to the use or
possession thereof.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The entire strip of land traversed by a street in which
the public owns the fee or an easement for roadway purposes.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or
ice, steered by skis or runners.



   STREET.  A public thoroughfare, highway, roadway, alley or trail used
for motor vehicle traffic.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)



§ 72.03  OWNER RESPONSIBLE.



   It is unlawful for the owner of a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle to
permit the snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle to be operated in any manner
contrary to any provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate or allow to be operated an
all-terrain vehicle within the limits of the city.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  PROHIBITED OPERATION; EXCEPTIONS.



   Except as specifically permitted and authorized in this chapter, it is
unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile within the limits of the city:



   (A)   On State Highway No. 25;



   (B)   On any public street, except that a snowmobile may operate
upon the most righthand lane of a street, except State Highway No. 25, and
may, in passing or in making a left turn, operate on other lanes which are
used for vehicle traffic in the same direction, for the purpose of going in
the most direct, practicable route possible from a point outside the city to
a specific destination within the city, or from a point within the city to a
specific destination outside the city limits. Operation of a snowmobile
without regard to a specific destination and on an aimless, non-direct route
constitutes a violation of this chapter;



   (C)   On a public sidewalk or boulevard within any public
right-of-way, except for the sidewalk on the east side of State Highway No.
25 between Fourth and Fifth Streets, provided that an operator may cross a
public sidewalk, boulevard or other public right-of-way to obtain access to a
street if such crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to
the direction of the sidewalk, boulevard or right-of-way and, provided
further, that such operator yields the right-of-way to all pedestrians or
vehicle traffic;



   (D)   On private property of another without specific permission of
the owner or person in control of such property;



   (E)   Upon any school grounds, except as permission is expressly
obtained from responsible school authorities;



   (F)   On public property, playgrounds, parks and recreation areas;



   (G)   On streets as permitted by this chapter at a speed not
exceeding 15 miles per hour within the limits of the city. However, in no
event shall the rate of speed be greater than reasonable or proper under all
of the surrounding circumstances;



   (H)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the personal property of another or to cause injury or damage thereto;



   (I)   While under the influence of alcoholic beverages or narcotics
or drugs, as prohibited in state law;



   (J)   In such a manner so as to create loud, excessive, unnecessary
or unusual noise or in any way which shall unduly disturb the peace and
privacy of the residents of the city or in any manner create a public
nuisance; and



   (K)   Without a lighted headlight and taillight.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  TRAFFIC ORDINANCES AND LAWS TO BE OBSERVED.



   City traffic ordinances and state laws shall apply to the operation of
snowmobiles upon all streets, except for those ordinances and laws which by
their nature have no application. The operator shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close as to
constitute a hazard. All streets shall be crossed at an angle of
approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the street. If more than one
snowmobile is traveling in the same direction, they shall travel in a single
file.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  OPERATION BY MINORS.



   No person under 14 years of age shall operate on the streets or make a
direct crossing of a city street as the operator of a snowmobile. A person 14
years of age or older, but less than 18 years of age, may operate a
snowmobile on streets as permitted under this chapter and state law, and make
a direct crossing of such streets, only if the person complies with the
licensing provisions as may be required in state law.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  TOWING.



   (A)   No vehicle, including but not limited to sleds, toboggans and
sleighs, shall be towed behind a snowmobile upon any public street between
the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise
unless such vehicle is equipped with at least one tail lamp meeting the
requirements of the equipment for a snowmobile as provided in the regulations
in state law.



   (B)   No snowmobile can be used for towing unless it shall have
attached to the rear of the snowmobile a rigid tow bar.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  EQUIPMENT.



   It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile any place within
the limits of the city unless it is equipped with the following:



   (A)   Brakes adequate to control the movement of, and to stop and
hold, the snowmobile under any condition of operation;



   (B)   A safety or so-called deadman throttle in operating condition;



   (C)   When operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset
to one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility, lights
shall be used as provided in state law. Such lights shall be so aimed that
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator.
It shall also be equipped with a red tail lamp as required in state law;



   (D)   Reflective material at least 16 square inches on each side,
forward of the handlebars, so as to reflect lights at a 90-degree angle; and



   (E)   All other equipment and safety requirements as prescribed by
Minnesota Statutes and the rules and regulations of the state.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.10  EMERGENCY USE OF STREETS PERMITTED; POLICE; FIRE DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any prohibitions in this chapter, a snowmobile
may be operated on a public street in an emergency situation during the
period of time when, and at locations where, snow upon the street renders
travel by automobile impractical.



   (B)   This chapter does not prohibit use of snowmobiles and
all-terrain vehicles by police, fire or emergency personnel operating in the
course of their authorized duties.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)



§ 72.11  SECURING.



   Every person leaving a snowmobile on a public place shall lock the
ignition, remove the key and take the key with the person.



(Ord. 169, passed 9-27-10)



 



CHAPTER 73:  SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE



Section



   73.01   Skateboards



§ 73.01  SKATEBOARDS.



   (A)   The operation of skateboards and related devices within the
corporate limits of the City of Mayer shall be regulated pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes as amended from time to time.



   (B)   In addition, it shall be unlawful to operate skateboards and
related devices under the following circumstances.



      (1)   On private property without the express permission to do
so by the owner or occupant of such property.



      (2)   In any careless, reckless or negligent manner, so as to
endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any person or property.



      (3)   In any park, except Meadow Park, except in and around
the playground equipment area in Meadow Park.



      (4)   Upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, trail and
parking lot lying within the following described area: Bluejay Avenue (County
Road 23) on the west; Ash Avenue (State Highway 25) on the east; First Street
(County Road 30) on the south and Fifth Street on the north; including said
streets and alley (between Bluejay and Ash Avenue).



   (C)   Impoundment. Violation of this section shall be punishable by
impoundment of such device by a law enforcement officer for storage and
safekeeping for a period of three days for the first offense, seven days upon
the second offense, and 30 days for the third offense. Subsequent offenses
are punishable as a petty misdemeanor. Such device may be recovered upon
payment of an impound fee of $25 to the city; and if the owner thereof is
under age 18, the accompaniment of a legal guardian is also required.



(Ord. 151, passed 11-10-08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED PROPERTY



      91.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      92.   ANIMALS



      93.   NUISANCES



      94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      95.   PUBLIC PARKS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED PROPERTY



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Abandoned property




Abandoned Vehicles




   90.15   Findings and purpose



   90.16   Definitions



   90.17   Violation to abandon motor vehicle



   90.18   Authority to impound vehicles



   90.19   Sale; waiting periods



   90.20   Notice of taking and sale



   90.21   Right to reclaim



   90.22   Operator's deficiency claim; consent to sale



   90.23   Disposition by impound lot



   90.24   Disposal authority



   90.25   Contracts; reimbursement by MPCA



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Purpose. This subchapter is enacted for the purpose of
protecting and promoting the public health, sanitation, safety and general
welfare in the city; the  suppression of disease and contamination; to
protect against and lessen the danger to human life, health and property from
fire, explosion, noxious fumes, infestations of insects and rodents,
accidents, and other hazards on private and public premises; and to protect
against and prohibit the creating or continuance of nuisances.



   (B)   Hazard and nuisance declared. The existence of abandoned
property as defined herein, on public or private premises, is declared to be
a hazard to public health, sanitation, safety and welfare, and a public
nuisance.



   (C)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      ABANDONED PROPERTY. Deteriorated, wrecked or derelict property in
unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or junk value,
if any, which has been left unprotected from the elements.  ABANDONED
PROPERTY includes, without being restricted, deteriorated, wrecked,
inoperative, discarded, disused or partially dismantled trailers, boats,
motors, watercraft of any kind, machinery, equipment, refrigerators, washing
machines, plumbing fixtures, household and office furniture and fixtures and
any other similar articles in such condition.



      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. A police officer, Public Works
Superintendent, City Administrator or any other person authorized or directed
by the City Council to enforce the provisions of this section.



      PUBLIC PREMISES. Any premises owned by or in possession of the
United States of America, the State of Minnesota, the County of Carver, or
the City of Mayer, or any agency or political subdivision of any of those
governmental bodies.



   (D)   Storage prohibited. No person shall place or leave or cause to
be placed or left, abandoned property on public premises within the city; nor
keep, store or cause to be placed, left, kept or stored abandoned property on
private premises within the city, except as may be otherwise permitted under
the terms of the Mayer Zoning Ordinance.



   (E)   Removal from public premises.



      (1)   When an Enforcement Officer shall find an article or
articles of abandoned property on public premises within the city, the
Officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon the article in substantially
the following form:



“NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY:
This property, to wit:  (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon
public property known as (setting forth brief description of location), and
in violation of § 90.01 of the Mayer Code of Ordinances, and must be removed
within ten (10) days from the date of this notice; otherwise, it shall be
presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order
of the City of Mayer. Dated this (setting forth date of posting of notice).
Signed:  (setting forth title, address and telephone number of Enforcement
Officer).”



      (2)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to
the elements. In addition to posting, the Enforcement Officer shall make
reasonable efforts to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the
article or articles, and if such is reasonably available to the Enforcement
Officer, he or she shall mail a copy of the notice to the owner on or before
the date of posting.



      (3)   If, at the end of ten days after posting the notice, the
owner or any person interested in the abandoned article or articles described
in the notice has not removed them from the public premises or shown
reasonable cause for failure to do so, the Enforcement Officer may cause the
article or articles of abandoned property to be removed, destroyed and
disposed of.



   (F)   Removal from private premises.



      (1)   Whenever an Enforcement Officer shall find an article or
articles of abandoned property on private premises within the city in
violation of this subchapter, the Officer shall cause a notice to be placed
upon the article in substantially the following form:



“NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY:
This property, to wit:  (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon
public property known as (setting forth brief description of location), and
in violation of § 90.01 of the Mayer Code of Ordinances, and must be removed
within ten (10) days from the date of this notice; otherwise, it shall be
presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order
of the City of Mayer. Dated this (setting forth date of posting of notice).
Signed:  (setting forth title, address and telephone number of Enforcement
Officer).”



      (2)   Such notice shall be not less than eight inches by ten
inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to
the elements. In addition to posting, the Enforcement Officer shall mail a
copy of the notice to the owner of the real property upon which the abandoned
article or articles are located, as shown by the real estate tax records on
or before the date of posting of the notice.



      (3)   If, at the end of ten days after posting the notice, the
owner or any person interested in the abandoned article or articles described
in the notice has not removed the article or articles and complied with the
regulations cited in the notice, or shown reasonable cause for failure to do
so, or the article or articles have been removed to another location within
the city, including any public premises, where storage of the article or
articles is prohibited by division (D) of this section, the Enforcement
Officer may cause the article or articles of abandoned property to be
removed, destroyed and disposed of.



      (4)   For the purpose of this section, OWNER OF REAL PROPERTY
shall mean the person who is the last owner of record or the fee owner or the
contract purchaser or the agent of the aforementioned person.



   (G)   Other ordinances not affected. This section shall not be
construed to repeal, suspend or modify the provisions of any other ordinance
relating to the abandonment or keeping of articles or materials of any kind
which are hazardous to public health, safety or welfare upon any premises.



   (H)   Disposition of abandoned property.



      (1)   Procedure. Except for abandoned and junked vehicles, and
except for abandoned property as defined in division (C)(1) above, all
property lawfully coming into possession of the city shall be disposed of as
provided in this section which is adopted pursuant to M.S. § 471.195, as it
may be amended from time to time.  Abandoned and junked vehicles shall be
disposed of according to the procedures of §§ 90.15 through 90.25.



      (2)   Storage.  The department of the city acquiring
possession of the property shall arrange for its storage.  If city
facilities are unavailable or inadequate, the department may arrange for
storage at a privately-owned facility.



      (3)   Claim by owner.  The owner may claim the property by
exhibiting satisfactory proof of ownership and paying the city any storage or
maintenance costs incurred by it.  A receipt for the property shall be
obtained upon release to the owner.



      (4)   Sale.  If the property remains unclaimed in the
possession of the city for 60 days, the property shall be sold to the highest
bidder at a public auction conducted by the City Clerk or his or her designee
after two weeks’ published notice setting forth the time and place of the
sale and the property to be sold.



      (5)   Disposition of proceeds.  The proceeds of the sale
shall be placed in the general fund of the city.  If the former owner makes
application and furnishes satisfactory proof of ownership within six months
of the sale, the former owner shall be paid the proceeds of the sale of the
property less the costs of storage and the proportionate part of the cost of
published notice and other costs of the sale.



(Am. Ord. 130, passed 8-14-06)



ABANDONED VEHICLES



§ 90.15  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   M.S. Ch. 168B, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as they may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted by reference.  Sections 90.15 through 90.25
of this code are adopted under the authority of M.S. § 168B.09, Subd. 2, as
it may be amended from time to time.  If any of these provisions are less
stringent that the provisions of M.S. § 168B or Minn. Rules Ch. 7035, as
they may be amended from time to time, the statute or rule shall take
precedence.



§ 90.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A motor vehicle, as defined in M.S. § 169.01, as it may
be amended from time to time,that:



         (a)   Has remained illegally:



            1.   For a period of more than 48 hours on any
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, or more than four hours
on that property when it is properly posted; or



            2.   On private property for a period of time, as
determined under § 90.18(B), without the consent of the person in control of
the property; and



         (b)   Lacks vital component parts or is in an inoperable
condition that it has no substantial potential for further use consistent
with its usual functions, unless it is kept in an enclosed garage or storage
building.



      (2)   A classic car or pioneer car, as defined in M.S. §
168.10 as it may be amended from time to time, is not considered an abandoned
vehicle.



      (3)   Vehicles on the premises of junk yards and automobile
graveyards that are defined, maintained, and licensed in accordance with M.S.
§ 161.242 as it may be amended from time to time, or that are licensed and
maintained in accordance with local laws and zoning regulations, are not
considered abandoned vehicles.



      (4)   A vehicle being held for storage by agreement or being
held under police authority or pursuant to a writ or court order is not
considered abandoned, nor may it be processed as abandoned while the police
hold, writ or court order is in effect.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Minnesota Department of Public Safety.



   IMPOUND.  To take and hold a vehicle in legal custody.  There are two
types of impounds: public and nonpublic.



   IMPOUND LOT OPERATOR or OPERATOR.  A person who engages in impounding
or storing, usually temporarily, unauthorized or abandoned vehicles. 
OPERATOR  includes an operator of a public or nonpublic impound lot,
regardless of whether tow truck service is provided.



   JUNK VEHICLE.  A vehicle that:



      (1)   Is three years old or older;



      (2)   Is extensively damaged, with the damage including things
as broken or missing wheels, motor, drive train or transmission;



      (3)   Is apparently inoperable;



      (4)   Does not have a valid, current registration plate; and



      (5)   Has an approximate fair market value equal only to the
approximate value of the scrap init.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE.  Has the meaning given “motor vehicle”
in M.S. § 169.01, as it may be amended from time to time.



   MOTOR VEHICLE WASTE.  Solid waste and liquid wastes derived in the
operation of or in the recycling of a motor vehicle, including such things as
tires and used motor oil, but excluding scrap metal.



   MPCA or AGENCY.  The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.



   NONPUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot that is not a public impound
lot.



   PUBLIC IMPOUND LOT.  An impound lot owned by or contracting with a
unit of government under section § 90.24.



   UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is subject to removal and
impoundment pursuant to § 90.18(B), or M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended
from time to time, but is not a junk vehicle or an abandoned vehicle.



   UNIT OF GOVERNMENT.  Includes a state department or agency, a special
purpose district, and a county, statutory or home rule charter city, or town.



   VITAL COMPONENT PARTS.  Those parts of a motor vehicle that are
essential to the mechanical functioning of the vehicle, including such things
as the motor, drive train and wheels.



§ 90.17  VIOLATION TO ABANDON MOTOR VEHICLE.



   Any person who abandons a motor vehicle on any public or private
property, without the consent of the person in control of the property, is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.18  AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES.



   (A)   Abandoned or junk vehicles.  The City Clerk or his or her
designee or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city may take into custody and impound any abandoned or junk vehicle.



   (B)   Unauthorized vehicles.  The City Clerk, or his or her
designee, or any peace officer employed or whose services are contracted for
by the city may take into custody and impound any unauthorized vehicle under
M.S. § 169.041 as it may be amended from time to time. A vehicle may also be
impounded after it has been left unattended in one of the following public or
private locations for the indicated period of time:



      (1)   In a public location not governed by M.S. § 169.041 as
it may be amended from time to time:



         (a)   On a highway and properly tagged by a peace
officer, four hours;



         (b)   Located so as to constitute an accident or traffic
hazard to the traveling public, as determined by a peace officer,
immediately; or



         (c)   That is a parking facility or other public
property owned or controlled by a unit of government, properly posted, four
hours; or



      (2)    On private property:



         (a)   That is single-family or duplex residential
property, immediately;



         (b)   That is private, nonresidential property, properly
posted, immediately;



         (c)   That is private, nonresidential property, not
posted, 24 hours; or



         (d)   That is any residential property, properly posted,
immediately.



§ 90.19  SALE; WAITING PERIODS.



   (A)   Sale after 15 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 90.23, 15 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be:



      (1)   A junk vehicle, except that it may have a valid, current
registration plate and still be eligible for disposal or sale under this
subdivision; or



      (2)   An abandoned vehicle.



   (B)   Sale after 45 days.  An impounded vehicle is eligible for
disposal or sale under § 90.23, 45 days after notice to the owner, if the
vehicle is determined to be an unauthorized vehicle.



§ 90.20  NOTICE OF TAKING AND SALE.



   (A)   Contents; notice given within five days.  When an impounded
vehicle is taken into custody, the city or impound lot operator taking it
into custody shall give notice of the taking within five days, excluded
Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, to the registered vehicle owner and
any lienholders.  The notice must:



      (1)   Set forth the date and place of the taking; the year,
make, model and serial number of the impounded motor vehicle if the
information can be reasonably obtained; and the place where the vehicle is
being held;



      (2)   Inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to
reclaim the vehicle under § 90.21; and



      (3)   State that failure of the owner or lienholders to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle and contents within the
appropriate time allowed under § 90.19 shall be deemed a waiver by them of
all right, title and interest in the vehicle and contents and a consent to
the transfer of title to and disposal or sale of the vehicle and contents
pursuant to § 90.23.



   (B)   Notice by mail or publication.  The notice shall be sent by
mail to the registered owner, if any, of an impounded vehicle and to all
readily identifiable lienholders of record.  The Department makes this
information available to impound lot operators for notification purposes. 
If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and
address of the registered owner and all lienholders, the notice shall be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the
motor vehicle was towed from or abandoned.  Published notices may be grouped
together for convenience and economy.



   (C)   Unauthorized vehicles; notice.  If an unauthorized vehicle
remains unclaimed after 30 days from the date the notice was sent under
division (B) of this section, a second notice shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner, if any, of the
unauthorized vehicle and to all readily identifiable lienholders of record.



(Am. Ord. 168, passed 6-26-10)



§ 90.21  RIGHT TO RECLAIM.



   (A)   Payment of charges.  The owner or any lienholder of an
impounded vehicle shall have a right to reclaim the vehicle from the city or
impound lot operator taking it into custody upon payment of all towing and
storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody within 15 or
45 days, as applicable under § 90.19, after the date of the notice required
by § 90.20.



   (B)   Lienholders.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
impair any lien of a garagekeeper under the laws of this state, or the right
of a lienholder to foreclose.  For the purposes of this section,
GARAGEKEEPER is an operator of a parking place or establishment, an operator
of a motor vehicle storage facility, or an operator of an establishment for
the servicing, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.



§ 90.22  OPERATOR'S DEFICIENCY CLAIM; CONSENT TO SALE.



   (A)   Deficiency claim.  The nonpublic impound lot operator has a
deficiency claim against the registered owner of the vehicle for the
reasonable costs of services provided in the towing, storage and inspection
of the vehicle minus the proceeds of the sale or auction.  The claim for
storage costs may not exceed the costs of:



      (1)   25 days storage for a vehicle described in section §
90.19(A); and



      (2)   55 days storage for a vehicle described in § 90.19(B).



   (B)   Implied consent to sale.  A registered owner who fails to
claim the impounded vehicle within the applicable time period allowed under
section § 90.19 is deemed to waive any right to reclaim the vehicle and
consents to the disposal or sale of the vehicle and its contents and transfer
of title.



§ 90.23  DISPOSITION BY IMPOUND LOT.



   (A)   Auction or sale.



      (1)   If an abandoned or unauthorized vehicle and contents
taken into custody by the city or any impound lot is not reclaimed under §
90.21, it may be disposed of or sold at auction or sale when eligible
pursuant to §§ 90.20 and 90.21.



      (2)   The purchaser shall be given a receipt in a form
prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles which shall be sufficient title
to dispose of the vehicle.  The receipt shall also entitle the purchaser to
register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and claims of ownership.  Before a vehicle is issued a new
certificate of title, it must receive a motor vehicle safety check.



   (B)   Unsold vehicles.  Abandoned or junk vehicles not sold by the
city or public impound lots pursuant to division (A) of this section shall be
disposed of in accordance with section § 90.24.



   (C)   Sale proceeds; public entities.  From the proceeds of a sale
under this section by the city or public impound lot of an abandoned or
unauthorized motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the cost of
towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all administrative, notice
and publication costs incurred in handling the vehicle pursuant to this
chapter.  Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the
owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days and then shall be
deposited in the treasury of the city.



   (D)   Sale proceeds; nonpublic impound lots.  The operator of a
nonpublic impound lot may retain any proceeds derived from a sale conducted
under the authority of division (A) of this section.  The operator may
retain all proceeds from sale of any personal belongings and contents in the
vehicle that were not claimed by the owner or the owner's agent before the
sale, except that any suspected contraband or other items that likely would
be subject to forfeiture in a criminal trial must be turned over to the
appropriate law enforcement agency.



§ 90.24  DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.



   The city may contract with others or may utilize its own equipment and
personnel for the inventory of impounded motor vehicles and abandoned scrap
metal and may utilize its own equipment and personnel for the collection,
storage and transportation of these vehicles and abandoned scrap metal.  The
city may utilize its own equipment and personnel only for the collection and
storage of not more than five abandoned or unauthorized vehicles without
advertising for or receiving bids in any 120-day period.



§ 90.25  CONTRACTS; REIMBURSEMENT BY MPCA.



   (A)   MPCA review and approval.  If the city proposes to enter into
a contract with a person licensed by the MPCA pursuant to this section or a
contract pursuant to section § 90.24, the MPCA may review the proposed
contract before it is entered into by the city, to determine whether it
conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste management and is in compliance
with MPCA rules.  A contract that does so conform may be approved by the
MPCA and entered into by the city.  Where a contract has been approved, the
MPCA may reimburse the city for the costs incurred under the contract that
have not been reimbursed under section § 90.23.  Except as otherwise
provided in § 90.24, the MPCA shall not approve any contract that has been
entered into without prior notice to and request for bids from all persons
duly licensed by the MPCA to be a party to a disposal contract pursuant to
M.S. § 116.07, as it may be amended from time to time; does not provide for
a full performance bond; or does not provide for total collection and
transportation of abandoned motor vehicles, except that the MPCA may approve
a contract covering solely collection or transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles where the MPCA determines total collection and transportation to be
impracticable and where all other requirements herein have been met and the
unit of government, after proper notice and request for bids, has not
received any bid for total collection and transportation of abandoned motor
vehicles.



   (B)   The city may perform work.  If the city utilizes its own
equipment and personnel pursuant to its authority under § 90.24, and the use
of the equipment and personnel conforms to the MPCA's plan for solid waste
management and is in compliance with MPCA rules, the city may be reimbursed
by the MPCA for reasonable costs incurred which are not reimbursed under
section § 90.23.



   (C)   The city required to contract work.  The MPCA may demand that
the city contract for the disposal of abandoned motor vehicles and other
scrap metal pursuant to the MPCA's plan for solid waste disposal.  If the
city fails to contract within 180 days of the demand, the MPCA, through the
Department of Administration and on behalf of the city, may contract with any
person duly licensed by the MPCA for the disposal.



CHAPTER 91:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   91.01   Title



   91.02   Purpose and scope



   91.03   Definitions



   91.04   Compliance; registration and functions



   91.05   User fees



   91.06   Enforcement



   91.07   Violations



§ 91.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the “Alarm
Systems Chapter,” except as herein referred to as “this chapter.”



(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-82)



§ 91.02  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public safety services
which serve the city from misuse and to provide for the maximum possible
service to alarm users.  This chapter provides regulation for the use of
burglary, robbery, fire and medical alarms and establishes a system of
administration and an alarm user fee.



(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-82)



§ 91.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any equipment or device which emits an audible, visual
or electronic signal upon the detection of a potential burglary, robbery,
fire medical emergency, trespass or property intrusion.  ALARM SYSTEM does
not include an anti-theft or tampering alarm installed in any motor vehicle.



   ALARM USER.  Any person in control of any building, structure,
facility or tract of land wherein or whereon an alarm system is used or
maintained within the city.



   FALSE ALARMS.  An alarm signal creating a response by public safety
personnel when a situation requiring a response does not exist, and which is
caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure,
alarm malfunction, improper installation or the inadvertence of the owner or
lessee of the alarm system or of his or her employees or agents.  FALSE
ALARMS do not include alarms caused by climatic conditions such as tornadoes,
thunderstorms, utility line mishaps, violent conditions of nature or any
other conditions which are clearly beyond the control of the alarm
manufacturer, installer or alarm user.



   PERSON.  Any human being, corporation, partnership, firm, association
or other organization, receiver, trustee, assignee, agent or other legal
representative of any of the foregoing or any other legal entity.



   PUBLIC SAFETY COMMUNICATIONS CENTER.  The central facility used to
receive emergency requests for public safety services and general information
from the public to be dispatched to public safety personnel.



   PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL.  All personnel employed by any law
enforcement agency and any fire fighting personnel and any ambulance
personnel.



   SHERIFF.  The Carver County Sheriff or his or her designee.



(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-82)



§ 91.04  COMPLIANCE; REGISTRATION AND FUNCTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall locate, install, construct, alter, repair, use
or maintain any alarm system within the city, except in full compliance with
this chapter and the standards adopted herein.



   (B)   All audible alarm systems shall meet the following
requirements:



      (1)   Every person maintaining an alarm system with an audible
alarm signal shall put a notice containing the name and telephone number of a
person to be notified to render repairs or services to the alarm system
during any hour of the day or night activation of the alarm system.  The
notice shall be posted at the main entrance to the premises or near the alarm
in a position as to be legible from the ground level adjacent to the building.



      (2)   Alarm systems with audible alarm signals that sound like
police or fire sirens are prohibited.



      (3)   All alarm systems with audible alarm signals, except for
fire alarms, shall have an automatic shut-off which will silence the audible
alarm signal within a period not to exceed 15 minutes.



   (C)   (1)   All persons using or maintaining any alarm system
within the city shall register the alarm system with the Sheriff, utilizing
registration forms to be furnished by the Sheriff, no later than the
following dates:



         (a)   Sixty days after the effective date of the
chapter; or



         (b)   Thirty days after the installation of the alarm
system.



      (2)   Any alteration or modification of any previously
registered alarm system shall be registered with the Sheriff, utilizing
registration forms to be furnished by the Sheriff, within 30 days of the
commencement of the alteration or modification.



   (D)   Financial institutions having alarm systems with a robbery
signal feature, shall have an on- premises annunciator panel providing
specific annunciation of the sensors on a private monitoring location on the
premises.  When, in the judgment of the Sheriff, no on-premises monitoring
location is feasible, the requirements of this section may be waived by the
Sheriff.  All alarm systems installed in financial institutions after the
effective date of this chapter shall have the annunciator for panels when
installed.  All alarm systems currently used by financial institutions shall
have the annunciator panels installed within one year from the effective date
of this chapter.



   (E)   Alarm systems that have more than one alarm signal function
(burglary, fire, etc.),  must report specifically which function has been
violated when reporting to the Public Safety Communication Center for the
purpose of dispatching public safety personnel to the site of the alarm
system.



   (F)   No alarm system shall connect directly to the Public Safety
Communications Center, except financial institutions and/or public buildings.
All other alarms must report to the Public Safety Communications Center in
some other manner.  No automatic telephone dialing device shall be allowed
to dial direct or be programed so that it dials directly into the Public
Safety Communications Center.



(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-82)



§ 91.05  USER FEES.



   (A)   An alarm user fee is hereby imposed upon any alarm user from
whose alarm system emanates more than two false alarms within any 12
consecutive month period. The fee payable under this section shall be the fee
established from time to time by Carver County Board ordinance.



   (B)   (1)   All federal, state, county and/or municipal buildings
and all public schools shall be exempt from the alarm user fee.



      (2)   All newly installed alarm systems are hereby granted a
30-day probationary period, commencing on the date of first operational use
thereof, during which period false alarm will not be counted for the purpose
of computing the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this chapter.



      (3)   All alarm systems which are altered by the addition to
any new alarm feature are hereby granted a 15-day probationary period,
commencing on the date of first operational use of the new feature, during
which period false alarms will not be counted for the purpose of computing
the amount of any alarm user fee imposed by this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   Subsequent to any false alarm, the Sheriff shall
notify the affected alarm user in writing of the date of the false alarm, the
apparent reason therefor, and the alarm user fee is required, pursuant to
this chapter.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of each alarm user to pay all alarm
user fees imposed by this chapter to the Sheriff within 30 days of the date
of mailing of the Sheriff’s fee statement specifying the amount of alarm
user fees.



      (3)   For the purpose of mailing the Sheriff’s fee statement
under this section, the statement shall be mailed to the affected alarm user
at his, her or its address shown on the registration form required by §
91.04 (C).



      (4)   Half of all alarm user fees collected by the Sheriff
shall be remitted to the city to defray its administrative and prosecution
costs incurred in connection with the enforcement of this chapter.  The
other half of the alarm user fees shall be retained by the Sheriff to defray
his or her administrative costs incurred in enforcing this chapter.



(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-82; Am. Ord. 115, passed 3-14-05)



§ 91.06  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   If, in the judgment of public safety personnel at the scene of
an alarm, it is determined that the user should appear at the location of the
alarm for the purpose of admitting public safety personnel to the subject
premises to investigate any alarm for the purposes of deactivating any system
signal or for the purpose of identifying third parties found on the subject
premises during the investigation of any alarm system signal, the alarm user
shall appear immediately if so requested by the Sheriff.



   (B)   If an alarm user has had more than three false alarms in a
12-month period, the alarm user, upon the written request of the Sheriff,
shall be required to submit, in written form, a description of any steps
being taken to remedy any problems with false alarms emanating from the alarm
user location.



   (C)   The Sheriff shall promulgate rules and regulations as
necessary for the implementation and/or administration of this chapter.



(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-82)



§ 91.07  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Injunctive relief.  In the event of a violation or a threat
of violation of this chapter, the city may institute appropriate action or
proceeding, including requesting injunctive relief to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate the violation or threatened violation.



   (B)   Civil action.  If a person fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, the city may recover costs, damages or alarm user
fees in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (C)   Governmental services lien.  In addition to the remedies
specified in division (A) above, but in lieu of the remedy specified in
division (B) above, the city may certify any unpaid alarm user fees to the
County Auditor or County Finance Director as a governmental service lien for
collection with the real property taxes imposed on the real property upon
which the alarm system is or was located.



(Ord. 60, passed 7-8-82)



CHAPTER 92:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Dogs and cats



   92.03   Non-domestic animals



   92.04   Farm animals



   92.05   Impounding



   92.06   (Reserved)



   92.07   Nuisances



   92.08   Seizure of animals



   92.09   Animals presenting a danger to health and safety of city



   92.10   Diseased animals



   92.11   Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs regulations adopted
by reference



   92.12   (Reserved)



   92.13   Basic care



   92.14   Breeding moratorium



   92.15   Enforcing officer



   92.16   Pound



   92.17   Interference with officers



   92.18   Beekeeping




Chickens




   92.30   Purpose and scope



   92.31   Keeping of chickens



   92.32   License required



   92.33   Duration of license and fee



   92.34   Right of entry for inspections



   92.35   License subject to terms and conditions of this subchapter,
private restrictions and revocation



   92.36   Limitations on keeping of chickens



   92.37   Violators and penalties



 



   92.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any mammal, reptile, amphibian, fish, bird (including all
fowl and poultry) or other member commonly accepted as a part of the animal
kingdom.  Animals shall be classified as follows:



      (1)   DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly accepted as
domesticated household pets.  Unless otherwise defined, domestic animals
shall include dogs, cats, caged birds, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs,
domesticated rabbits, fish, non-poisonous, non-venomous and non- constricting
reptiles or amphibians, and other similar animals.



      (2)   FARM ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly associated with a
farm or performing work in an agricultural setting.  Unless otherwise
defined, farm animals shall include members of the equestrian family (horses,
mules), bovine family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry (chickens, turkeys), fowl
(ducks, geese), swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees,
and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable.



      (3)   NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.  Those animals commonly
considered to be naturally wild and not naturally trained or domesticated, or
which are commonly considered to be inherently dangerous to the health,
safety, and welfare of  people.  Unless otherwise defined, non- domestic
animals shall include:



         (a)   Any member of the large cat family (family
felidae) including lions, tigers, cougars, bobcats, leopards and jaguars, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated house cats.



         (b)   Any naturally wild member of the canine family
(family canidae) including wolves, foxes, coyotes, dingoes, and jackals, but
excluding commonly accepted domesticated dogs.



         (c)   Any crossbreeds such as the crossbreed between a
wolf and a dog, unless the crossbreed is commonly accepted as a domesticated
house pet.



         (d)   Any member or relative of the rodent family
including any skunk (whether or not descented), raccoon, squirrel, or ferret,
but excluding those members otherwise defined or commonly accepted as
domesticated pets.



         (e)   Any poisonous, venomous, constricting, or
inherently dangerous member of the reptile or amphibian families including
rattlesnakes, boa constrictors, pit vipers, crocodiles and alligators.



         (f)   Any other animal which is not explicitly listed
above but which can be reasonably defined by the terms of this section,
including but not limited to bears, deer, monkeys and game fish.



   APIARY.  The assembly of one (1) or more colonies of honeybees at a
single location.



   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner and not under the custody and
control of the owner or other person, either by leash, cord, chain, or
otherwise restrained or confined.



   BEEKEEPER.  A person who owns or has charge of one (1) or more
colonies of honeybees.



   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT.  Anything used in the operation of an apiary,
such as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.



   CAT.  Both the male and female of the felidae species commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets.



   COLONY.  An aggregate of honeybees consisting principally of workers,
but having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and
honey.



   DOG.  Both the male and female of the canine species, commonly
accepted as domesticated household pets, and other domesticated animals of a
dog kind.



   HIVE.  The receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for
that purpose.



   HONEYBEE.  All life stages of the common domestic honeybee, Apis
mellifera species of European origin.



   NUCLEUS COLONY.  A small quantity of honeybees with a queen housed in
a smaller than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose.



   OWNER.  Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation
owning, keeping, or harboring an animal.



   RELEASE PERMIT.  A permit issued by the Animal Control Officer or
other person in charge of the pound for the release of any animal that has
been taken to the pound. A release permit may be obtained upon payment of a
fee to the City Clerk in accordance with the regular license requirement if
the animal is unlicensed, payment of a release fee, and any maintenance costs
incurred in capturing and impounding the animal.  The release fee shall be
as established by resolution of the City Council.



   SUPER.  That part of a honeybee hive used to collect honey.



   SWARMING.  The natural process where a queen bee leaves a colony with
a large group of worker bees.



   UNUSUAL AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR.  Any instance in which unusual aggressive
characteristics such as stinging without provocation or attacking without
provocation occurs.



(Am. Ord. 202, passed 8-24-15)



§ 92.02  DOGS AND CATS.



   (A)   Running at large prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for the
dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at
large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Dogs or cats on a leash and accompanied by
a responsible person or accompanied by and under the control and direction of
a responsible person, so as to be effectively restrained by leash, shall be
permitted in streets or on public land unless the city has posted an area
with signs reading “Dogs or Cats Prohibited.”



   (B)   License required.



      (1)   All dogs over the age of six months kept, harbored, or
maintained by their owners in the city, shall be licensed and registered with
the city. Dog licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk upon payment of the
license fee as established by resolution of the City Council.  The owner
shall state, at the time application is made for the license and upon forms
provided, his or her name and address and the name, breed, color, and sex of
each dog owned or kept by him or her. No license shall be granted for a dog
that has not been vaccinated against distemper and rabies, as evidenced by a
certificate by a veterinarian qualified to practice in the state in which the
dog is vaccinated annually.



      (2)   It shall be the duty of each owner of a dog subject to
this section to pay to the City Clerk the license fee established by
resolution of the City Council.



      (3)   Upon payment of the license fee as established by
resolution of the City Council, the Clerk shall issue to the owner a license
certificate and metallic tag for each dog licensed. The tag shall have
stamped on it the year for which it is issued and the number corresponding
with the number on the certificate. Every owner shall be required to provide
each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed, and shall
see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or
destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the City Clerk.  A charge shall be
made for each duplicate tag in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council.  Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another
and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee or tag because of death
of a dog or the owner’s leaving the city before the expiration of the
license period.



      (4)   The licensing provisions of this division (B) shall not
apply to dogs whose owners are non-residents temporarily within the city, nor
to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog
show, nor shall this provision apply to “seeing eye” dogs properly
trained to assist blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from
place to place.



      (5)   The funds received by the City Clerk from all dog
licenses and metallic tags fees as established by resolution of the City
Council, shall first be used to defray any costs incidental to the
enforcement of this chapter, including but not restricted to the costs of
licenses, metallic tags, and impounding and maintenance of the dogs.



   (C)   Cats.  Cats shall be included as controlled by this
division  insofar as running-at-large, pickup, impounding, and boarding is
concerned. All other provisions of this section shall also apply to cats
unless otherwise provided.



   (D)   Vaccination.



      (1)   All dogs and cats kept harbored, maintained, or
transported within the city shall be vaccinated at least once every three
years by a licensed veterinarian for:



         (a)   Rabies - with a live modified vaccine; and



         (b)   Distemper.



      (2)   A certificate of vaccination must be kept on which is
stated the date of vaccination, owner’s name and address, the animal’s
name (if applicable), sex, description and weight, the type of vaccine, and
the veterinarian’s signature. Upon demand made by the City Clerk, the
Animal Control Officer or a police officer, the owner shall present for
examination the required certificate(s) of vaccination for the animal(s). In
cases where certificates are not presented, the owner or keeper of the
animal(s) shall have seven days in which to present the certificate(s) to the
City Clerk or officer. Failure to do so shall be deemed a violation of this
section.



   (E)   Limitation.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any residence in the city to possess,
harbor, shelter or keep more than three adult dogs and cats, excepting
veterinary hospitals and pet shops, or other establishments, properly
licensed by the city. For purposes of this division (E), an ADULT ANIMAL
shall be deemed to be any animal six months or older.



      (2)   Maintaining multiple animals. No more than a total of
three adult dogs and cats may be maintained at one residence, at any time,
without first obtaining a multiple animal license from the city. In no event
shall more than a total of five adult dogs and cats be maintained at one
residence.



         (a)   License procedure. Application for a multiple
animal license must be made to the city and accompanied by the license fee
that the City Council shall establish from time to time in the city fee
schedule.



         (b)   Approval of contiguous property owners. The
application for a multiple animal license shall be accompanied by a petition
showing the approval of the occupants of privately owned real estate abutting
the premises on which the multiple animal residence is to be located.



         (c)   Granting or denial of license; conditions. Whether
or not all of the occupants of abutting property approve the application, the
city may grant or deny the license. The multiple animal license will not be
granted unless the city finds that the use of the applicant’s premises with
multiple animals will not have any adverse effect upon adjacent properties or
the occupancy thereof, and will not constitute a nuisance to the
neighborhood. A license will only be granted if the keeping of the dogs or
cats is incidental to the occupancy of the premises for residential purposes.
The city may impose conditions on the granting of a license in order to
minimize or mitigate possible adverse impacts.



         (d)   Reduction in number. Each license will be
conditioned upon a requirement that the total number of animals maintained be
reduced through attrition to no more than three within a time frame as
designated by the city.



         (e)   Maintenance of property. Properties holding a
multiple animal license shall be maintained in a clean and healthful
condition at all times, and shall be open to inspection by the city at all
reasonable times.



         (f)   Rejection of license; appeal process. If an
application is rejected, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the
decision of the city, the reason for the denial, and the applicant’s right
to appeal the denial to the City Council. Within seven days of receiving the
notice, the applicant must appeal the decision in writing to the city. The
City Council will hear the appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting.



         (g)   Revocation. The City Council may revoke a multiple
animal license for any violation of this chapter or any other law relating to
the keeping of animals, after a hearing as provided in this division (E). The
city shall give the licensee at least five days’ written notice of the
meeting at which the revocation will be considered by mailing the notice to
the licensee at the address in the application. The City Council will give
the licensee an opportunity to be heard at the meeting.



         (h)   Multiple animal license fee. The multiple animal
license fee shall be in such amount as provided in the fee schedule for the
city.



      (3)   No person, firm, or corporation shall maintain in this
city a kennel.



   (F)   Lifetime licenses.



      (1)   Lifetime dog licenses may be issued by the city as an
alternate to annual licenses. To be eligible for a lifetime license the
following conditions are required.



         (a)   The dog shall be electronically
tagged/microchipped. Microchips shall include such information as the city
may determine appropriate including the unique identifying information related



to an electronic device, the manufacturer, and demonstration that the
implanted device can be read b city or county equipment.



         (b)   Certification by a licensed veterinarian that the
dog has been vaccinated for rabies and distemper.



         (c)   Payment of the required fees as established by the
city fee schedule.



      (2)   There shall be no reimbursement of any license fee,
including lifetime fees, upon the death or removal of the dog from the city
and fees shall not be prorated. Dogs declared dangerous and potentially
dangerous are not eligible for lifetime licenses.



      (3)   Lifetime licenses may be revoked by the city without
refund of fees paid if the dog’s vaccinations are not kept current or if
the dog is declared dangerous or potentially dangerous. When a lifetime
license has been revoked, if eligible, a new lifetime license may be obtained
through the procedures established in this section and payment of the
appropriate fees.



(Am. Ord. 135, passed 7-9-07; Am. Ord. 175, passed 11-28-11; Am. Ord. 219,
passed 4-23-18)



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.03  NON-DOMESTIC ANIMALS.



   It shall be illegal for any person to own, possess, harbor, or offer
for sale, any non-domestic animal within the city.  Any owner of a
non-domestic animal at the time of adoption of this code shall have 30 days
in which to remove the animal from the city after which time the city may
impound the animal as provided for in this section.  An exception shall be
made to this prohibition for animals specifically trained for and actually
providing assistance to the handicapped or disabled, and for those animals
brought into the city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic,
scientific research laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  FARM ANIMALS.



   Farm animals shall only be kept in an agricultural district of the
city, or on a residential lot of at least ten acres in size provided that no
animal shelter shall be within 300 feet of an adjoining piece of property. 
An exception shall be made to this section for those animals brought into the
city as part of an operating zoo, veterinarian clinic, scientific research
laboratory, or a licensed show or exhibition.



§ 92.05  IMPOUNDING.



   (A)   Running at large.  Any unlicensed animal running at large is
hereby declared a public nuisance.  Any Animal Control Officer or police
officer may impound any dog or other animal found unlicensed or any animal
found running at large and shall give notice of the impounding to the owner
of the dog or other animal, if known. In case the owner is unknown, the
officer shall post notice at the city office that if the dog or other
animal  is not claimed within the time specified in division (C) of this
section, it will be sold or otherwise disposed of. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to kill, destroy, or otherwise
cause injury to any animal, including dogs and cats running at large.



   (B)   Biting animals.    Any animal that has not been inoculated
by a live modified rabies vaccine and which has bitten any person, wherein
the skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, shall
be confined in the city pound for a period of not less than ten days, at the
expense of the owner.  The animal may be released at the end of the time if
healthy and free from symptoms of rabies, and by the payment of all costs by
the owner.  However, if the owner of the animal shall elect immediately upon
receipt of notice of need for the confinement by the officer to voluntarily
and immediately confine the animal for the required period of time in a
veterinary hospital of the owner’s choosing, not outside of the county in
which this city is located, and provide immediate proof of confinement in the
manner as may be required, the owner may do so.  If, however, the animal has
been inoculated with a live modified rabies vaccine and the owner has proof
of the vaccination by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian, the owner
may confine the dog or other animal to the owner’s property.



   (C)   Reclaiming.  All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept,
with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at
least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal as
defined under § 92.11 in which case it shall be kept for seven regular
business days or the times specified in § 92.11, and except if the animal is
a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular
business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided
by this section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the
animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise
provided for in this code or established from time to time by resolution of
the City Council:



      (1)   Payment of the release fee and receipt of a release
permit as established by resolution of the City Council.



      (2)    Payment of maintenance costs, as provided by the pound,
per day or any part of day while animal is in the pound; and



      (3)   If a dog is unlicensed, payment of a regular license fee
as established by resolution of the City Council, and valid certificate of
vaccination for rabies and distemper shots is required.



   (D)   Unclaimed animals. 



      (1)   At the expiration of the times established in division
(C) of this section, if the animal has not been reclaimed in accordance with
the provisions of this section, the owner shall be deemed to have forfeited
all rights to the animal and the officer appointed to enforce this section
shall, in the following order:



         (a)   Attempt to place the animal for adoption through a
“no-kill” animal rescue;



         (b)   Let any person claim the animal by complying with
all provisions of this section;



         (c)   Cause such animal to be disposed of in a proper
and humane manner.



      (2)   All money collected under this section shall be payable
to the City Treasurer.



(Am. Ord. 136, passed 6-25-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.06  (RESERVED).



§ 92.07  NUISANCES.



   (A)   Habitual barking.  It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or harbor a dog which habitually barks, yelps or cries. HABITUAL
BARKING, YELPING OR CRYING shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals
of at least three minutes with less than one minute of interruption, or
repeated intervals of barking for a period of 30 minutes or more with no more
than five minutes of interruption between barking intervals. The barking must
be audible off of the owner’s or caretaker’s premises.



   (B)   Damage to property.  It shall be unlawful for any person’s
dog or other animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or
not the owner has knowledge of the damage.



   (C)   Cleaning up litter.  The owner of any animal or person having
the custody or control of any animal shall be responsible for cleaning up any
feces of the animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner whether
on their own property, on the property of others or on public property.



   (D)   Other.  Any animals kept contrary to this section are subject
to impoundment as provided in § 92.05.



(Am. Ord. 128, passed 4-24-06)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  SEIZURE OF ANIMALS.



   Any police officer or Animal Control Officer may enter upon private
property and seize any animal provided that the following exist:



   (A)   There is an identified complainant other than the police
officer or Animal Control Officer making a contemporaneous complaint about
the animal;



   (B)   The officer reasonably believes that the animal meets either
the barking dog criteria set out in § 92.07(A); the criteria for cruelty set
out in § 92.13; or the criteria for an at large animal set out in §
92.01(E);



   (C)   The officer can demonstrate that there has been at least one
previous complaint of a barking dog; inhumane treatment of the animal; or
that the animal was at large at this address on a prior date;



   (D)   The officer has made a reasonable attempt to contact the owner
of the dog and the property to be entered and those attempts have either
failed or have been ignored;



   (E)   The seizure will not involve the forced entry into a private
residence.  Use of a pass key obtained from a property manager, landlord,
innkeeper, or other authorized person to have that key shall not be
considered unauthorized entry; and



   (F)   Written notice of the seizure is left in a conspicuous place
if personal contact with the owner of the dog is not possible.



§ 92.09  ANIMALS PRESENTING A DANGER TO HEALTH AND SAFETY OF CITY.



   If, in the reasonable belief of any person or the Animal Control
Officer or police officer, an animal presents an immediate danger to the
health and safety of any person, or the animal is threatening imminent harm
to any person, or the animal is in the process of attacking any person, the
person or officer may destroy the animal in a proper and humane manner.
Otherwise, the person or officer may apprehend the animal and deliver it to
the pound for confinement under § 92.05. If the animal is destroyed, the
owner or keeper of the animal destroyed shall be liable to the city for the
cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the costs of any
veterinarian examination. If the animal is found not to be a danger to the
health and safety of the city, it may be released to the owner or keeper in
accordance with § 92.05(C).



§ 92.10  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Running at large.  No person shall keep or allow to be kept
on his or her premises, or on premises occupied by them, nor permit to run at
large in the city, any animal which is diseased so as to be a danger to the
health and safety of the city, even though the animal be properly licensed
under this section.



   (B)   Confinement.  Any animal reasonably suspected of being
diseased and presenting a threat to the health and safety of the public, may
be apprehended and confined in the pound by any person, the Animal Control
Officer or a police officer. The officer shall have a qualified veterinarian
examine the animal. If the animal is found to be diseased in a manner so as
to be a danger to the health and safety of the city, the officer shall cause
the animal to be painlessly killed and shall properly dispose of the remains.
The owner or keeper of the animal killed under this section shall be liable
to the city for the cost of maintaining and disposing of the animal, plus the
costs of any veterinarian examinations.



   (C)   Release.  If the animal, upon examination, is not found to be
diseased the animal shall be released to the owner or keeper free of charge.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.11  DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.



   (A)   Code adopted by reference. Chapter 92 of the Carver County
Code pertaining to dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs as authorized by
M.S. §§ 347.51, Subd. 8, and 347.565, including all amendments thereto
adopted and published from time to time by the Carver County Board of
Commissioners, is hereby adopted by the City of Mayer and incorporated in
this chapter by reference as if fully set out herein.



   (B)   Application, administration and enforcement.  The
application, administration, and enforcement of this section in the City of
Mayer shall be by the “Animal Control Authority” as defined in § 6 of
Chapter 92 of the Carver County Code.



(Ord. 195, passed 10-27-14)



§ 92.12 (RESERVED).



§ 92.13  BASIC CARE.



   All animals shall receive from their owners or keepers kind treatment,
housing in the winter, and sufficient food and water for their comfort. Any
person not treating their pet in a humane manner will be subject to the
penalties provided in this section.



§ 92.14  BREEDING MORATORIUM.



   Every female dog or female cat in heat shall be confined in a building
or other enclosure in a manner that it cannot come in contact with another
dog or cat except for planned breeding.  Upon capture and failure to reclaim
the animal, every dog or cat shall be neutered or spayed prior to being
transferred to a new owner.



§ 92.15  ENFORCING OFFICER.



   The Council is hereby authorized to appoint an animal control
officer(s) to enforce the provisions of this section. In the officer’s duty
of enforcing the provisions of this section, he or she may from time to time,
with the consent of the City Council, designate assistants.



§ 92.16  POUND.



   Every year the Council shall designate an official pound to which
animals found in violation of this chapter shall be taken for safe treatment,
and if necessary, for destruction.



§ 92.17  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.



   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with any
person authorized by the City Council to capture dogs, cats or other animals
and convey them to the pound while engaged in that operation.  Nor shall any
unauthorized person break open the pound, or attempt to do so, or take or
attempt to take from any agent any animal taken up by him or her in
compliance with this chapter, or in any other manner to interfere with or
hinder the officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this chapter.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.18  BEEKEEPING.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish certain
requirements for beekeeping within the city and to avoid conflicts which
might otherwise be associated with beekeeping in populated areas, all for the
sake of preserving the safety and well-being of the community.



   (B)   Standards of practice.



      (1)   Honeybee colonies meeting the requirements of this
ordinance may be kept within the A Agricultural, C/I Commercial/Industrial
and P/I public institutional districts.



      (2)   No more than six hives or two colonies may be located on
a lot.



      (3)   No hive shall occupy any front yard.



      (4)   No hive shall exceed 20 cubic feet in volume.



      (5)   No hive shall be located closer than ten feet from a
public sidewalk, 25 feet from a principal building on an abutting lot, three
feet from any side or rear property line, within 200 feet of a school or
licensed child day care center and no hive shall be kept or maintained within
any required front yard.



      (6)   A flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall
shield any part of a property line that is within 25 feet of a hive. The
flyway barrier shall consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation or a
combination thereof and it shall be positioned to transect both legs of a
triangle extending from an apex at the hive to each end point of the part of
the property line to be shielded.



      (7)   A constant supply of water shall be provided within 25
feet of all hives.



      (8)   No colonies or hives shall be kept upon any land not
owned or possessed by the keeper of such bees. The owner shall obtain a
license for beekeeping under the requirements of this section.



      (9)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to
prohibit the keeping of bees within a school or on school grounds for the
purpose of observation, or within a physician’s office or laboratory for
the purpose of medical research, treatment, or other scientific purposes.



   (C)   Application for license. An application for a license to keep
bees shall be made to the city upon forms furnished by the city prior to
installing, altering or establishing a colony of bees within a hive. A
license must be obtained to assure that all colonies and hives meet all
requirements of this section.



      (1)   The Application shall include the following data.



         (a)   Name and address of applicant/property owner.



         (b)   Legal description of the property.



         (c)   A site plan or survey, if deemed necessary by the
city, illustrating the dimensions of the property, including location and
distances of neighboring residences and the location of the hive(s) in
relation to any property lines, sidewalk, alleys, and right-of-ways.



         (d)   Location of any schools or licensed child day care
center.



      (2)   All applications shall be accompanied by an application
fee, if any is required by the city.



      (3)   Upon establishment of the colony and placement of the
hive(s) and after all requirements of this section are met, the city shall
issue a license upon a form furnished by the city. The license shall be good
for a period of one year at which time the applicant shall renew the license.
The renewal shall be accompanied by a renewal fee, if any is required by the
city and notification by the city is not required for renewal of a license.



      (4)   Upon initial registration or change of address within
the city, the city shall notify in writing all owners of lots within 200 feet
of any lot line of the apiary site, of the presence of said apiary.



      (5)   Any resident within 200 feet of any lot line of an
apiary site may file a written appeal of the approval of the initial
registration to the City Administrator, or their designee, if an appeal is
filed, the beekeeper will be notified in writing by the City Administrator or
their designee.



   (D)   Required conditions.



      (1)   Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
frames, which frames shall be kept in sound and usable condition.



      (2)   Materials from a hive or colony which might encourage
the presence of honeybees, such as wax comb, shall be promptly disposed of in
a sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.



      (3)   For each colony permitted to be maintained under this
section, there may also be maintained upon the same apiary site, one nucleus
colony in a hive structure not to exceed one standard 9 5/8 inch depth
ten-frame hive body, with no supers.



      (4)   Beekeeping equipment shall be maintained in good
condition. Unused beekeeping equipment must be protected to prevent occupancy
by swarming honeybees.



      (5)   Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate
living space for their resident honeybees in order to control swarming.



      (6)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual
aggressive behavior, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly
implement appropriate actions to address the behavior.



      (7)   If requeening is required, queens shall be selected from
European stock bred for gentleness and non-swarming characteristics.



      (8)   Fruit trees and other flowering trees, which are located
on an apiary site, shall not be sprayed, while in full bloom, with any
substance which is injurious to honeybees.



   (E)   Compliance and inspection.



      (1)   Upon receipt of credible information that any colony or
hive located within the city is not being kept in compliance with this
section, the City Administrator shall cause an investigation to be conducted.
If the investigation shows that a violation may exist and will continue, the
City Administrator shall cause a written notice of hearing to be issued to
the owner. Notices shall be given by certified U.S. mail or personal
delivery. However, if the owner cannot be located, then notice may be given
by publication in the official newspaper, at least seven days before the
hearing. The notice shall set forth the following.



         (a)   The date, the time and the place that the hearing
will be held, which date shall be not more than 30 days from the date of the
notice.



         (b)   The violation alleged.



         (c)   That the owner may appear in person or through
counsel, present evidence, and cross examine witnesses.



         (d)   That if the City Council finds that the colonies
or hives have been kept in violation of this section, and if the violation is
not remediated within the time allowed, the colonies or hives may be ordered
removed and/or destroyed.



      (2)   No hearing and no order shall be required for the
destruction of honeybees not residing in a hive structure that is intended
for beekeeping.



      (3)   Upon prior notice to the owner of the apiary site, the
chief of police or his/her designee shall have the right to inspect any
apiary for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this section.



      (4)   It shall be deemed a violation of this section for any
person to resist, impede or hinder City Administrator or his/her designee in
the performance of their duties in inspecting any apiary and surrounding
grounds.



   (F)   Denial, revocation or suspension.



      (1)   Registrations issued under the provisions of this
section may be denied, revoked or suspended by the City Administrator after
notice and the right to request a hearing, for any of the following causes:



         (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements on
the registration or during the course of the registered activity.



         (b)   The keeping of honeybees in an unlawful manner or
a manner so as to constitute a breach of peace, or to constitute a nuisance
to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.



   (G)   Any violation of this section. Notice of the denial,
revocation or suspension, shall be in writing, specifically set forth the
grounds for denial, revocation or suspension and the person’s right to
request a hearing before the city manager or his/her designee. Such notice
shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the person to his/her last known
address, or shall be delivered in the same manner as a summons. Any person
who desires a hearing before the city manager or his/her designee must
request the hearing in writing, within seven days of the date of the notice,
by filing a written request for a hearing with the chief of police. If a
hearing is requested it shall be held before the City Administrator or
designee within 30 days of the request. The city shall notify the person in
writing of the time, date and location of the hearing at least five days
prior to the hearing. Within seven days after the hearing the City
Administrator or designee shall issue a written decision in the matter and
that decision shall be final. If the person fails to request a hearing within
seven days of the date of the notice, the denial, suspension, or revocation
shall automatically be deemed final. The right to request a hearing before
the City Administrator or his/her designee shall be in place of any right to
appeal.



(Ord. 202, passed 8-24-15)  Penalty, see § 92.99



CHICKENS



§ 92.30  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   It is recognized that the ability to cultivate one’s own food is a
sustainable activity that can also be a rewarding past time. Therefore, it is
the purpose and intent of this subchapter, subject to the conditions and
requirements of this subchapter, to permit the limited keeping and
maintenance of chicken hens for eggs and meet sources in a clean and sanitary
manner that is not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare of the community.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.31  KEEPING OF CHICKENS.



   The raising, harboring, maintaining and keeping of chickens in the City
of Mayer is prohibited except as provided by this subchapter and except as
may be allowed in the City of Mayer agricultural zoning districts.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.32  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   A license is required for any person seeking to keep chickens as
allowed by this subchapter.  An applicant must complete an application form
provided by the city.  Any amendment to an existing license shall constitute
a new application and fee.  The application shall include, but not limited
to the following information:



   (A)   Written, dated and signed consents from at least 75% of the
owners of all properties within 200 feet of the applicant’s property. 
Such consents may also be required upon any request for renewal of the
license.



   (B)   A scaled drawing (site plan) showing the location, size, and
dimensions of all structures (coops and the like) and containment areas for
the chickens including the distance of all structures and containment areas
from adjoining structures and neighboring property lines and city setback
requirements.



   (C)   The number of chickens to be kept on site.



   (D)   Detailed feces and waste removal plan.



   (E)   An agreement by the applicant that the premises may be
inspected by the city at all reasonable times to ensure compliance with all
applicable conditions.



   (F)   A statement that the applicant understands the conditions and
requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.33  DURATION OF LICENSE AND FEE.



   (A)   Each license issued under this subchapter shall expire on
December 31 in the year of issuance unless sooner revoked.  A license shall
be renewed annually to continue the limited keeping of chickens.



   (B)   The annual fee for a license shall be in such amount as set
forth in the City fee Ordinance, which shall be paid at the time of the
making of the application.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.34  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS.



   The animal control officer or city administrator’s designee may enter
and inspect any property or accessory building for the keeping of chickens at
any reasonable time for the purpose of investigating an actual or suspected
violation to ascertain compliance or noncompliance with this section.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.35  LICENSE SUBJECT TO TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS SUBCHAPTER,
PRIVATE RESTRICTIONS AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   A license is subject to all terms and conditions of this
subchapter and any additional conditions deemed necessary by the city to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare.  Private restrictions such
as covenants take precedence over the permit.  A permit issued to a person
whose premises are subject to covenants that prohibit the keeping of chickens
is subject to be voided.  The interpretation and enforcement of the private
restrictions is the sole responsibility of the private parties involved.



   (B)   The city may revoke a license for failure to comply with
provisions of this subchapter or any of the license’s conditions.  Prior
to revoking a license, the city shall provide the owner with notice of the
revocation and an opportunity to appeal the revocation to the city council.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.36  LIMITATIONS ON KEEPING OF CHICKENS.



   (A)   Intent and purpose.  It is the intent and purpose of this
section to set standards for the limited keeping of chickens in the City of
Mayer.



   (B)   Conditions.  The limited keeping of chickens may be permitted
as  one additional accessory use to a detached single-family  property
dwelling unit subject to the following:



      (1)   The owner of the chickens shall live in the dwelling on
the property and the property owner is in receipt of a license as required by
this subchapter.



      (2)   No more than five total hen chickens shall be kept on
the single-family dwelling unit property.



      (3)   No roosters or adult male chickens shall be kept on the
single-family dwelling unit property.



      (4)   All chickens shall be kept within a separate enclosed
building and/or fenced outdoor containment area subject to the following:



         (a)   The building shall be less than 120 square feet in
size and not exceed six feet in height.



         (b)   The building shall comply with all setbacks and
other standards for accessory buildings, unless otherwise stated herein.



         (c)   Any outdoor containment area, run or exercise yard
shall be screened from view from all neighboring properties and
rights-of-way.  Outdoor containment areas shall not exceed 20 square feet
per bird and shall be enclosed by a fence not to exceed six feet in height.



         (d)   Any building or containment area shall be located
in the rear yard only and shall be at least 50 feet from adjacent habitable
structures.



         (e)   Fencing used to contain chickens shall comply with
applicable conditions of the City Code, but in any event shall be sufficient
to contain the chickens from being able to leave the site.



         (f)   Chickens shall not be kept within the dwelling
unit or garage.



         (g)   The accessory building and/or containment area
shall be maintained in good repair, in a clean and sanitary manner, free of
vermin, and free of objectionable odors.



         (h)   Chickens shall remain in the building and/or
containment area at all times and shall not run at large.



         (i)   Chickens shall remain in the building from sunset
to sunrise each day to prevent nuisance noise and the attraction of vermin
and predators.



         (j)   Leg banding of all chickens is required.  The
bands must identify the owner’s name, address, and telephone number.



      (5)   The slaughter of chickens on site is prohibited.



      (6)   The raising of chickens for breeding purposes is
prohibited.



      (7)   The sale of eggs or other commercial activity on the
premises is prohibited.



      (8)   Feces and discarded feed shall be regularly collected
and only stored temporarily on site in a leak-proof container with a
tight-fitting cover to prevent nuisance odors and the attraction of vermin. 
Such waste shall not be composted on site.



      (9)   Chicken feed shall be stored in leak-proof containers
with a tight-fitting cover to prevent attracting vermin.



      (10)   Chicken fighting is prohibited.



      (11)   Dead chickens must be disposed of according to the
Minnesota Board of Animal Health Rules which require chicken carcasses to be
disposed of as soon as possible after death, usually within 48 to 72 hours. 
Legal forms of chicken carcass disposal include offsite burial, offsite
incineration or rendering, or offsite composting.



      (12)   The holder of a license who no longer intends to keep
chickens or whose license has expired shall notify the city and remove all
structures, fences and containment areas where chickens have been kept.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.37  VIOLATORS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person keeping chickens without a license issued under
this subchapter or continues to keep chickens after the license has expired
or been revoked shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  If a license is revoked
or a person is found guilty of a violation of this subchapter, no new license
may be issued for a minimum period of one year after such event.



   (B)   Any person violating any conditions of this subchapter shall
reimburse the city for all costs and expenses incurred by the city to enforce
the conditions of the license including but not limited to the pickup and
impounding of chickens.



(Ord. 191, passed 2-24-14)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Separate offenses.  Each day a violation of this chapter is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable under this section.



   (B)   Misdemeanor.  Unless otherwise provided, violation of this
chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99.



   (C)   Petty misdemeanor.  Violations of §§ 92.02, 92.07, 92.13
and 92.14 are petty misdemeanors punishable as provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 93:  NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   93.01   Assessable current services



   93.02   Tree diseases



   93.03   Open burning




Nuisances




   93.15   Public nuisance defined



   93.16   Public nuisances affecting health



   93.17   Public nuisances affecting morals and decency



   93.18   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety



   93.19   Duties of city officers



   93.20   Abatement



   93.21   Recovery of cost




Weeds




   93.35   Short title



   93.36   Jurisdiction



   93.37   Definitions; exclusions



   93.38   Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like



   93.39   Filing complaint



   93.40   Notice of violations



   93.41   Appeals



   93.42   Abatement by city



   93.43   Liability




Noise




   93.50   Definitions



   93.51   Noise prohibited



   93.52   Hourly restriction on certain operations



   93.53   (Reserved)



   93.54   Air circulation devices



   93.55   Exception for emergency work



   93.56   Noise Control Officer; powers and duties



   93.57   Variances



 



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned Vehicles, see Chapter 90



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Chapter 111



   Dogs and other animals creating nuisances, see § 92.07



   Excavation, see Ch. 153



   Peddlers and Solicitors, see Chapter 113



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 93.01  ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CURRENT SERVICE.  One or more of the following: snow, ice or
rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots
adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of
public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any
hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26, as they may
be amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines;
street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling or other dust
treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of
trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public
streets or private property; and the operation of a street lighting system.



   (B)   Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.



      (1)   Duty of owners and occupants.  The owner and the
occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to
keep the walk safe for pedestrians.  No owner or occupant shall allow snow,
ice, dirt or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its
deposit thereon.  Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a
violation.



      (2)   Removal by city.  The City Clerk or person designated
by the Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice,
dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any matter has
been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall. The City Clerk
or designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of the removal
adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.



   (C)   (1)   Weeds as a nuisance.  Any weeds, whether noxious, as
defined by law, or not, growing upon any lot or parcel of land outside the
traveled portion of any street or alley in the city to a greater height than
12 inches or which have gone or are about to go to seed are a nuisance.  The
owner and the occupant shall abate or prevent the nuisance on the property
and on land outside the traveled portion of the street or alley abutting on
the property.



      (2)   Notice.  On or before June 1 of each year and at other
times as ordered by resolution of the City Council, the City Clerk shall
publish once in the official newspaper a notice directing owners and
occupants of property within the city to destroy all weeds declared by
division (C)(1) of this section to be a nuisance and stating that if not so
destroyed within ten days after publication of the notice, the weeds will be
destroyed by city employees at the expense of the owner and that if not paid,
the charge for the work will be made a special assessment against the
property concerned.



      (3)   Removal by city.  If the owner or occupant of any
property in the city fails to comply with the notice within ten days after
its publication, city employees may cut and remove the weeds. The City Clerk
shall keep a record showing the cost of the work attributable to each
separate lot and parcel.



   (D)   Public health and safety hazards.  When the city removes or
eliminates public health or safety hazards from private property under city
ordinance, the administrative officer responsible for doing the work shall
keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against each parcel
of property affected and annually deliver the information to the City Clerk.



   (E)   Installation and repair of water service lines.  Whenever the
city installs or repairs water service lines serving private property, the
City Clerk shall keep a record of the total cost of the installation or
repair against the property.



   (F)   Repair of sidewalks and alleys.



      (1)   Duty of owner.  The owner of any property within the
city abutting a public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in
repair and safe for pedestrians.  Repairs shall be made in accordance with
the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the
office of the City Clerk.



      (2)   Inspections; notice.  The City Council or its designee
shall make inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks
and alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or
vehicles.  If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private
property is unsafe and in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a
notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service,
upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the
sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days and stating that if
the owner fails to do so, the city will do so. The expense thereof must be
paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special assessment against
the property concerned.



      (3)   Repair by city.  If the sidewalk or alley is not
repaired within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the City Clerk shall
report the facts to the City Council and the City Council shall by resolution
order the work done by contract in accordance with law. The City Clerk shall
keep a record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or
parcel of property.



   (G)   Personal liability.  The owner of property on which or
adjacent to which a current service has been performed shall be personally
liable for the cost of the service. As soon as the service has been completed
and the cost determined, the Clerk, or other designated official, shall
prepare a bill and mail it to the owner. The amount shall be immediately due
and payable at the office of the Clerk.



   (H)   Damage to public property.  Any person driving any vehicle,
equipment, object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure
shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may
sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the
vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating,
driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in
excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code.  When the
driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but
is so operating, driving or moving the same with the express or implied
permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly and
severally liable for any damage.  Any person who willfully acts or fails to
exercise due care and by that act damages any public property shall be liable
for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectable by action or as a
lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (I)   Assessment.  On or before September 1 of each year, the City
Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service
and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to which
they are attributable under this section.  The City Council may then spread
the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under M.S. §
429.01 and other pertinent statutes, as they may be amended from time to
time, for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with
current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding
ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Streets and Sidewalks, see Chapter 94



§ 93.02  TREE DISEASES.



   (A)   Declaration of policy.  The City Council determines that the
health of the elm and oak trees within the city is threatened by fatal
diseases known as Dutch Elm and Oak Wilt diseases, and other trees may be
threatened by other epidemic diseases of shade trees.  The City Council
further determines that the loss of elm, oak and other trees growing upon
public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of
property within the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare
and convenience of the public.  It is declared to be the intention of the
City Council to control and prevent the spread of those diseases and this
section is enacted for that purpose.



   (B)   Designated enforcement officer.  It shall be the duty of the
officer designated by the City Council to coordinate, under the direction and
control of the City Council, all activities of the city relating to the
control and prevention of Dutch Elm disease and Oak Wilt disease and other
epidemic diseases of shade trees.  The officer shall recommend to the City
Council the details of a program for the control of the diseases, and perform
the duties incident to a program adopted by the City Council.



   (C)   Trees constituting nuisance declared.  The following are
public nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:



      (1)   Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman)
Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus
(Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);



      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been
removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;



      (3)   Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected
to any degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;



      (4)   Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion
of the designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to
logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not
been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;
or



      (5)   Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.



   (D)   Inspection and investigation.  As often as practical, the
designated officer shall inspect all public and private premises within the
city which might harbor any plant pest, as defined in M.S. § 18.46 (13), as
it may be amended from time to time, to determine whether any condition
described in division (C) of this section exists thereon.  The designated
officer shall investigate all reported incidents of infestation of Dutch Elm
fungus, elm bark beetles, Oak Wilt fungus or any other epidemic disease of
shade trees.



   (E)   Entry on private premises.  The designated officer or his or
her duly authorized agents may enter upon private premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned under this
section.



   (F)   Abatement of nuisance.  It is unlawful for any person to
permit any public nuisance, as defined in division (C) of this section, to
remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the city.  The
nuisances may be abated in the manner prescribed by this section. In abating
a nuisance, defined in division (C) of this section, the designated officer
shall cause the infected tree or wood to be sprayed, removed, burned or
otherwise effectively treated so as to destroy and prevent as fully as
possible the spread of epidemic diseases such as Dutch Elm disease and Oak
Wilt disease. The designated officer shall also take other steps as are
necessary to prevent root graft transmission of the diseases. The abatement
procedures shall be carried out in accordance with current technical and
expert opinions and plans as may be designated by the Commissioner of
Agriculture.



   (G)   Procedure for removal of infected trees and wood.



      (1)   Action by the designated officer.  Whenever the
designated officer finds with reasonable certainty that the infestation,
defined in division (C), exists in any trees or wood in any public or private
place in the city, the designated officer shall in writing notify the owner
of the existence of a nuisance, which notice shall state that the owner has
60 days to abate the nuisance and avoid city action.  A copy of the notice
shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for the information of the City
Council.  If within the 60-day period the property owner has not abated the
nuisance, the designated officer shall report all the facts surrounding the
unabated nuisance to the City Council.



      (2)   Action by the City Council.



         (a)   Upon receipt of the designated officer’s report
required in division (G)(1) of this section, the City Council shall by
resolution order the nuisance abated.  Before action is taken on the
resolution, the City Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to
consider taking action to abate the nuisance.  This notice shall be mailed
to affected property owners and published once no less than one week prior to
the meeting.  The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the
streets affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement and
the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs.



         (b)   At the hearing or adjournment thereof, the City
Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and
desirability of the proposed project.



         (c)   The City Council shall thereafter adopt a
resolution confirming the original resolution with modifications as it
considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by
contract.



      (3)   Record.  The designated officer shall keep a record of
the costs of abatement done under this section and shall report monthly to
the City Clerk or other appropriate officer all work done for which
assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the
land, lots, parcels involved and the amount chargeable to each.



      (4)   Assessment.  On or before September 1 of each year, the
City Clerk shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against
each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this
section.  The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion
thereof against the property involved as a special assessment under M.S. §
429.101 and other pertinent statutes, as they may be amended from time to
time, for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following
year along with the current taxes.



   (H)   Interference prohibited.  It is unlawful for any person to
prevent, delay or interfere with the designated officer or his or her agents
while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this
section.  However, it is a defense to prosecution under this division that
the interference alleged consisted of constitutionally protected speech only.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.03  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   BURNING PERMIT.  A permit issued by the City Fire Marshal authorizing
fires exempted from the general provisions hereof, and setting conditions
therefore.



   CAMP FIRE.  A fire set for cooking, warming or ceremonial purposes,
which is not more than three feet in diameter by three feet high, and has had
the ground five feet from the base of the fire cleared of all combustible
material.



   OPEN FIRE or OPEN BURNING.  A fire burning in matter, whether
concentrated or dispersed, which is not contained within a fully enclosed
fire box, structure or vehicle, and from which the products of combustion are
emitted directly to the open atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct
or chimney.



   PERSON.  As defined in M.S. § 116.06(8), as it may be amended from
time to time.



   RECREATION FIRE.  See CAMP FIRE.



      (1)   RECREATION FIRE BURN.  When a camp fire is used for
recreation purposes, it must be ignited with an approved starter fluid using,
dry clean wood, producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the
property line, conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times,
extinguished completely before quitting the occasion, and respecting weather
conditions, neighbors, burning bans and air quality so the threat of nuisance
health or safety hazards will not be created.  Mobile cooking devices such
as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers and propane or
natural gas devices are not defined as camp or recreation fires.



      (2)   RECREATION FIRE SITE.  An area of no more than a
three-foot diameter circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or
border) completely surrounded by non-combustible and non- smoke or odor
producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or block of
ferrous metal only and which area is depressed below ground, on the ground or
on a raised block.  Included are permanent outdoor wood burning fire
places.  RECREATION FIRE SITES shall not be located closer than 15 feet to
any structure.  Burners are not a RECREATION FIRE SITE, as defined herein.



   STARTER FUELS.  Dry, untreated, unpainted wood or charcoal fire
starter.  Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and
as aids to ignition only.  Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning
devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open fire.



   WOOD.  Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto
logs,” charcoal, cordwood or untreated dimensional lumber.  WOOD does not
include wood that is green, with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, coil soaked
or treated with paint, glue or preservatives.  Clean pallets may be used for
recreation fires when cut into three foot lengths.



   (B)   Open burning prohibited.  From and after the effective date
of this section, except as herein otherwise provided, open burning shall be
prohibited within the city.



   (C)   Exemptions.  Open burning of the types, and subject to the
conditions, as hereinafter stated, shall be exempt from the prohibition of
division (B) above.



      (1)   Recreational fires;



      (2)   Fires under managed supervision for which a burning
permit has been obtained from the City Fire Marshal and, where required by
state law, from the Department of Natural Resources, but limited to the
following:



         (a)   Fires purposely set for the instruction and
training of public and industrial fire fighting personnel;



         (b)   Fires set for the elimination of a fire hazard
which cannot be abated by any other practicable means;



         (c)   Fires purposely set for forest and game management
purposes; and



         (d)   The burning of trees, brush, grass and other
vegetable matter in the clearing of land, the maintenance of street, road and
highway right-of-way, and in accepted agricultural land management practices.



      (3)   An exception to conduct fires under this section does
not excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may
result therefrom nor does it exempt any person from regulations promulgated
by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or any other governmental unit
exercising jurisdiction in matters of pollution or fire hazard regulation.



   (D)   Rules adopted by reference.  M.S. §§ 88.02 through 88.22,
88.75 and 88.76 and the Minnesota Uniform Fire Code, as they may be amended
from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
section as if fully set forth at this point.



(Ord. 84, passed 1-10-94; Am. Ord. 179, passed 5-14-12)  Penalty, see §
10.99



NUISANCES



§ 93.15  PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED.



   (A)   Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty
intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public
nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:



      (1)   Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably
annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of
any considerable number of members of the public;



      (2)   Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for
passage any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or



      (3)   Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law
or this subchapter to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is
specifically provided.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.S. § 609.74



§ 93.16  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:



   (A)   Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or
vegetable matter;



   (B)   All diseased animals running at large;



   (C)   All ponds or pools of stagnant water;



   (D)   Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours
after death;



   (E)   Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;



   (F)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or
fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to
emit foul and disagreeable odors;



   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;



   (H)   All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon
public or private property;



   (I)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in
unreasonable quantities;



   (J)   All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and



   (K)   Any offensive trade or business, as defined by statute, not
operating under local license.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.17  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.



   The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public
morals and decency:



   (A)   All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except
as otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;



   (B)   Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in the occupations;



   (C)   All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous
sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;



   (D)   All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or
disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are
permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where
intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of
law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining such a place; and



   (E)   Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of
intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other
immoral or illegal purpose.



Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Chapter 111



§ 93.18  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.



   The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and
safety:



   (A)   All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 12 hours
after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to
fall;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an
intersection;



   (C)   All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface
of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;



   (D)   All unnecessary noises and annoying vibrations;



   (E)   Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use
of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, except under conditions as
are permitted by this code or other applicable law;



   (F)   Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in
a dangerous manner;



   (G)   Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or
any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to
gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;



   (H)   All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over
streets and sidewalks, or so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not
constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;



   (I)   The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any
building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any
sidewalk;



   (J)   Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and
within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;



   (K)   All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so
situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;



   (L)   Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or
other public properties;



   (M)   The accumulation or storage in the open of partially
dismantled, deteriorated, wrecked, discarded, disused, inoperable or derelict
property of any kind, including, but not limited to, vehicles of any kind
including automobiles, trucks, buses, vans, campers, bicycles, watercraft of
any kind including boats, motors, pontoons, canoes, jet skis, machinery and
equipment, tools, household appliances, including stoves, refrigerators,
washing and drying machines, plumbing fixtures, household and office
furniture and fixtures, and all other material or articles in such condition
in a manner conducive of the harboring of rats, mice, snakes, rodents,
vermin, insects, or the rank growth of vegetation or odor among the items so
accumulated or stored, or in a manner conducive to or creating fire, health
or safety hazards from such accumulation or storage;



   (N)   Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered
or in other condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person
coming on the premises where it is located;



   (O)   Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or
a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;



   (P)   The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other
public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which
may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing
over the substance;



   (Q)   The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way
or adjacent private property; and



   (R)   All other conditions or things which are likely to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone.



(Am. Ord. 129, passed 8-14-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.19  DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.



   The City Engineer, Street Superintendent, Police Department or other
designated official shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter relating
to nuisances affecting public safety.  The Police Department shall enforce
provisions relating to other nuisances and shall assist the other designated
officers in the enforcement of provisions relating to nuisances affecting
public safety.  The officers shall have the power to inspect private
premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and
maintenance of public nuisances.



§ 93.20  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice.  Written notice of violation, notice of the time,
date, place and subject of any hearing before the City Council, notice of
City Council order, and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing
shall be given as set forth in this section.



      (1)   Notice of violation.  Written notice of violation shall
be served by the officer charged with enforcement on the owner of record or
occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered
mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or
the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice
of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.



      (2)   Notice of City Council hearing.  Written notice of any
City Council hearing to determine or abate nuisance shall be served on the
owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified
or registered mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is
unknown or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the
City Council hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by
posting it on the premises.



      (3)   Notice of City Council order.  Except for those cases
determined by the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any
city council order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and
Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.



      (4)   Notice of motion for summary enforcement.  Written
notice of any motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in
M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (B)   Procedure.  Whenever the officer charged with enforcement
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises
in the city, the officer shall notify in writing the owner of record or
occupant of the premises of the fact and order that the nuisance be
terminated or abated.  The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be
taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be
abated.  If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time
specified, the enforcing officer shall report that fact forthwith to the City
Council.  Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner or
occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition
identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if
the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council,
the city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council
order and notice of motion for summary enforcement.



   (C)   Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.



      (1)   In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement required
to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) of this section will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably
endanger public health safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary
enforcement and abate the nuisance.  To proceed with summary enforcement,
the officer charged with enforcement shall determine that a public nuisance
exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in
abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or
welfare. 



      (2)   The enforcement officer shall notify in writing the
occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the
city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the
City Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement.



      (3)   The City Council shall determine whether or not the
condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance,
whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by
delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division
(A) of this section, and may order that the nuisance be immediately
terminated or abated.



      (4)   If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated,
the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.



   (D)   Immediate abatement.  Nothing herein shall prevent the city,
without notice or process, from immediately abating any condition which poses
an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.21  RECOVERY OF COST.



   (A)   Personal liability.  The owner of premises on which a
nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost
to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the
work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Clerk or other
official designated by the City Council shall prepare a bill for the cost and
mail it to the owner.  Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and
payable at the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Assessment.  If the nuisance is a public health or safety
hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public
sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled
portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Clerk
shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance,
list the total unpaid charges along with all other such charges as well as
other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101, as
it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or parcel to
which the charges are attributable.  The City Council may then spread the
charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes
for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current
taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the
City Council may determine in each case.



Penalty, see § 10.99



WEEDS



§ 93.35  SHORT TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weed Subchapter.”



§ 93.36  JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The jurisdiction of this subchapter shall be the corporate
limits of the city, as presently defined, or as may be modified from time to
time by annexation or city ordinance.



   (B)   This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or
county ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.



§ 93.37  DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DESTRUCTION ORDER.  The notice served by the City Council or
designated city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the
ordinance violation.



      PROPERTY OWNER.  The person occupying the property, the holder
of legal title or a person having control over the property of another, such
as a right-of-way, easement, license or lease.



      WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION.



         (1)   Includes but is not limited to the following:



            (a)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall
include but not be limited to:  alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber,
Canada Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field
Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress,
Horsenettle, Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle,
Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife,
Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter
Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild
Parsnip;



            (b)   Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or
more and not pruned, sprayed, cultivated or otherwise maintained for two
consecutive years;



            (c)   Bushes of the species of tall, common or
European barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural
varieties;



            (d)   Any weeds, grass or plants, other than
trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, growing to a height
exceeding 12 inches; and



            (e)   Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled,
uncultivated growth of annuals and perennial plants.



         (2)   The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees,
cultivated plants or crops.



   (B)   In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants
which have been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being
noxious or detrimental plants.



§ 93.38  OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.



   All property owners within the corporate limits of the city shall be
required and be financially responsible for the removal, cutting or disposal
and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other uncontrolled
plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is in excess of
six inches in average height, and in no event, exceeds 15 inches maximum
height on at least 20% of the surface area of the property.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.39  FILING COMPLAINT.



   (A)   Any person, including the city, who believes there is property
located within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant
matter in violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed,
dated and filed with the City Clerk.



   (B)   If the city makes the complaint, an employee, officer or
Council member of the city shall file the complaint in all respects as set
out above.



§ 93.40  NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of
weeds in violation of this subchapter, a person designated by the City
Council shall make an inspection and prepare a written report to the City
Council regarding the condition.  The City Council, upon concluding that
there is a probable belief that this subchapter has been violated, shall
forward written notification in the form of a destruction order to the
property owner or the person occupying the property as that information is
contained within the records of the City Clerk or any other city agency.



      (2)   The notice shall be served in writing by certified
mail.  The notice shall provide that within seven regular business days
after the receipt of the notice that the designated violation shall be
removed by the property owner or person occupying the property.



   (B)   (1)   All notices are to be in writing and all filings are
to be with the City Clerk.



      (2)   Certified mailing to the City Clerk or others is deemed
filed on the date of posting to the United States Postal Service.



§ 93.41  APPEALS.



   (A)   The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of
objections with the City Council within 48 hours of the notice, excluding
weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City
Council.  It is the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that
the matter in question is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not
otherwise in violation of this subchapter, and should not be subject to
destruction under the subchapter.



   (B)   An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the
City Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council Members
in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the
City Council.



§ 93.42  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the
destruction order within seven regular business days and has not filed a
notice within 48 hours to the City Clerk of an intent to appeal, the City
Council may employ the services of city employees or outside contractors and
remove the weeds to conform to this subchapter by all lawful means.



§ 93.43  LIABILITY.



   (A)   The owner is liable for costs of removal, cutting or
destruction, as defined by this subchapter.



   (B)   (1)   The property owner is responsible for all collection
costs associated with weed destruction, including but not limited to court
costs, attorney’s fees and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the
city.



      (2)   If the city uses municipal employees, it shall set and
assign an appropriate per hour rate for employees, equipment, supplies and
chemicals which may be used.



   (C)   All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the
City Clerk and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses
and costs incurred by the city.



NOISE



§ 93.50  DEFINITIONS.



   Words and phrases defined in this section have, when used in this
subchapter, the meanings given below. Any word or phrases used in this
subchapter, and defined in regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency Noise Pollution Control Section, NPC-1 and NPC-4, has the meaning
given in those regulations.



   AIR CIRCULATION DEVICE. A mechanism designed and used for the
controlled flow of air used in ventilation, cooling, or conditioning,
including, but not limited to, central and window air conditioning units.



   L10. The sound level, expressed in decibels (dBA) which exceeded 10% of
the time for a one-hour period, as measured by a sound level meter having
characteristics as specified in the latest standards, S1.4, of the American
National Standards Institute and using test procedures approved by the Noise
Control Officer.



   L50. The sound level similarly expressed and measured which exceeded
50% of the time for a one- hour period.



   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee,
association, or any body of persons whether incorporated or not. With respect
to acts prohibited or required herein, PERSON shall include employees and
licensees.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05)



§ 93.51  NOISE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   General prohibition. No person shall make or cause to be made
any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety, peace, or welfare
of any persons or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their
property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific
restrictions of the following divisions.



   (B)   Motor vehicles.  No person shall operate a motor vehicle in
the city in violation of the motor vehicle noise limits of the Minnesota
Pollution Control Agency.



   (C)   Horns, audible signaling devices, and the like. No person
shall sound any signaling device on any vehicle except as a warning of danger
(M.S. § 169.68).



   (D)   Exhaust. No person shall discharge the exhaust, or permit the
discharge of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, or snowmobile except through a muffler or
other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and
complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.



   (E)   Defective vehicles or loads. No person shall use any vehicle
so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling, or other noise.



   (F)   Loading, unloading, unpacking. No person shall create loud and
excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.



   (G)   Radios, audio/media devices, paging system, and the like. No
person shall use, operate, or permit the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, audio/media device, paging system,
machine, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a
distinctly and loudly audible manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and
comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument,
audio/media device, machine, or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line
of the structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or
apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located
outside a structure, mobile home, or building shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.



   (H)   Participation in noisy parties or gatherings. No person shall
participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise,
disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. When a police
officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the
officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the
premises to leave the premises or shall make every reasonable effort to see
that the disturbance is stopped.



   (I)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising, and the like. No
person shall operate or permit the use or operation of any loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound on a
street or other public place for the purpose of commercial advertising or
attracting the attention of the public to any commercial establishment or
vehicle.



   (J)   Animals. No person shall keep any animal that disturbs the
comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity by its frequent or continued
noise.



   (K)   Schools, churches, and the like. No person shall create any
excessive noise on a street, alley, or public grounds adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church, nursing home, homes for the elderly, or
hospital when the noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the
institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when
conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such institution.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05; Am. Ord 197, passed 1-12-15)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.52  HOURLY RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN OPERATIONS.



   (A)   Recreational vehicles. No person shall, between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., drive or operate any minibike, or other recreational
vehicle not licensed for travel on public highways. Snowmobiles may use a
direct route to and from the city and are exempt from this division.



   (B)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall, between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,  operate a power lawn mower, power hedge
clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill, or other similar
domestic power maintenance equipment. Snow removal equipment and generators
used during a power outage are exempt from this section.



   (C)   Refuse hauling. No person shall, between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., collect or remove garbage or refuse in any residential
district.



   (D)   Construction activities. No person shall, between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,  engage in or permit construction activities
involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or gas-powered machine or
other power equipment.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05; Am. Ord 197, passed 1-12-15)  Penalty, see §
93.99



§ 93.53  (RESERVED).



§ 93.54  AIR CIRCULATION DEVICES.



   No person shall permanently install or place any air circulation
device, except a window air conditioning unit, in any outdoor location. The
noise produced by any window unit and by existing air circulation device
shall be attenuated by means deemed appropriate by the Noise Control Officer,
including, but not limited to, relocation of such device.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.55  EXCEPTION FOR EMERGENCY WORK.



   Noise created exclusively in the performance of emergency work to
preserve the public health, safety, or welfare, or in the performance of
emergency work necessary to restore a public service or eliminate a public
hazard shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter for a period
not to exceed 24 hours after the work is commenced. Persons responsible for
such work shall inform the Noise Control Officer of the need to initiate such
work or, if the work is commenced during non-business day thereafter. Any
person responsible for such emergency work shall take all responsible actions
to minimize the amount of noise.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05)



§ 93.56  NOISE CONTROL OFFICER; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Administering officer. The noise control program established
by this subchapter shall be administered by the Noise Control Officer, who
shall be appointed by the Mayer City Council.



   (B)   Testing procedures. The Noise Control Officer shall adopt
guidelines establishing the test procedures and instrumentation to be used in
enforcing the provisions of this subchapter. A copy of such guidelines shall
be kept on file in the office of the Noise Control Officer and shall be
available for the public reference during office hours.



   (C)   Studies, and the like. The Noise Control Officer shall conduct
such research, monitoring, and other studies related to sound as are
necessary or useful in enforcing this subchapter and reducing noise in the
city. He or she shall make such investigations and inspections in accordance
with law as required in applying ordinance requirements.



   (D)   Noise impact statements. The Noise Control Officer may require
any person applying to the city for a change in zoning classification or a
permit or license for any structure, operation, process, installation, or
alteration, or project that may be considered a potential noise source to
submit a noise impact statement on a form prescribed by the Officer. He or
she shall evaluate each such statement and make appropriate recommendations
to the Council or other agency or officer authorized to take the action or
approve the license or permit applied for.



   (E)   Other powers and duties. The Noise Control Officer shall
exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are reasonable
and necessary to enforce this subchapter.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05)



§ 93.57  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Authority. The Noise Control Officer shall have authority,
consistent with this section, to grant variances from the requirements of any
section of this subchapter.



   (B)   Application. Any person seeking a variance shall file an
application with the Noise Control Officer on a form prescribed by the
Officer. The application shall state the dates during which the variance is
proposed, the location of the noise source and time of operation, the nature
of the noise source, reasons why the variance is sought, steps taken to
minimize the noise level, and such other information as is required by the
Noise Control Officer. If the application is for a variance for more than
three days, the Noise Control Officer shall give mailed notice of the
requested variance to all property owners within 500 feet of the noise
source. Any person claiming to be adversely affected by the variance applied
for may, within 20 days of the mailing of the notice, file a statement with
the Noise Control Officer in support of his or her claim.



   (C)   Action on application. If the Noise Control Officer finds that
sufficient controversy exists regarding the proposed variance, he or she may
hold a public hearing on the proposal at which all persons affected shall be
given an opportunity to be heard. He or she shall hold such a hearing upon
request of the applicant or any person claiming to be adversely affected by
the variance applied for. Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the
Officer shall approve or deny the application. It may be approved only if the
Officer finds that full compliance with the requirements of this subchapter
would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on other persons,
or on the community. In determining whether to grant or deny the application,
the Officer shall balance the hardship to the applicant against the adverse
impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the persons affected, the
adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse effects of
granting variance. The variance may be granted subject to conditions,
including a time limit, which shall be clearly stated.



   (D)   Appeals. Either the applicant or any party aggrieved may,
within 20 days of the decision on the variance application, appeal to the
City Council for a review of the decision. The appeal shall be filed in
writing with the City Administrator. The appeal shall be heard as soon as
practicable and within 20 days of the filing of the appeal, and the applicant
and any person who filed a statement on the application for a variance with
the Noise Control Officer shall be given at least ten days’ mailed notice
of the time when and place where the appeal will be considered by the
Council. The Council may affirm, modify, or overrule the action of the Noise
Control Officer on the basis of the criteria set out in division (C) above.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Notice of certain violations. When the Noise Control Officer
determines that a noise exceeds the maximum sound level permitted under §§
93.50 through 93.57, he or she shall give a written notice of the violation
to the owner or occupant of the premises where the noise originates and order
such person to correct or remove each specified violation with such a
reasonable time as is prescribed in the notice. The failure to remove or
correct any such violation within the time so prescribed constitutes a
violation of §§ 93.50 through 93.57.



   (B)   Civil remedies. Sections 93.50 through 93.57 may be enforced
by injunction, action for abatement, or other appropriate civil remedy.



   (C)   Criminal penalties.



      (1)   Any violation of §§ 93.50 through 93.57 involving the
operation of a motor vehicle is a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction, the
violator shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200, plus the costs of
prosecution.



      (2)   Every person who violates any other provision of §§
93.50 through 93.57 is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not more than $700 or imprisonment for a term of not to
exceed 90 days, or both, plus, in either case, the costs of prosecution.



      (3)   Each act of violation and each day a violation occurs or
continues constitutes a separate offense.



(Ord. 116, passed 4-25-05)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   94.01   Clearing and cleaning sidewalks




Right-Of-Way Construction Regulations




   94.20   Election to manage the public right-of-way



   94.21   Definitions and adoption of rules by reference



   94.22   Permit requirement



   94.23   Permit applications



   94.24   Issuance of permit; conditions



   94.25   Permit fees



   94.26   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   94.27   Supplementary applications



   94.28   Denial of permit



   94.29   Installation requirements



   94.30   Inspection



   94.31   Work done without a permit



   94.32   Supplementary notification



   94.33   Revocation of permits



   94.34   Mapping data; information required



   94.35   Location of facilities



   94.36   Damage to other facilities



   94.37   Right-of-way vacation



   94.38   Indemnification and liability



   94.39   Abandoned facilities; removal of abandoned facilities



   94.40   Appeal



   94.41   Reservation of regulatory and police powers



Cross-reference:



   Assessable current services, see § 93.01



   Street Department, see § 33.60



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  CLEARING AND CLEANING SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Clearing of sidewalks.  The owner and the occupant or other
person in control of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use
diligence to keep the walks safe for pedestrians and clear of all snow, ice,
dirt and rubbish.  No person shall allow snow, ice, dirt or rubbish to
remain on the sidewalk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon or
after the snow has ceased to fall.



('82 Code, § 4.211)



   (B)   Cleaning by city.  Whenever any sidewalk has not been cleared
as required by this section, the Street Commissioner may give written notice
to the owner, occupant or other person in control of the property demanding
that the sidewalk be cleaned within 24 hours or a lesser time as the
Commissioner may determine is necessary for protection of the public health
and safety.  No notice shall be required respecting the clearing of snow
from a sidewalk.  If the sidewalk is not cleared within the time required,
the Street Commissioner may have the sidewalk cleared and the owner of the
property shall be responsible for all costs and expenses of clearing the
sidewalk.  If the owner fails to make payment within ten days of billing,
the cost shall be taxed against the property provided by law.



('82 Code, § 4.212)



   (C)   Liability to city.  The owner and the occupant or other
person in control of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall
indemnify the city for any liability, including the cost of defending against
any claim, incurred by the city by reason of improper maintenance of the
sidewalk or by reason of failure to keep the sidewalk clear of snow, ice,
dirt or rubbish.



('82 Code, § 4.213)  Penalty, see § 10.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS



§ 94.20  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   In accordance with the authority granted to the city under state and
federal statutory, administrative and common law, the city hereby elects
pursuant to this chapter to manage rights-of-ways within its jurisdiction.



§ 94.21  DEFINITIONS AND ADOPTION OF RULES BY REFERENCE.



   Minn. Rules Ch. 7819, as it may be amended from time to time is hereby
adopted by reference and are incorporated into this code as if set out in
full. The definitions included in Minn. Rules part 7819.0100 Subps. 1 through
23, as it may be amended from time to time are the definitions of the terms
used in the following provisions of this subchapter.



§ 94.22  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required.  Except as otherwise provided in this code,
no person may obstruct or excavate any right-of-way without first having
obtained the appropriate permit from the city.



      (1)   Excavation permit.  An excavation permit is required to
excavate that part of the right-of- way described in the permit and to hinder
free and open passage over the specified portion of the right-of-way by
placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration
specified therein.



      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required to
hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of right-of-way by
placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to the extent and
for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is not required if
a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the same project.



   (B)   Permit extensions.  No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless the
person makes a supplementary application for another right-of- way permit
before the expiration of the initial permit, and a new permit or permit
extension is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty.  In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000
Subp. 3, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding division
(B) of this section, the city shall establish and impose a delay penalty for
unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or
restoration.  The delay penalty shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.



   (D)   Permit display.  Permits issued under this subchapter shall
be conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the
indicated work site and shall be available for inspection by the Clerk.



   (E)   Exceptions to requirement for obstructions or excavation
permits.



      (1)   Decorative landscaping items not exceeding two and
one-half feet in height including, but not limited to, such items as grass,
groundcover, flowers, or shrubs may be allowed in the right-of-way without a
permit. However, such objects or plantings may not encroach into actual
roadway, trailway or sidewalk area. No permanently anchored structures of any
kind shall be allowed within any part of the right-of-way. The City of Mayer
has the right to remove any item or object that is within the right-of- way
at any time for any reason.



      (2)   In appropriate circumstances a property owner may
request a variance from the above stated decorative landscaping limitations.
The request shall be in writing and directed to the City Administrator. The
request shall specifically set forth in detail the proposed variations from
the decorative landscaping limitations. The City Administrator may approve or
deny the proposed variance or approve the variance with and subject to
restrictions, including time limits.



(Am. Ord. 141, passed 11-26-07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.23  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   Application for a permit shall contain, and will be considered complete
only upon compliance with the requirements of the following provisions:



   (A)   Submission of a completed permit application form, including
all required attachments, scaled drawings showing the location and area of
the proposed project and the location of all known existing and proposed
facilities, and the following information:



      (1)   Each permittee’s name, gopher one-call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers.



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative.  The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times.  Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration.



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, or a form of self insurance acceptable to the Clerk.



         (b)    Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees and permittees, and placement and
use of facilities and equipment in the right-of-way by the registrant, its
officers, agents, employees and permittees, including but not limited to
protection against liability arising from completed operations, damage of
underground facilities and collapse of property;



         (c)   Naming the city as an additional insured as to
whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for whom
defense will be provided as to all coverages;



         (d)   Requiring that the Clerk be notified 30 days in
advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a coverage
term;



         (e)    Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, workers compensation and umbrella coverage
established by the Clerk in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this chapter.



      (4)   The city may require a copy of the actual insurance
policies.



      (5)   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate required to be filed under M.S. § 300.06, as it may be amended
from time to time as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State.



      (6)   A copy of the person’s order granting a certificate of
authority from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission or other applicable
state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully required to have the
certificate from the Commission or other state or federal agency.



   (B)   Payment of money due the city for:



      (1)   Permit fees as established by resolution of the City
Council, estimated restoration costs and other management costs;



      (2)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



      (3)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered by the
city because of the applicant's prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; or



      (4)   Franchise fees or other charges as established by
resolution of the City Council, if applicable.



§ 94.24  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance.  If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter, the Clerk shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions.  The Clerk may impose reasonable conditions upon
the issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use.



§ 94.25  PERMIT FEES.



   Permit fees shall be in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council.



   (A)   Excavation permit fee.  The city shall establish an
excavation permit fee as established by resolution of the City Council, in an
amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs; and



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (B)   Obstruction Permit Fee. The city shall establish the
obstruction permit fee as established by resolution of the City Council, and
shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs.



   (C)   Payment of permit fees.  No excavation permit or obstruction
permit shall be issued without payment of excavation or obstruction permit
fees.  The city may allow applicant to pay those fees within 30 days of
billing.



   (D)   Non-refundable.  Permit fees as established by resolution of
the City Council, that were paid for a permit that the Clerk has revoked for
a breach as stated in § 94.40 are not refundable.



   (E)   Application to franchises.  Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



   (F)   All permit fees shall be established consistent with the
provisions of Minn. Rules part 7819.100, as it may be amended from time to
time.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing.  The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
94.34.



   (B)   Patch and restoration.  The permittee shall patch its own
work.  The city may choose either to have the city restore the right-of-way
or to restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration.  If the city restores the
right-of-way, the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of
billing.  If following the restoration, the pavement settles due to the
permittee's improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within
30 days of billing, all costs associated with having to correct the defective
work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration.  If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions
of Minn. Rules part 7819.3000, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Standards.  The permittee shall perform patching and
restoration according to the standards and with the materials specified by
the city and shall comply with Minn. Rule part 7819.1100, as it may be
amended from time to time.  The Clerk shall have the authority to prescribe
the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures
of general application or on a case-by-case basis.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching, or restoration performed by the permittee or its agents.  The
permittee upon notification from the Clerk, shall correct all restoration
work to the extent necessary, using the method required by the Clerk. The
work shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the
notice from the Clerk, not including days during which work cannot be done
because of circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is
prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under § 94.34.



   (E)   Failure to restore.  If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the Clerk, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
Clerk, the Clerk at his or her option may do the work.  In that event the
permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of
restoring the right-of-way.  If the permittee fails to pay as required, the
city may exercise its rights under the construction performance bond.



   (F)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration.  In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee as established by resolution of the City Council.  However, the right-
of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and the degradation fee
shall not include the cost to accomplish these responsibilities.



§ 94.27  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit.  No permittee may do
any work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein.
Any permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in
the permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that
greater area make application for a permit extension and pay any additional
fees required thereby, and be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates.  A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit.  No permittee may begin its work before
the permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after
the end date.  If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end
date, it must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and
receive the new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after
the end date of the previous permit.  This supplementary application must be
submitted before the permit end date.



§ 94.28  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The city  may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this chapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use.



§ 94.29  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The excavation, backfilling, patching and restoration, and all other
work performed in the right-of- way shall be done in conformance with Minn.
Rules part 7819.1100, as it may be amended from time to time and other
applicable local requirements, in so far as they are not inconsistent with
M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163 as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 94.30  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion.  When the work under any permit
hereunder is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate
in accordance Minn. Rule part 7819.1300, as it may be amended from time to
time.



   (B)   Site inspection.  The permittee shall make the work-site
available to city personnel and to all others as authorized by law for
inspection at all reasonable times during the execution of and upon
completion of the work.



   (C)   Authority of Clerk.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Clerk may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Clerk may issue an order to the permittee for any
work which does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or codes.  The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit.  Within
ten days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to
the Clerk that the violation has been corrected.  If proof has not been
presented within the required time, the Clerk may revoke the permit pursuant
to § 94.40.



§ 94.31  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each person with facilities in the right-of-way shall
immediately notify the city of any event regarding its facilities which it
considers to be an emergency.  The owner of the facilities may proceed to
take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.  Within two
business days after the occurrence of the emergency, the owner shall apply
for the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
chapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   If the city  becomes aware of an emergency regarding
facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local representative of each
facility owner affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency.  In any
event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary to respond to the
emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the person whose facilities
occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations.  Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit, and as a penalty
pay double the normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees
required by this code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct
any damage to the right-of-way and comply with all of the requirements of
this chapter.



§ 94.32  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, the permittee shall notify the
Clerk of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



§ 94.33  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach.  The city reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit, without a fee refund if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit.  A substantial
breach by the permittee shall include, but shall not be limited, to the
following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner;
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittees control; or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
94.37.



   (B)   Written notice of breach.  If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation or any condition of the permit the city
shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy that violation. 
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit.  A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city,
at its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, the permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city, that will cure the breach.  The permittee's failure
to so contact the city, or the permittee's failure to submit an acceptable
plan, or the permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit.



   (D)   Reimbursement of city costs.  If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city's reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with the revocation.



§ 94.34  MAPPING DATA; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   Each permittee shall provide mapping information required by the city
in accordance with Minn. Rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100, as it may be
amended from time to time.



§ 94.35  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Placement, location, and relocation of facilities must comply
with applicable laws, and with Minn. Rules parts 7819.3100, 7819.5000 and
7819.5100, as they may be amended from time to time, to the extent the rules
do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.



   (B)   Corridors.  The city may assign specific corridors within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current tech- nology, the city
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way.  All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation
or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue.



   (C)   Limitation of space. To protect the health, safety, and
welfare or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use,
the Clerk shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or
additional facilities within the right-of-way.  In making those decisions,
the Clerk shall strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and
potential users of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by
considerations of the public interest, the public's needs for the particular
utility service, the condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with
respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the
right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development
projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.



§ 94.36  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it necessary to
maintain, support, or move facilities to protect it, the Clerk shall notify
the local representative as early as is reasonably possible and placed as
required.  The costs associated therewith will be billed to that registrant
and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.  Each facility
owner shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the
right-of-way which it or its facilities damages.  Each facility owner shall
be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the facilities of
another registrant caused during the city's response to an emergency
occasioned by that owner’s facilities.



§ 94.37  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way which contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are
governed by Minn. Rules part 7819.3200, as it may be amended from time to
time.



§ 94.38  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By applying for and accepting a permit under this chapter, a permittee
agrees to defend and indemnify the city in accordance with the provisions of
Minn. Rule 7819.1250, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 94.39  ABANDONED FACILITIES; REMOVAL OF ABANDONED FACILITIES.



   Any person who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way shall
remove them from that right-of- way if required in conjunction with other
right-of-way repair, excavation, or construction, unless this requirement is
waived by the Clerk.



§ 94.40 APPEAL.



   A right-of-way user that has been denied registration; has been denied
a permit; has had permit revoked; or believes that the fees imposed are
invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon
written request, by the City Council.  The City Council shall act on a
timely written request at its next regularly scheduled meeting.  A decision
by the City Council affirming the denial, revocation, or fee as imposition
will be writing and supported by written findings establishing the
reasonableness of the decision.



§ 94.41  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittees or registrants rights are subject to the regulatory and
police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.



CHAPTER 95:  PUBLIC PARKS



Section



   95.01   Application



   95.02   Definition



   95.03   Park rules and prohibited acts



   95.04   Additional rules and regulations



 



   95.99   Penalty



§ 95.01  APPLICATION.



   This chapter applies to all persons who enter, use and occupy City of
Mayer owned park property. The use of such parks shall be subject to and all
such persons shall conform to and abide by the rules and regulations set
forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 147, passed 8-11-08)



§ 95.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PUBLIC PARK.  Any park, park area, historic site, playground, garden
or other area owned or used by the city for recreational and/or public
gatherings in connection therewith.



(Ord. 147, passed 8-11-08)



§ 95.03  PARK RULES AND PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   Glass.



      (1)   The use or possession of glass bottles, glass containers
or any other form of glass beverage containers are prohibited.



      (2)   No person shall distribute or possess with intent to
distribute a beverage bottle in a public park. However, the following may be
permitted: any person with an infant in the person’s care or custody
carrying a bottle containing liquid prepared for consumption by the infant.



   (B)   Recreational motor vehicles. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle, which includes, but is not limited to, snowmobiles, trail bikes, or
other all terrain vehicles, or motor vehicles licensed for off-road
recreational purposes in a public park. This provision does not apply to
recreational motor vehicles operated by enforcement or emergency personnel
acting in the performance of their duties or snowmobiles, trail bikes or
other all terrain vehicles that are operating on an approved trail.



   (C)   Removing, defacing or destroying property. No person shall
remove, deface, destroy, diminish, or impair the value of public property
located on or within any public park or public grounds, including buildings,
structures, trees, shrubs, grass, vegetation, signs, tables, benches,
fireplaces, trash receptacles, notices, or placards, boundary markers or
fences, or any other public property either real or personal.



   (D)   Refuse and trash. No person shall dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage, refuse, trash or snow in a park except in proper receptacles
provided for that purpose. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park, nor left anywhere on the grounds
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are
provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.



   (E)   Disturbances. No person or groups of persons shall conduct
themselves in any way that shall disturb or adversely affect any other
person’s peaceful use or enjoyment of the public park.



   (F)   Firearms and explosives. No person shall discharge firearms,
air rifles, B.B. guns, sling shots, explosives or fireworks in or about any
public park in the City of Mayer. Exceptions may be allowed for special
events by obtaining prior permission from the City Council.



   (G)   Camping. No overnight camping is permitted in any park except
in special designated areas.



   (H)   Concessions. No person shall engage in or solicit business of
any nature whatsoever within a public park or recreation area without proper
city permits or licenses.



   (I)   Alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume any alcoholic
beverage in a public park, on a public street or in or on other public
property unless the consumption and display of the beverage being consumed is
lawfully permitted on the public property, pursuant to applicable provisions.



   (J)   Pets. All pets must be kept on a leash and confined to the
designated pet exercise areas. The owner or person responsible for any animal
which leaves droppings on the premises shall be responsible to remove the
droppings immediately.



   (K)   Maintenance of vehicles. No person shall wash or perform
maintenance or repairs on any vehicle in a public park or public grounds.
This provision does not apply to City of Mayer employees washing or
performing maintenance or repairs on city owned vehicles or equipment.



   (L)   Posting signs and placards. No person shall paste, glue, tack,
erect, construct or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or
inscription, on any public park or public grounds, except by written
permission of the City Council.



   (M)   Traffic and parking. Vehicles shall be driven or parked only
in designated areas in any park or public grounds and shall be driven therein
at a maximum speed of five miles per hour. Parking in designated areas shall
be allowed only by vehicles whose owners and/or occupants are currently using
the public park or grounds. City vehicles, police, and fire are authorized to
drive vehicles in parks as part of their normal duties.



   (N)   Overnight parking or occupancy. Overnight parking or occupancy
within any public park or public grounds is prohibited.



   (O)   Fires. Fires are permitted only in fireplaces or fire rings
provided in designated areas and shall be fully extinguished when unattended.



   (P)   Golf. Golfing is prohibited in all public parks and public
grounds.



(Ord. 147, passed 8-11-08)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Upon direction of the City Council, additional rules and regulations
may be posted at individual parks as deemed appropriate. Any violation of
such posted rules shall be considered a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 147, passed 8-11-08)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 147, passed 8-11-08)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   GENERAL LICENSING REGULATIONS



      111.   INTOXICATING AND 3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR



      112.   AMUSEMENTS AND GAMBLING



      113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



      114.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL LICENSING REGULATIONS



Section



   110.01   Applicability



   110.02   Application procedure



   110.03   Bond and insurance required



   110.04   Fees



   110.05   Issuance



   110.06   Conditions and terms



   110.07   Termination, suspension or revocation



Cross-reference:



   Firearms; dangerous weapons, see § 130.01



§ 110.01  APPLICABILITY.



   All licenses and permits required by this title shall be governed by
the provisions hereinafter set forth unless otherwise provided by law or in
this code.  As used in §§ 110.02 through 110.06, “license” shall
include both a license and a permit, and “licensee” shall  include both
a licensee and a permittee.



('82 Code, § 7.111)



§ 110.02  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   Every application shall be made to the City Clerk, on a form provided
by the Clerk. It shall be accompanied by payment for the prescribed fee. 
The fee shall be refunded if the license is not approved. The applicant shall
provide any information as may be required on the application or form. No
person shall make a false statement in or concerning any application.



('82 Code, § 7.112)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 110.03  BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The bond shall be a corporate surety bond and shall be filed
with the Clerk before the license is issued. Except where otherwise provided,
a bond shall be in the amount of at least $3,000, on the condition that the
license will comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations
pertaining to the licensed activity and that the licensee will indemnify the
city and save it harmless from all loss or damage by reason of any act or
omission of the licensee or his or her agents or employees.



('82 Code, § 7.113)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



   (B)   When a licensee is required to have in force a policy of
insurance, the coverage shall be for the term of the license and the policy
shall provide that it is noncancellable without a notice of ten days to the
city.  Satisfactory evidence of coverage by insurance shall be filed with
the Clerk before the license is issued.



('82 Code, § 7.114)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 110.04  FEES.



   (A)   Unless a fee is specified, the Council shall, by resolution,
establish the fee to be charged for any license.  The fee shall be paid
prior to issuance of the license.



('82 Code, § 7.115)



   (B)   Unless otherwise specified by law or by this code, if a
portion of the license year has elapsed when an annual license is granted,
the fee shall be one-twelfth of the annual fee for each month or fraction of
a month remaining in the license year.  No license fee shall be prorated
during the time which a licensee was required to have a license, but failed
to apply for one.



('82 Code, § 7.116)



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE.



   If the license does not require Council approval, the Clerk shall issue
the license upon being satisfied that all requirements of law and of this
code have been met. If the Clerk is not so satisfied, or if Council approval
is required, the Clerk shall present the application to the Council for
action. The Clerk shall thereupon issue the license if approval is granted.



('82 Code, § 7.117)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 110.06  CONDITIONS AND TERMS.



   (A)   Copies.  Whenever a licensee is required to post copies of a
license at a place other than where the original license is posted, the Clerk
shall issue a sufficient number of copies for such purposes, marking each
copy with the word “COPY” on its face.



('82 Code, § 7.118)



   (B)   Duplicates.  The Clerk shall issue a duplicate license upon
the licensee submitting satisfactory proof that the license has been lost,
stolen or destroyed. The Clerk shall mark any duplicate with the word
“DUPLICATE” on its face. The Clerk shall charge a fee in an amount
established resolution of the City Council for a duplicate.



('82 Code, § 7.119)



   (C)   Refunds.  After issuance, license fees shall not be refunded
in whole or in part unless otherwise required by law or by this code.



('82 Code, § 7.120)



   (D)   Duration.  A license shall be valid for one year or the part
of the year for which it is issued and shall expire on the last day of
February annually.



('82 Code, § 7.121)



   (E)   Renewals.  Applications for renewal of licenses may be made
on or after January 1 annually for the next succeeding license year.



('82 Code, § 7.122)



   (F)   Transfers.  No license may be transferred to any other
person. When a license relates to specific premises, the license shall not be
transferred to another location without approval of the issuing authority.
When a license relates to specific vehicles or devices, it may be transferred
to a replacement vehicle or device upon filing with the Clerk a statement of
the reasons for the transfer, a description of the vehicle or device to which
the license is transferred and the disposition of the vehicle or device from
which the license is to be transferred.



('82 Code, § 7.123)



   (G)   Inspection.



      (1)   A licensee shall permit, at any reasonable hour, any law
enforcement officer, health officer or any other duly designated officer or
employee of the city engaged in the performance of official duties with
respect to the licensed activity to inspect the licensed premises and to
examine the books and records of the activity to which the license relates.



      (2)   A valid search warrant shall be obtained before
conducting the inspection or examination if the licensee objects to the
inspection or examination.  Refusal to permit the inspection or examination
is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.



('82 Code, § 7.124)



   (H)   Compliance with legal requirements.  Every licensee shall
comply with all laws, regulations and provisions of this chapter applicable
to the licensed activity.



('82 Code, § 7.125)



   (I)   Display of license.



      (1)   The licensee shall display the license in a conspicuous
place on the premises, in the vehicle or on or near the device to which the
license relates. If a license relates to multiple devices at a single
premises, the license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
premises. If the license authorizes the licensee to engage in a particular
line of employment, the license shall be carried on the licensee’s person
when the licensee is carrying on the licensed activity, unless the licensee
carries on the activity from a single place of business in the city, in which
case it may be displayed at a place of business. In all other cases, the
license shall be displayed at the licensee's place of business within the
city or other place in the city as the Clerk may designate upon the license.



      (2)   In addition, if a license relates to multiple premises,
the licensee shall obtain from the Clerk and display a copy of the license in
a conspicuous place on each premises to which the license relates.



('82 Code, § 7.126)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 110.07  TERMINATION, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Automatic termination.  Each license shall automatically
terminate upon termination of any required insurance coverage or bond.



('82 Code, § 7.127)



   (B)   Suspension or revocation.  The Council may suspend, for a
period not exceeding 60 days, or revoke any license for violation of any
provision, law or regulation applicable to the licensed activity. Except when
suspension or revocation may be made without hearing, the licensee shall be
granted a hearing.  The notice of hearing shall state the time and place of
the hearing, the action proposed and the reasons for the proposed action.
When a licensee holds more than one license, violation of any provision, law
or regulation respecting any license shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of all other licenses of the same kind issued to the licensee or
premises.



('82 Code, § 7.128)



CHAPTER 111:  INTOXICATING AND 3.2 PERCENT MALT LIQUOR



Section



   111.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   111.02   City may be more restrictive than state law



   111.03   Definitions



   111.04   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited



   111.05   Consumption in public places



   111.06   Outdoor areas, patios and decks



   111.07   Raffles, silent auctions and fundraising events for
charitable purposes of wine, beer or intoxicating liquors



   111.08   Number of licenses which may be issued



   111.09   Term and expiration of licenses



   111.10   Kinds of liquor licenses



   111.11   License fees; pro rata



   111.12   Council discretion to grant or deny a license



   111.13   Application for license



   111.14   Financial responsibility; liability insurance required



   111.15   Description of premises



   111.16   Applications for renewal



   111.17   Transfer of license



   111.18   Investigation



   111.19   Hearing and issuance



   111.20   Restrictions on issuance



   111.21   Conditions of license



   111.22   Hours and days of sale



   111.23   Minors on premises



   111.24   Restrictions on purchase and consumption



   111.25   Suspension and revocation



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and
all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby
adopted by reference and are made a part of this chapter as if set out in
full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to
M.S. Ch. 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had
been in existence at the time this chapter is adopted.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.02  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 340A.509, as it
may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this chapter,
additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages
within its limits beyond those contained in M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.03  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 340A.101, as it may
be amended from time to time, for the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:



   LIQUOR.  As used in this chapter, without modification by the words an
“intoxicating” or a “3.2 percent malt” includes both intoxicating
liquor and 3.2 percent mall liquor.



   PREMISES OR LICENSED PREMISES.  The compact and contiguous space
specified in the license.



   OUTDOOR AREA.  Any area that is not bounded by the walls, doorways,
and closeable windows covering 100% of the combined surface area of the
vertical planes constituting the perimeter of the area. A wall does not
include any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier,
whether temporary or permanent.



   RESTAURANT.  Establishment, other than a hotel, under the control of a
single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the
premises and served at tables to the general public and having a minimum
seating capacity of 30 guests. A RESTAURANT must have a license from the
Minnesota Commissioner of Health or the Minnesota Commissioner of Agriculture.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11; Am. Ord. 177, passed 4-23-12)



§ 111.04  NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that
nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any
establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the
owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and
the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and
combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to
prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely
to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including
prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds
that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed
under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing
community standards of the city.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person
or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her
buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent
material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when
the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals
covered with a non-transparent material.



   (C)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as
provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any
liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or any other license issued
under this chapter or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions
of § 111.99(B).



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent
malt liquor in a public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or
alley, or in any public place other than on the premises of an establishment
licensed under this chapter, in a municipal liquor dispensary if one exists
in the city, or where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully
permitted.



   (B)   No on-sale or off-sale license shall be effective or valid
beyond the licensed premises. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or
consumed outside of the licensed premises as described in the application for
a license and as approved by the city.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.06  OUTDOOR AREAS, PATIOS AND DECKS.



   Consumption of alcohol in outdoor areas, patios or decks adjacent to
the licensed premises (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the “outdoor
area”) is allowed under this section but subject to the following
conditions.



   (A)   The applicant for a liquor license or for renewal of a license
shall include in the application a request that the license allow the
consumption of alcohol in an outdoor area or on a patio or deck in compliance
with this section. Alcohol shall not be sold or served in the outdoor area
unless a special event permit has been obtained as provided in subsection (N).



   (B)   The outdoor area shall be immediately adjacent to the building
or structure comprising the remainder of the licensed premises and shall be
no closer than ten feet from any adjacent residential property.



   (C)   The application shall contain the street address and a scaled
drawing or diagram of the location of the premises to be licensed including
the outdoor area, patio or deck and describing the proposed fencing and
lighting as required herein.



   (D)   A fence permit as provided by § 152.093 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Mayer is required.



   (E)   (1)   Any exterior stairway or ramp access to an outdoor
area must be gated so as to require all persons using the outdoor area to
enter and exit such area through the building or structure comprising the
remainder of the licensed premises.



      (2)   However, if the configuration of the licensed premises
is such that the fenced outdoor area constitutes the main entrance used by
customers for access to the building or structure, the Council, upon written
request by the licensee, may allow access to the main building through the
outdoor area under such conditions as the Council may determine appropriate.



   (F)   If any portion of the outdoor area lies within 200 feet of a
residential district, the outdoor area shall be screened in a manner approved
by the City Council so as to prevent viewing of the outdoor area from the
residential district and to dampen noise and/or deflect noise away from the
residential district.



   (G)   Exterior lighting for the outdoor area shall promote public
safety and be designed and installed so that the globe is recessed and
enclosed on all sides except the bottom and no light is cast directly at any
other property.



   (H)   The outdoor area and surrounding landscaping shall be designed
to complement the building or Mructure comprising the remainder of the
licensed premises structure.



   (I)   The outdoor area shall comply with all applicable laws, zoning
district regulations and building codes, including but not limited to those
relating to handicap accessibility.



   (J)   The licensee’s dram shop liability carrier shall have
acknowledged, in writing, that the outdoor area is covered by dram shop
insurance.



   (K)   The outdoor area shall meet all such other requirements as the
City Council finds necessary or desirable to protect nearby properties and
the public.



   (L)   Additional requirements applicable to licensed outdoor areas:



      (1)   An employee must be assigned to supervise the outdoor
area at all times if alcohol is allowed to be sold or served in the outdoor
area pursuant to a special events permit as provided by subsection (N);



      (2)   Any activity that would disturb the peace of the
surrounding area is prohibited in or on the outdoor area, patio or deck. This
includes the prohibition against the use of any device designed to produce,
reproduce or amplify sound, including, but not limited to loud speakers,
amplifiers, microphones, radios, televisions or musical instruments; and



      (3)   The licensee or his employees shall:



         (a)   Remove any person from the outdoor premises thai
becomes unruly or noisy;



         (b)   Maintain at least one waste receptacle in the
outdoor area;



         (c)   Maintain at least one fire safe cigarette disposal
receptacle in the outdoor area;



         (d)   Pick up trash and litter generated by the
operation of the outdoor area within a reasonable distance from the outdoor
area; and



         (e)   Provide and maintain a fire extinguisher in the
outdoor area.



   (M)   The licensee may allow smoking on or in the outdoor area,
patio or deck, provided that such smoking is in full compliance with the
Minnesota Freedom to Breath Act of 2007.



   (N)   Special events. The City Council may waive any of the
conditions imposed under this section for special events upon written request
submitted by the licensee at least 15 days prior to the special event as may
be deemed appropriate and reasonable by the City Council. A special events
permit shall be obtained from and provided by the city for such event.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.07  RAFFLES, SILENT AUCTIONS AND FUNDRAISING EVENTS FOR CHARITABLE
PURPOSES OF WINE, BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS.



   No person shall conduct a silent auction, raffle of other fundraising
event pursuant to M.S. § 340A.707 with prizes or awards of wine, beer or
intoxicating liquors without notifying the City Clerk of the event al least
ten days prior to the occurrence of the event. The event holder shall provide
the city with the following information: the person or organization holding
the event, the day, time and location of the event, type of fund raising
event (silent auction, raffle or otherwise), type and amount of wine, beer,
intoxicating liquor to be awarded as prizes, and the charitable purposes to
which the event proceeds will be donated.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.



   State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a city may
issue. However, the number of licenses which may be granted under this
chapter is limited to the number of license which were issued as of the
effective date of this chapter, even if a larger number of licenses are
authorized by law or election. The Council in its sound discretion may
provide by ordinance that a larger number of licenses may be issued up to the
number of licenses authorized by M.S. Ch. § 340A, as it may be amended from
time to time. If a larger number of licenses in a particular category has
been authorized by a referendum held under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.413, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, but not all of
them have been issued, the larger number of licenses is no longer in effect
until the Council by ordinance determines that any or all of the licenses may
be issued. The Council is not required to issue the full number of licenses
that it has available.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.09  TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All
licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on the last day of February
of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall
expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms.
Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety,
and the accompanying city consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of
each year.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.10  KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.



   The Council is authorized to issue the following licenses and permits,
up to the number specified in § 111.08.



   (A)   3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued
only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and
establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with
the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.



   (B)   3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license.



   (C)   Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may be issued
only to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.



   (D)   Off sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued
only to exclusive liquor stores or drug stores that have an off sale license
which was first issued on or before May 1, 1994. The fee for an off sale
intoxicating liquor license established by the Council under § 111.11 shall
not exceed $240 or a greater amount which may be permitted by M.S. §
340A.408, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to
the following establishments as defined by M.S. § 340A.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, and this chapter: hotels, restaurants, bowling
centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations,
theaters and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with
the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses
established by the Council under § 111.11 shall not exceed the amounts
provided for in M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to
time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale
licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a
community festival held within the city under the provisions of M.S. §
340A.404, subd. 4b, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may
in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense
intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet,
conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports,
convention, or cultural facility owned by the city, under the provisions of
M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 4a, as it may be amended from time to time. The
licensee shall not dispense intoxicating liquor to any person attending or
participating in a youth amateur athletic event, for persons 18 years of age
or younger, held on the premises.



   (F)   Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, only after
authorization to do so by voter approval at a general or special election as
provided by M.S. § 340A.504, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to
time. Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a
restaurant as defined in § 111.03, club, bowling center, or hotel which has
a seating capacity of at least 30 persons, which holds an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license, and which serves liquor only in conjunction with
the service of food. The maximum fee for this license, which shall be
established by the Council under the provisions of § 111.11 of this chapter,
shall not exceed $200, or the maximum amount provided by M.S. § 340A.504,
subd. 3c, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (G)   Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses if
the city has a population less than 10,000.



   (H)   Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in
connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or
other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three years. No
license shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the city shall
issue no more than 12 days worth of temporary licenses to any one
organization in one calendar year.



   (I)   On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner
of Public Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating
at least 25 guests at one time and meet the criteria of M.S. § 340A.404,
subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to lime, and which meet the
definition of restaurant in § 111.03; to licensed bed and breakfast
facilities which meet the criteria in M.S. § 340A.404, subd. 5, as it may be
amended from time to time and to theaters that meet the criteria of M.S. §
340A.404, subd. 1(b), as it may be amended from time to time. The fee for an
on-sale wine license established by the Council under the provisions of §
111.11, shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale
intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also
holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt
liquor with a content over 3.2 percent (strong beer) without an additional
license.



   (J)   One day consumption and display permits with the approval of
the Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction
with a social activity in the city sponsored by the organization.



   (K)   Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit
by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional
fee which may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a
consumption and display permit under the provisions of § 111.11 shall not
exceed $300, or the maximum amount permitted by M.S. § 340A.414, subd. 6, as
it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall
expire on March 31 of each year.



   (L)   Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a
business establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking
classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation
required. The license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant
in each class, at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of
six ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as
part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises only.



   (M)   Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the
Commission of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an
auction. A license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of only
vintage wine of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for
sale by any wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale
of wine for not more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600
cases of wine are sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms,
including license fee, imposed by § 111.11.



   (N)   Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2 percent
malt liquor licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety,
may be issued to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of
manufacture and who meet the criteria established at M.S. § 340A.301 subd.
6(d) and 7(b), as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this
license at on-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub
licensed under this section possesses a license for off-sale under division
(O) of this section, the brew pub’s total combined retail sales at on-sale
or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales
may not total more than 500 barrels.



   (O)   Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the
approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that
is a licensee under division (N) of this section or that produces fewer than
3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria
established at M.S. § 340A.301 subd. 6(d) and 7(b), as it may be amended
from time to time. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal
hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the city. Malt liquor sold
off-sale must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale
closing time at exclusive liquor stores. All malt liquor sold under this
license shall be packaged in the manner required by M.S. § 340A.301 subd. 7,
as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license may not
exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer licensed under this section
possesses a license under division (N) of this section, the brewer’s total
retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year,
provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.



   (P)   Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be
issued, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers
who manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the
on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the
municipality sponsored by the brewer.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.11  LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.



   (A)   No license or other fee established by the city shall exceed
any limit established by M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, for a liquor license.



   (B)   The Council may establish from time to time in the Ordinance
Establishing Fees and Charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is
authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the
license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor
laws and this chapter. No liquor license fee shall be increased without
providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected
licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.



   (C)   The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted
after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a per diem
basis based on a 365 day license year.



   (D)   All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the
application is filed with the city. If the application is denied, the license
fee shall be returned to the applicant.



   (E)   A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may
occur only if authorized by M.S. § 340A.408, subd. 5, as it may be amended
from time to time.



   (F)   Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction
in their annual license fee by the amount specified in M.S. § 340A.408 if at
the time of initial application or renewal they:



      (1)   Agree to have a private vendor approved by the city
train all employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws
pertaining to the sale of alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and
the responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;



      (2)   Post a policy requiring identification checks for all
persons appearing to be 30 years old or less;



      (3)   Establish a written cash award and incentive program to
award employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to
punish employees in the event of a failed compliance check; and



      (4)   Failure to abide by the provisions of this paragraph may
result in suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction
are met and may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license
pursuant to § 111.25.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.12  COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.



   The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the
application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No
applicant has a right to a license under this chapter.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.13  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Form. Every application for a license issued under this chapter shall
be on a form provided by the city. Every application shall state the name of
the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s
character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license
applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will
operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the
applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has
been in that business at that place, and other information as the Council may
require from time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor
license shall be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety
and shall also contain the information required in this section. The form
shall be verified and filed with the city. No person shall make a false
statement in an application.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.14  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY; LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No retail license may be issued, maintained or renewed unless
the applicant demonstrates proof of financial responsibility with regard to
liability imposed by M.S. § 340A.801. The Clerk must submit to the
Commissioner the applicant’s proof of financial responsibility. The minimum
requirement for proof of financial responsibility may be given by filing:



      (1)   A certificate that there is in effect for the license
period an insurance policy issued by an insurer required to be licensed under
M.S. § 60A.07, subd. 4, or by an insurer recognized as an eligible surplus
lines carrier pursuant to M.S. § 60A.206 or pool providing at least $100,000
of coverage because of bodily injury to any one person in any one occurrence,
$200,000 because of bodily injury to two or more persons in any one
occurrence, $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of property of others
in any one occurrence, $100,000 for loss of means of support of any one
person in any one occurrence, and $200,000 for loss of means of support of
two or more persons in any one occurrence;



      (2)   A bond of a surety company with minimum coverages as
provided in division (A)(1) of this section; or



      (3)   A certificate of the commissioner of management and
budget that the licensee has deposited with the commissioner of management
and budget $100,000 in cash or securities which may legally be purchased by
savings banks or for trust funds having a market value of $100,000.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit an insurer from providing the
coverage required by this section in combination with other insurance
coverage.



   (C)   An annual aggregate policy limit for dram shop insurance of
not less than $300,000 per policy year may be included in the policy
provisions.



   (D)   A liability insurance policy required by this section must
provide that it may not be canceled for:



      (1)   Any cause, except for nonpayment of premium, by either
the insured or the insurer unless the canceling party has first given 30
days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent to cancel the
policy; and



      (2)   Nonpayment of premium unless the canceling party has
first given ten days’ notice in writing to the issuing authority of intent
to cancel the policy.



   (E)   In the event of a policy cancellation, the insurer will send
notice to the insuring authority at the same time that a cancellation request
is received from or a notice is sent to the insured.



   (F)   All insurance policies which provide coverage with regard lo
any liability imposed by M.S. § 340A.801 must contain at least the minimum
coverage required by this section.



   (G)   No licensee shall commence business until the offered security
has been approved by the council nor continue in business after the security
is no longer in force. The council may disapprove any bond, insurance policy
or other security upon finding that it does not meet the requirements of this
code or other law, or that the security or insurance may become unable to pay
any claim which may arise.



   (H)   Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial
responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S. § 340A.409, as it
may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required
to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with the city at all
times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation
of the license.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.15  DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.



   The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous
premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed. The description
may not include any parking lot or sidewalk.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.16  APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.



   At least 90 days before a license issued under this chapter is to be
renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the city. The
decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion
of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.17  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred without the
approval of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is
deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior
Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to
transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new
license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for
a license shall apply.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.18  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an
initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a
license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public
interest to do so, un an application for renewal of a license, the city shall
conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant
or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the
investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation
fee of $500 which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the
preliminary investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be
returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall
be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicaling liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



   (B)   Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the
results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of
the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the
Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the
Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee
for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by
the applicant shall be $500, less any amount paid for the initial
investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and
$10,000, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the
investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee
shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied.
The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually
expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the
application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall
be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an
on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.19  HEARING AND ISSUANCE.



   The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and
not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial
investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or
against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the
Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No
license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been
approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.20  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the
premises described in the application.



   (B)   Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly
issued within the city to any one person or for any one place.



   (C)   No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any
premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or
other financial claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid



   (D)   No license shall be issued for any place or any business
ineligible for a license under state law.



   (E)   No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident
of the state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders
shall be residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall
not apply to any license existing on the effective date of this chapter or to
the renewal of an existing license.



   (F)   No license shall be granted within 250 feet of any school or
church. The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church to
the closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to
be sold.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



§ 111.21  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the
license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the
condition is met.



   (A)   At least one representative of each licensee must attend all
mandatory license training seminars conducted by the Carver County Sheriffs
Department or the Minnesota Alcohol and Gambling Board. The representative
need not be the same person each time, but must hold a position of
responsibility in either the ownership or management of the licensee.



   (B)   Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of
business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any
employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well,
and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this chapter
and the law equally with the employee.



   (C)   Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer,
city employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct
compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of
the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time
when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.



   (D)   No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public
during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.



   (E)   Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of slate
law and of this chapter is a continuing condition of any license.



   (F)   Failure by on off-sale intoxicating liquor license who has
received a fee reduction pursuant to § 111.11(F) to abide with the
provisions of § 111.11(F).



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.22  HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.



   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by
M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the
City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive
hours than state law allows.



   (B)   No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit
any consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an
on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can
legally occur.



   (C)   No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other
container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain
upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more
than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.



   (D)   No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall
remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time
when a sale can legally occur.



   (E)   Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds
for revocation or suspension of the license.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.23  MINORS ON PREMISES.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any
rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent
malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of
18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person,
host or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel
or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating
liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.



   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed
establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a
restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the
premises where liquor is not sold.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.24  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public
place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from
the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of M.S. § 340A.414,
as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the
Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.25  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60
days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed
to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this
chapter relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial
responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the
licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended
from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or
it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.



   (B)   The following are the minimum periods of suspension or
revocation which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the
provisions of this chapter or M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time
to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended
from time to time:



      (1)   For commission of a felony related to the licensed
activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension,
sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent malt
liquor, or violation of § 111.04, the license shall be revoked.



      (2)   The license shall be suspended by the Council after a
finding under division (A) of this section that the licensee has failed to
comply with any applicable statute, rule, or provision of this chapter for at
least the minimum periods as follows.



         (a)   For the first violation within any three-year
period, at least one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil
penalties which may be imposed.



         (b)   For a second violation within any three-year
period, at least three consecutive days suspension in addition to any
criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.



         (c)   For the third violation within any three-year
period, at least seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any
criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.



         (d)   For a fourth violation within any three-year
period, the license shall be revoked.



      (3)   The Council shall select the day or days during which
the license will be suspended.



   (C)   Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall
effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this chapter
or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or
lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to
the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a
license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of
suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a
request is made in writing to the Clerk, a hearing before the Council shall
be granted within ten days. Any suspension under division (B) of this section
shall continue until the Council determines that the financial responsibility
requirements of stale law and this chapter have again been met.



   (D)   The provisions of § 111.99 pertaining to administrative
penalty may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or
revocation under this chapter.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or M.S.
Ch. 340A as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated
under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.



   (B)   The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for
each violation of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and
of this chapter. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required
in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the
Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended
from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the
Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed
penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty
is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the
minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in
addition to any suspension unless the license is revoked:



      (1)   For the first violation within any three-year period,
$500;



      (2)   For the second violation within any three-year period, $
1,000; and



      (3)   For the third and subsequent violations within any
three-year period, $2,000.



   (C)   The term “violation” as used in § 111.25 includes any and
all violations of the provisions in this section, or of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it
may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter
as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be
determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding
three-year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a
violation for which revocation is imposed.



(Ord. 172, passed 7-25-11)



CHAPTER 112:  AMUSEMENTS AND GAMBLING



Section




Amusements




   112.01   Amusement machines




Gambling




   112.10   Purpose



   112.11   Adoption of Minnesota Statues pertaining to lawful gambling



   112.12   Restrictions on gambling sites



   112.13   Restrictions on location of lawful gambling



   112.14   Organizations qualified for lawful gambling licenses



   112.15   Requirements for expenditure of profits



AMUSEMENTS



§ 112.01  AMUSEMENT MACHINES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AMUSEMENT MACHINE.  Any machine or device intended for use by
the public as a source of amusement, recreation or musical selection, and
which requires for its operation, the payment of a fee by the user which is
inserted directly into the device or machine.  Cigarette, candy, gum, soft
drink and similar vending machines, however, are not to be considered as
AMUSEMENT MACHINES within the meaning of this section.



      OPERATOR.  The person who keeps or allows amusement machines to
be kept on premises owned by him or her or under his or her control.



      OWNER.  Any person(s) who owns and places amusement machines by
whatever arrangement on the operator's premises.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any
amusement machine, as herein defined, to allow any amusement machine to be
maintained or operated within the corporate limits of the city unless the
owner or operator has first obtained a license thereof, as hereinafter
provided.



   (C)   Any person or persons desiring to maintain or operate an
amusement machine within the corporate limits of the city shall make
application for a license therefor, as herein provided, to the City Clerk and
shall pay therefor the sum of $40 per year for each amusement machine. After
referring the license application to the City Council for approval, the City
Clerk shall issue the license, which license shall run for one year at a
time. The sum to be established by resolution of the City Council per
amusement machine shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time of the
application. In the event that the application shall be refused by the City
Council, the fee or fees paid by the applicant shall be refunded to him or
her.



(Ord. 63, passed 11-14-83)  (Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)  Penalty, see §
10.99



GAMBLING



§ 112.10  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Council recognizes that, although lawful gambling as
authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22 may not appeal to all members
of society, it is an activity that is engaged in by a significant portion of
the population and the financial profits therefrom may or may not be used for
the benefit of society without the enforcement provisions of the Minnesota
Statutes.



   (B)   The City Council further recognizes that fraternal, religious,
veterans and other nonprofit organizations provide a much needed and useful
service to mankind and the City Council is especially appreciative of the
goals and objectives of such organizations established within the City of
Mayer. The Council commends these organizations for their contributions to
worthy causes within and without the City of Mayer, and, accordingly, the
Council supports the purposes for which M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.22 were
adopted.



   (C)   The ability to obtain a license under M.S. §§ 349.11 through
349.22 to conduct lawful gambling within the City of Mayer is a privilege
granted by the State of Minnesota and the City of Mayer and not a right
guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States of America or the State
of Minnesota. Accordingly, in addition to the purposes for which M.S. §§
349.11 through 349.22 were adopted, the purpose of this subchapter is to
ensure that licenses to conduct lawful gambling within the City of Mayer are
issued only to organizations who can be expected to expend the profits from
such gambling for lawful purposes within the City of Mayer or to benefit
residents of the city and its immediate surrounding area.



(Ord. 104, passed 3-18-02)



§ 112.11  ADOPTION OF MINNESOTA STATUTES PERTAINING TO LAWFUL GAMBLING.



   Minnesota Statutes §§ 349.11 through 349.22 are hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this subchapter as completely as if the statutes
were fully set forth herein.



(Ord. 104, passed 3-18-02)



§ 112.12  RESTRICTIONS ON GAMBLING SITES.



   No more than one licensed organization may conduct lawful gambling on
any premises at which there is a gambling site at any one time. All leases
pertaining to lawful gambling shall state the days of the week and times
during which a licensee may conduct lawful gambling on the premises. This
prohibition shall, however, not apply to the conducting of raffles.



(Ord. 104, passed 3-18-02)



§ 112.13  RESTRICTIONS ON LOCATION OF LAWFUL GAMBLING.



   Lawful gambling consisting of the use of paddlewheels, tipboards and
pull-tabs may only be conducted by a licensed organization on premises owned
by such organization or on premises leased by such organization and which
premises has a valid “on-sale” liquor license issued by the City of Mayer
pursuant to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mayer, or at the Mayer
Community Center upon request by the licensed organization which request
shall be subject to approval by the City Council on a case-by-case basis.



(Ord. 104, passed 3-18-02)



§ 112.14  ORGANIZATIONS QUALIFIED FOR LAWFUL GAMBLING LICENSES.



   Approval of applications for lawful gambling licenses pursuant to M.S.
§§ 349.11 through 349.22 shall be granted by the City of Mayer only to
organizations qualified under the Minnesota Statutes and in which 50% or more
of the active members of such organization reside within the City of Mayer
and which such organization meets regularly at least once per month and at
least 90% of such regularly scheduled meetings are conducted within the City
of Mayer.



(Ord. 104, passed 3-18-02)



§ 112.15  REQUIREMENT FOR EXPENDITURE OF PROFITS.



   (A)   Ten percent of net profits. A licensed organization must
contribute from its net profits, as defined in M.S. § 349.213, derived from
lawful gambling activities conducted within the city, 10% per year thereof to
a fund hereby established, administered and regulated by the city, without
cost to such fund, for disbursement by the city for all lawful purposes.



   (B)   Fifty percent of gross profits. In addition to the
contribution required by division (A) above,  a licensed organization must
expend not less than 50% per year of its gross profits derived from lawful
gambling activities conducted within the city on lawful purposes conducted or
located within the City of Mayer trade area. The City of Mayer’s trade area
is defined as the City of Mayer, Camden Township, Hollywood Township,
Watertown Township and Waconia Township.



(Ord. 104, passed 3-18-02)



CHAPTER 113:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   113.01   Definitions



   113.02   Permit required; exceptions



   113.03   Application procedure



   113.04   Investigation and issuance; expiration



   113.05   Form and published notice



   113.06   Permits to be carried and exhibited



   113.07   Permit fees



   113.08   Prohibited practices



   113.09   Use of public and private property



   113.10   Revocation of permit; re-application



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Chapter 93



§ 113.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NUISANCE.  Any person or thing which:



      (1)   Annoys, injures or endangers the health, safety, comfort
or repose of the public;



      (2)   Offends public decency;



      (3)   Interferes with the use of or obstructs, or tends to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage a lake, stream, navigable river or
public water, park, square, sidewalk, street, alley or highway;



      (4)   Depreciates the value of the property of the inhabitants
of the city; or



      (5)   In any manner, renders the inhabitants of the city
insecure in life or in use of property.



   PEDDLER.  Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who goes
from house to house, from place to place or from street to street, conveying
or transporting goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books,
periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever, or offering or
showing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to
purchasers.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  Includes any person, firm or corporation, whether
as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or
not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods,
wares and merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal
property of any nature whatsoever, within the city, and who, in furtherance
of the purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure,
motor vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel or motel room,
lodging house, apartment, shop or any street, alley, vacant lot or other
place within the city for exhibition and sale of goods, wares and merchandise
either privately or at public auction.



   SOLICITORS.



      (1)   Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares
or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property
of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for service to be performed
in the future, including orders for the performance of maintenance or repair
service on home or places of business, whether or not the individual has,
carries or shows a sample of the subject of the order or whether or not he or
she is collecting advance payments on the orders.



      (2)   The definition includes any person, firm or corporation,
that hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle,
trailer, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel or motel room, lodging house,
apartment, shop, street, alley, vacant lot or other place within the city for
the purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for organization,
society, association or corporation, who solicits in its name money,
donations of money or property or financial assistance of any kind or sells
or distributes any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is
charged, or solicited from persons other than members of the organization,
upon the streets, in office or business buildings, by house to house canvass,
or in public places for a charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic
purpose.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93)



§ 113.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient
merchant to engage in any business or solicitation activities within the city
without first obtaining a permit therefore in compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.



   (B)   This chapter does not apply to the following:



      (1)   Sales of goods, merchandise or service to business,
commercial or industrial users at their usual place of business;



      (2)   Deliveries of previously sold goods or services in the
regular course of business or deliveries or sales made as a part of the
regular established route to preexisting customers;



      (3)   Vendors who make an uninvited call upon the occupant of
a residence as a preliminary step to the establishment of regular route
services for the sale and delivery of commodities and services to regular
customers such as vendors of milk, groceries and other perishable
commodities, soft water services, laundry and dry cleaning pick-up and
delivery and newspapers;



      (4)   Any sale under court order;



      (5)   Any bona fide auction sale by a city resident;



      (6)   Sidewalk sales authorized by the City Council;



      (7)   Garage sales or rummage sales when conducted by a
non-profit organization, or when conducted upon the premises of the owner of
the articles being offered for sale, provided that the sales do not last
longer than 72 hours, and provided that no more than three sales be conducted
on any given location within one year;



      (8)   Sale of goods and/or admissions by local school students
to a school function or by local bona fide civic or non-profit organizations
for entertainment functions sponsored by the organizations; and



      (9)   Sales or services provided by persons who are licensed
by the State of Minnesota or the United States and who are exempt by law from
the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 148, passed 9-22-08)



§ 113.03  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   Applicants for a permit under this chapter shall file with the City
Clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city
which will give the following information:



   (A)   The name and permanent home and business address of the
applicant and all persons to be associated with the applicant in the business
or activity;



   (B)   A brief description of the nature of the business or the
purpose or cause for which the permit is sought;



   (C)   If the permit is sought to be issued in the name of an
organization or other business entity, the names and addresses of the
principal officers and directors of the main office and the address and phone
number of the main office or headquarters of the organization conducting or
sponsoring the activity and the names and addresses of the persons directly
supervising and responsible for the business, solicitation or activity to be
conducted;



   (D)   In the case of the transient merchants, the place where the
business is the be carried on, the length of time for which the permit is
sought and a description of the goods or merchandise to be sold;



   (E)   A list of the last three municipalities, if any, where the
applicant carried on a business or activity similar to the one for which the
permit is sought;



   (F)   The names and addresses of at least three references who will
substantiate the applicants moral character and business responsibility or
other evidence of the character and responsibility of the applicant; and



   (G)   Applicant’s Minnesota sales tax permit number, if applicable.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 113.04  INVESTIGATION AND ISSUANCE; EXPIRATION.



   (A)   (1)   Upon receipt of a completed application, the City
Clerk, or other person as may be designated by the City Council, shall
institute an investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character
as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public good. The
investigation may include referral to and a report made by the city police or
County Sheriff’s Office.



      (2)   Upon completion of such investigation and report as
determined appropriate, the City Clerk or City Administrator may approve the
application and issue the permit. If the application is not approved, the
applicant shall be notified of such disapproval and the reasons therefor, and
that no permit will be issued and that the applicant may appeal the decision
to the City Council and that any such appeal will be placed on the agenda of
the next regular Council meeting following receipt of the appeal.



      (3)   An appeal must be in writing and the applicant or its
representative must appear in person at the Council meeting.



   (B)   All annual permits issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall expire at midnight on December 31, in the year when issued. 
Non-annual licenses shall expire at midnight on the date specified on the
license.



   (C)   All permits shall be nontransferable.  No refund shall be
made or unused portions of fees.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99; Am. Ord. 166, passed
6-28-10)



§ 113.05  FORM AND PUBLISHED NOTICE.



   The form of the permit to be issued and the notice to be published in
the newspaper shall be as determined appropriate by the City Clerk.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



§ 113.06  PERMITS TO BE CARRIED AND EXHIBITED.



   Permits shall be carried by the permittee or conspicuously posted in
its place of business and the permit shall be exhibited to any officer or
citizen upon request. In the case where more than one individual shall be
involved in the activity or solicitation, the applicant shall make sufficient
copies of the permit to be made available to each peddler or solicitor acting
on behalf of the group, organization or legal entity.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93)



§ 113.07  PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   The fee for any permit required to be issued under this
chapter shall be established annually by ordinance as part of the City Fee
Schedule. Until the next fee schedule is adopted, the fee for a permit under
this chapter shall be $100. The fee shall be payable at the time of the
filing of the application.



   (B)   No fee shall be required from any bona fide charitable,
religious, civic, educational or political organization, provided the
proceeds of any sale or solicitation are being used for the legitimate
purposes of the organization.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 148, passed 9-22-08)



§ 113.08  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any peddler,
solicitor or transient merchant to:



   (A)   Engage in solicitation for any unlawful business or
organizational purpose or activity;



   (B)   Engage in harassment, intimidation, deception, exert pressure,
threaten or any other unlawful practice during the course of solicitation or
sale;



   (C)   Refuse to leave the premises when requested by the owner,
lessee, person in charge thereof, or the person being solicited;



   (D)   Call attention to the business or activity by crying out,
blowing a horn, ringing a bell or any loud or unusual noise;



   (E)   Display merchandise or make sales or solicitations directly
from vehicles or trailers on city streets or alleys; or



   (F)   Engage in business after the hour of 8:00 p.m. or before 8:00
a.m., unless a previous appointment has been made for a different time.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.09  USE OF PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No permittee shall have any exclusive right to any location in
the public streets or alleys, nor shall any be permitted a stationary
location thereon, nor shall be permitted to operate in a congested area where
the operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of the streets or
alleys. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgement of a police officer,
exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.



   (B)   No peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall sell or
offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise or personal property of any
nature whatsoever within the city from a stationary location on public or
private property without first obtaining the written consent of the property
owner or authorized occupant.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93)



§ 113.10  REVOCATION OF PERMIT; RE-APPLICATION.



   (A)   (1)   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter
may be revoked by the Council of the city after notice and hearing for any of
the following causes:



         (a)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement
contained in the application for the permit;



         (b)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement in
the course of carrying on the business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler,
transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor;



         (c)   Any violation of this chapter;



         (d)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor; or



         (e)   Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser,
solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as the
case may be, in an unlawful manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach
of peace or to constitute a menace to health, safety or general welfare of
the public.



      (2)   Notice of the hearing of revocation of a permit shall be
given by the City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
complaint and the time and place of hearing. The notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the permittee at his or her last known address or address
set forth on his or her application at least seven days prior to the date set
for hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as
a summons at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.



   (B)   No permittee whose permit has been revoked shall reapply until
at least six months have elapsed since the last previous revocation.



(Ord. 81, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. 94, passed 12-13-99)



CHAPTER 114:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES




In General




   114.01   Purpose; findings



   114.02   Definitions



   114.03   Classification



   114.04   Defenses



   114.05   Injunction




License




   114.15   Application



   114.16   Issuance



   114.17   Fees; investigation fees



   114.18   Posting



   114.19   Inspection



   114.20   Expiration



   114.21   Suspension



   114.22   Revocation



   114.23   Appeal



   114.24   Transfer




Additional Regulations




   114.35   Escort agencies



   114.36   Nude model studios



   114.37   Sexually oriented theaters; sexually oriented motion
picture theaters



   114.38   Sexually oriented motels



   114.39   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos



   114.40   Location of sexually oriented businesses



   114.99   Penalty



IN GENERAL



§ 114.01  PURPOSE; FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, to guard against the inception
and transmission of disease, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor
effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials, Similarly, it
is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market.



   (B)   Findings. The City Council further finds that experience from
other cities demonstrates that sexually oriented use businesses conducted in
private by members of the same or the opposite sex, and employing personnel
with no specialized training, are susceptible to operation in a manner
contravening, subverting or endangering the health, safety and welfare of
members of the community by being the sites of acts of prostitution, illicit
sex, and occasions of violent crimes, thus requiring close inspection,
licensing, and regulation.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)



§ 114.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES. Includes adult bookstores, adult motion picture
theaters, adult motion picture sales/rentals, adult mini-motion picture
theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steam room/bath house/sauna
facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation
parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses,
adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels,
adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments,
businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in
which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
which are capable of being seen by members of the public.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation or unclothes genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of
a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a
sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts of
conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty;



      (2)   Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence;



      (3)   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral
copulation, coitus, or masturbation;



      (4)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast;



      (5)   Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom
are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who
are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding or other physical restraint of any such person;



      (6)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other
sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or



      (7)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or
anal irrigation.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES, ACCESSORY. The offering of retail goods for
sale which are classified as sexually oriented uses on a limited scale and
which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services
offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include, but are not
limited to, the sale of adult magazines, the sale and/or rental of adult
motion pictures, the sale of adult novelties, and the like.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES, PRINCIPAL. The offering of goods and/or
services which are classified as sexually oriented uses as a primary or sole
activity of a business or establishment and include but are not limited to
the following:



      (1)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, BODY PAINTING STUDIO. An
establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or
other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of
a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified
anatomical areas.



      (2)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, BOOKSTORE. A building or portion
of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of items consisting of
printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, video tape, or motion
picture film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the
public generally but only to one or more classes of the public excluding any
minor by reason of age or if a substantial or significant portion of such
items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (3)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, CABARET. A building or portion of
a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such
building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such
dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (4)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT. A
companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or
discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (5)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR. A
conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which
provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or
discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (6)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, ESCORT SERVICE. A business that
provides one or more persons to accompany a customer to places and/or
activities that occur off-premises of the escort service operation, if such
service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (7)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, HEALTH/SPORT CLUB. A health/sport
club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (8)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, HOTEL OR MOTEL.ADULT HOTEL OR
MOTEL. A hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from
patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (9)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB. A
massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and
which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (10)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A
building or portion of building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used
for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



      (11)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, MODELING STUDIO. An
establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure
models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted,
painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise
depicted by such customers.



      (12)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, MOTION PICTURE ARCADE. Any place
to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or
motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.



      (13)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A
building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used
for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or if such material is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.



      (14)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, NOVELTY BUSINESS. A business
which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human
genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.



      (15)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, SAUNA. A sauna which excludes
minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or
hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by
the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (16)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, STEAM ROOM/BATH HOUSE FACILITY.
A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat
bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or
reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing
agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of
age or if the service provided by the steam room/bath house facility is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.



   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of the City of Mayer.



   LICENSEE. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented use business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license.



   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE BUSINESS. The
increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the
floor area existed on the effective date of this chapter.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE BUSINESS.
Means and includes any of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sub-lease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)



§ 114.03  CLASSIFICATION.



   The following uses are classified as:



   (A)   Sexually oriented uses, accessory.



      (1)   Comprise no more than 10% of the floor area of the
establishment in which it is located;



      (2)   Comprise no more than 20% of the gross receipts of the
entire business operation;



      (3)   Not involving or including any activity except the sale
or rental of merchandise.



   (B)   Sexually oriented uses, principal.



      (1)   Body painting studio;



      (2)   Bookstore;



      (3)   Cabaret;



      (4)   Companionship establishment;



      (5)   Conversation/rap parlor;



      (6)   Health/sport club;



      (7)   Hotel or motel;



      (8)   Massage parlor, health club;



      (9)   Mini-motion picture theater;



      (10)   Modeling studio;



      (11)   Motion picture arcade;



      (12)   Motion picture theater;



      (13)   Novelty business;



      (14)   Sauna;



      (15)   Steam room/bath house facility.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)



§ 114.04  DEFENSES.



   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:



   (A)   By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;



   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



   (C)   In a structure:



      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing;



      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)



§ 114.05  INJUNCTION.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid license or in violation of this chapter is subject
to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



LICENSE



§ 114.15  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Required and exempt.



      (1)   No person, firm, or corporation shall operate a sexually
oriented use, principal, without having first secured a license as herein
provided.



      (2)   Sexually oriented uses, accessory, shall not require a
license pursuant to this section.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city and must include the following information:



      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence,
phone number, and birth date of the applicant. If the applicant is a
partnership, the name, residence, phone number, and birth date of each
general and limited partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the names,
residences, phone numbers, and birth dates of all persons holding more than
5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation.



      (2)   The name, address, phone number, and birth date of the
operator and manager of the adult establishment, if different from the
owner’s.



      (3)   The address and legal description of the premises where
the adult establishment is to be located.



      (4)   A statement detailing any gross misdemeanor or felony
convictions relating to sex offenses, obscenity, or the operation of an adult
establishment or business by the applicant, operator, or manager. In the case
of a corporation, a statement detailing any felony convictions by the owners
of more than 5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation.



      (5)   Whether or not the applicant, operator or manager has
ever applied for or held a license to operate a similar type of business in
another community. In the case of a corporation, whether or not those owners
of more than 5% of the issued and outstanding stock have ever applied for or
held a license to operate a similar type of business in another community.



      (6)   The activities and types of business to be conducted.



      (7)   The hours of operation.



      (8)   The provisions made to restrict access by minors.



      (9)   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal
operations and activities, drawn to scale.



      (10)   Applicants who must comply with § 114.39 shall submit
a diagram, drawn to scale.



   (C)   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of
this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance
with the law by the Fire Department and Building Official.



   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented use
business is an individual, the individual must sign the application for a
license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
use business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 5% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under § 114.16 and each
applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.16  ISSUANCE.



   The City Administrator shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the
administrator finds one or more of the following to be true:



   (A)   An applicant is under 18 years of age.



   (B)   An applicant is delinquent in his or her payment to the city
of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or her or imposed
upon him or her in relation to a sexually oriented business.



   (C)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form.



   (D)   An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision
of this chapter within two years immediately preceding the application. The
fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.



   (E)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
license by the city to operate a sexually oriented use business within the
preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a
sexually oriented use business has been revoked within the preceding 12
months.



   (F)   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented use business
have not been approved by the Fire Department and the Building Official as
being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.



   (G)   The license fee required by the chapter has not been paid.



   (H)   The required background check is not yet complete.



   (I)   An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented use
business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has
demonstrated that he or she is unable to operate or manage a sexually
oriented use business premises in a peaceful and law abiding manner, thus
necessitating action by law enforcement officers.



   (J)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of
or is not in compliance with this code.



   (K)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of
a crime:



      (1)   Involving any of the following offenses:



         (a)   Prostitution as described in M.S. § 609.321;



         (b)   Solicitation, inducement or promotion of
prostitution as described in M.S. § 609.322;



         (c)   Receiving profit derived from prostitution as
described in M.S. § 609.323;



         (d)   Other prohibited acts relating to prostitution as
described in M.S. § 609.324;



         (e)   Obscenity as described in M.S. § 617.241;



         (f)   Sale, dissemination, distribution, display or
exhibition of harmful material to minors as described in M.S. §§ 617.293
and 617.294;



         (g)   Sexual performance by a child as described in M.S.
§ 617.246;



         (h)   Dissemination or possession of child pornography
as described in M.S. § 617.247;



         (i)   Indecent exposure as described in M.S. § 617.23;



         (j)   Criminal sexual conduct as described in M.S. §§
609.342, 609.343, 609.344, and 609.345;



         (k)   Incest, as described in M.S. § 609.365; or



         (l)   Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to
commit any of the foregoing offenses.



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or



         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or
more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24-month period.



   (L)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.



   (M)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been
convicted of an offense listed in division (K)(1) above may qualify for a
sexually oriented use business license only when the time period required by
division (K)(2) above has elapsed.



   (N)   The license, if granted, shall state the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
sexually oriented use business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented use business so that
it may be easily read at any time.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.17  FEES; INVESTIGATION FEES.



   The annual fee for a sexually oriented use business license shall be
set by resolution of the City Council. The investigation fee for the purpose
of issuing a license shall be set by resolution of the City Council. In the
event that the license is denied upon application, the license fee shall be
refunded; however, no part of the license investigation fee shall be returned
to the applicant. No part of the annual license fee shall be refunded if the
license is suspended or revoked.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)



§ 114.18  POSTING.



   Licensed premises must have the license posted in a conspicuous place
at all times.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.19  INSPECTION.



   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
Carver County Sheriff’s Department, Fire Department, and Building
Inspection Division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented use
business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it
is occupied or open for business.



   (B)   A person who operates a sexually oriented use business or
their agent or employee commits an offense if the person refuses to permit a
lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the Carver County
Sheriff’s Department at any time it is occupied or open for business.



   (C)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of a
sexually oriented motel, which are currently being rented by a customer for
use as a permanent or temporary habitation.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.20  EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Each renewal license shall be issued for a maximum period of
one year. All licenses expire on December 31 of each year. Each license may
be renewed only by making application as provided in § 114.15 of this
chapter. Application for renewal shall be made at least 90 days before the
expiration date. If the City Administrator determines good and sufficient
cause is shown by the applicant for failure to file a timely renewal
application, the City Administrator may, if other provisions of this chapter
are complied with, grant the application.



   (B)   When the City Administrator denies renewal of a license, the
applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
If, subsequent to denial, the City Administrator finds that the basis for
denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may
be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial
became final.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.21  SUSPENSION.



   The City Administrator may suspend a license for a period not to exceed
30 days following written notice and an opportunity to be heard if the
Administrator determines that a licensee or an employee of a license has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;



   (B)   Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the
sexually oriented use business premises;



   (C)   Refused to allow inspection of the sexually oriented use
business premises as authorized in this chapter;



   (D)   Permitted unlawful gambling by any person on the sexually
oriented use business premises;



   (E)   Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually
oriented use business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus
necessitating action by law enforcement officers.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)



§ 114.22  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The City Administrator may revoke a license preceded by
written notice and an opportunity to be heard if a cause of suspension under
§ 114.21 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.



   (B)   The City Administrator may revoke a license if the City
Administrator determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information to the
city during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises;



      (4)   A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented use business during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in §
114.16(K)(1) for which the time period required in § 114.16(K)(2) has not
elapsed;



      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a
person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed
premises of a crime listed in § 114.16(K)(1), for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented use business at the time the offenses were committed;



      (7)   A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act
of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual
contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term SEXUAL CONTACT
shall have the meaning as it is defined in M.S. § 609.341, Subd. 11(b); or



      (8)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of ad
valorem taxes, local lodging tax, or other taxes or fees related to the
sexually oriented use business.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.



   (D)   Division (B)(7) of this section does not apply to sexually
oriented motels as a grounds for revoking the license unless the licensee or
employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or
within public view.



   (E)   When the City Administrator revokes a license, the revocation
shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented use business license for one year from the date revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City Administrator finds that
the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may
be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under §
114.16(K)(1), an applicant may not be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under § 114.16(K)(2) have elapsed.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.23  APPEAL.



   (A)   Generally. If the City Administrator denies the issuance of a
license, or suspends, or revokes a license, the Administrator shall send to
the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
written notice of the action, and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party
may appeal the decision of the City Administrator within ten days of
receiving notice of the city’s action. The filing of an appeal stays the
action of the City Administrator in suspending or revoking a license until
the City Council makes a final decision.



   (B)   Procedure. The City Council may appoint a committee of the
Council or an independent hearing officer to hear the matter, report findings
of fact, and a recommendation for disposition to the Council. Hearings on the
appeal shall be open to the public and the licensee or applicant shall have
the right to appear and be represented by legal counsel and to offer evidence
on its behalf. The City Council shall make a final decision within 30 days of
the conclusion of the hearing.



   (C)   Additional requirements. The City Council may condition
denial, suspension, revocation, or non-renewal of a license upon appropriate
terms and conditions.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.24  TRANSFER.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually oriented use business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty. see § 114.99



ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS



§ 114.35  ESCORT AGENCIES.



   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.36  NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.



   (A)   A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age
of 18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if he or she appears in a state of
nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area
of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public
right-of-way.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.37  SEXUALLY ORIENTED THEATERS; SEXUALLY ORIENTED MOTION PICTURE
THEATERS.



   (A)   A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a
person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity or on the
premises of a sexually oriented theater or sexually oriented motion picture
theater.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under division (A) if the
person under 18 years was in a rest room not open to public view or persons
of the opposite sex.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.38  SEXUALLY ORIENTED MOTELS.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is a sexually oriented motel as that term is defined
in this chapter.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that
does not have a sexually oriented use business license, he or she rents or
sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, for the same time period the room
is rented to that person, he or she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room
again to another person.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, the terms RENT or SUB-RENT mean
the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.39  EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented use business, other than a sexually oriented motel, which exhibits
on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor
space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented use business
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager’s station shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required;
however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated
street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The
City Administrator may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal application if
the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies
that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was
prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without the prior approval of the City
Administrator or his or her designee.



      (4)   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. The premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose must be visible from at least one of the manager’s stations. The
view required in this division (A)(5) must be by direct line of sight from
the manager’s station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the view area specified in division (A)(5) above remain
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which
has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section.



      (7)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot candle as
measured at the floor level.



      (8)   It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that
any patron is present on the premises.



   (B)   A person having a duty under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(8)
above commits an offense if the person knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.40  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   A sexually oriented business shall not be located or operated
in any zoning district other than as specified in Chapter 152: Zoning.



   (B)   A sexually oriented business shall not be located or operated
within 1,320 feet of the following:



      (1)   A boundary of any residential or agricultural district
as defined in Chapter 152.



      (2)   The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use.



      (3)   A religious institution or church which is used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.



      (4)   A public or private educational facility including but
not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
charter schools; school includes the school grounds.



      (5)   A public park or recreational area which has been
designated for park or recreational activities.



   (C)   A sexually oriented business shall not be located or operated
within 250 feet of another sexually oriented business or on a lot adjacent to
an existing sexually oriented business.



   (D)   For the purpose of divisions (B) and (C) above, measurement
shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in
divisions (B) and (C).



   (E)   For purposes of division (C) above, the distance between a
sexually oriented business and any other building, structure or business
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening
structures or objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall
of the structure in which each business is located.



(Ord. 220, passed 4-23-18)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as
prescribed in § 10.99 of this code.



(Ord. 114, passed 2-28-05)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Firearms; dangerous weapons



   130.02   Alcohol consumption



   130.03   Predatory offender residency restrictions



§ 130.01  FIREARMS; DANGEROUS WEAPONS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      DANGEROUS WEAPONS.  Any of the following objects:



         (1)   Dagger, dirk or stiletto;



         (2)   Saber or sword;



         (3)   Switchblade knife, spring blade knife or any knife
the blade of which can be opened with one hand by gravity, a flick of the
wrist or some type of mechanism;



         (4)   Blackjack, sand club, sap, sap gloves, pipe club,
bludgeon or mace club;



         (5)   Chain club or chains assembled or used as an
assault weapon;



         (6)   Artificial knuckles or other objects designed to
be worn over the fists or knuckles;



         (7)   Throwing devices with cutting or pointed edges;



         (8)   Japanese or other night sticks, nut crackers,
nanchuks, chakas, flails, karate sticks or morning stars;



         (9)   Sling shots;



         (10)   Spears or lances;



         (11)   Bow and arrow, blow gun, splat ball gun or paint
gun; and



         (12)   Firearm.



   EXPLOSIVE.  An explosive device or incendiary device, as defined in
M.S. § 299F.72, as it may be amended from time to time.



   FIREARM.  A weapon from which is propelled a missile, projectile or
bullet by means of explosives, gas or compressed air, springs, or elastic
materials and shall include air and “BB” guns.



   MINOR.  A person who is less than 18 years old.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  An area, building or structure that is open and
accessible to the public.



   REPLICA FIREARM.  A device or object that is a facsimile or toy
version of, and reasonably appears to be a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed
off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher or any other firearm.



   (B)   Sale to minors.  No person shall sell or transfer a dangerous
weapon or explosive to a minor unless the minor's parents or guardian is
present at the time of the sale or transfer and gives the person his or her
express written consent to the proposed transaction.



   (C)   Carrying by intoxicated or influenced persons.  No person who
is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance shall
carry a dangerous weapon or explosive upon his or her person or in any
vehicle.



   (D)   Possession prohibited.



      (1)   Unless permitted by the Carver County Sheriff, no person
shall have a dangerous weapon or explosive in his or her possession, custody
or control in a public place, in or on private property of another without
their permission, or in a motor vehicle, except in compliance with the
following:



         (a)   A dangerous weapon or explosive may be transported
by a person directly to or from his or her place of business, the place of
purchase, a gun dealer, a gunsmith, a place of target practice or his or her
home.



         (b)   A dangerous weapon or explosive may be transported
only if it is:



            1.   In a closed and fastened container or
securely tied package;



            2.   In the locked trunk of any vehicle which is
used or, if the vehicle does not have a trunk, in the farthest rear portion
of the vehicle in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers;
and



            3.   Unloaded, disassembled or otherwise rendered
incapable of immediate operation, if possible.



      (2)   The presence of a dangerous weapon or explosive in a
passenger automobile, van, pick-up truck or sport utility vehicle permits the
fact finder to infer knowing possession of the dangerous weapon or explosive
by the driver or person in control of the vehicle when the weapon or
explosive was in the vehicle.  The inference does not apply:



         (a)   To a licensed operator of a vehicle who is at the
time operating it for hire in the lawful and proper pursuit of the operator's
trade;



         (b)   To any person in the vehicle if one of them
legally possesses a dangerous weapon or explosive; or



         (c)   When the dangerous weapon or explosive is
concealed on the person of one of the occupants.



      (3)   No person shall possess, carry, transport or control any
knife or bladed instrument capable of cutting, stabbing or injuring while on
school property, in a school bus, or on public streets or sidewalks adjacent
to a school, except when knives and bladed instruments are used as part of an
instructional activity carried on in the school, used in the preparation or
consumption of food in a lunchroom or kitchen, or used as a tool by a person
authorized to perform construction, repair or maintenance services on school
property.



   (E)   Use or discharge.



      (1)   No person shall in any public or private place use a
dangerous weapon or explosive or discharge a firearm if the firearm is loaded
with powder, a blank cartridge, explosive, bullet, pellet or shot without
first obtaining a permit from the Carver County Sheriff as set forth in
division (F) below.



      (2)   The prohibition in division (1) shall not apply to:



         (a)   Licensed peace officers and other personnel
authorized by the Carver County Sheriff; and



         (b)   People lawfully acting in the defense of
themselves or others.



   (F)   Permit application, granting and revocation.



      (1)   Permit issuance.  A person may apply to the Carver
County Sheriff for a permit to possess, use or transport a dangerous weapon
or explosive or to discharge a firearm contrary to the provisions of
divisions (D) and (E).  An application for a permit shall be in writing and
shall state the reason for requesting the permit, the period for which permit
is desired, the type of dangerous weapon, explosive or firearm involved, the
proposed activity or use, and any other information that the Carver County
Sheriff deems useful to review the application.  The Sheriff shall issue a
permit only if he or she determines that the proposed use is for a lawful
purpose and will be carried out in a safe manner.  The Carver County Sheriff
may impose conditions to assure the lawful and safe use of the permit and may
specify the firearm, explosive or dangerous weapon to be used and the times,
places and circumstances of use. Permits shall be usable only by the person
to whom issued.



      (2)   Ineligible people.  No permit under this section may be
issued if the Carver County Sheriff determines that the applicant is one of
the following categories of people:



         (a)   Those listed in M.S. § 624.713, as it may be
amended from time to time;



         (b)   A person who presently has a court restraining
order against them, issued because of assaultive, aggressive or threatening
behavior;



         (c)   A person who is presently on court-ordered
probation as the result of a criminal conviction involving assault or
disorderly conduct; or



         (d)   A person who, within the preceding two years,
handled a dangerous weapon, explosive or firearm in a negligent, careless or
reckless manner or in a manner that unreasonably alarms any person.



      (3)   Permit revocation.



         (a)   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked if the Carver County Sheriff determines that:



            1.   The terms and conditions of the permit are
being or have been violated;



            2.   Continued use of the permit is or may be a
danger to the public safety or any property;



            3.   The permit holder has used the permit to
violate any law or city ordinance;



            4.   The permit holder falsified any information
or omitted material information in the application; or



            5.   The permit holder is or has become one of the
persons listed in division (2) above.



         (b)   The Carver County Sheriff shall revoke the permit
by giving written notice to the permit holder.  The revocation shall be
effective upon delivery of the written notice to the address of the permit
holder set forth in the permit application.



         (c)   Any permit holder aggrieved by a revocation of a
permit may appeal the decision to the Carver County Court.



         (d)   Any permit revoked pursuant to this section shall
remain revoked during the pendency of an appeal.



   (G)   Organized club permit.  The Mayer City Council may issue a
special permit to an organized gun club to allow shooting of firearms by
members and their guests on club property.  The permit shall not be issued
if the proposed activity would be a safety hazard or a nuisance to
surrounding properties. The City Council may prescribe the hours of operation
and types of firearms to be used.



   (H)   Confiscation.  The Carver County Sheriff may confiscate and
dispose of a dangerous weapon or explosive worn, carried, possessed, used or
handled in violation of any ordinance or state statute. The Sheriff may
provide for its sale, destruction or other disposition.



   (I)   Civil liability.  Nothing in this section authorizes the use
of dangerous weapons, explosives or firearms in a manner which will endanger
a human being or property, and no permit issued relieves a person from civil
liability from damage resulting from use of the permit.



   (J)   Replica firearms.  No person shall display, exhibit, brandish
or otherwise employ a replica of a firearm in a threatening manner if, in
doing so, the person either:



      (1)   Causes or attempts to cause fear in another person; or



      (2)   Acts in reckless disregard of the risk of causing fear
in another person.



(Ord. 91, passed 5-11-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   General Licensing Regulations, see Chapter 110



§ 130.02  ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   Public consumption.  No person shall consume any alcoholic
beverage on a public street, in a public park or in other public property
unless the consumption and display of the beverage being consumed is lawfully
permitted on the public property, pursuant to applicable provisions.



('82 Code, § 6.111)



   (B)   Alcoholic beverages in unlicensed public places.  No person
shall display, mix, prepare for consumption or consume any alcoholic beverage
in any public place or place of business which is not licensed for the
display, consumption, sale or furnishing of set-ups for alcoholic beverage.



('82 Code, § 6.112)



   (C)   Persons under 21 years of age.  It is a violation of this
code for any person:



      (1)   Under 21 years of age to misrepresent his or her age for
the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverage;



      (2)   To induce a person 21 years of age to purchase or
procure any alcoholic beverage;



      (3)   Other than the parent or legal guardian to procure any
alcoholic beverage for any person under 21 years of age, to sell or give an
alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age;



      (4)   Under 21 years of age to consume any alcoholic beverage
unless in the company of his or her parent or guardian and unless the
consumption is otherwise permitted by law; and



      (5)   Under 21 years of age to possess any alcoholic beverage
with intent to consume the alcoholic beverage at a place other than the
household of his or her parent or guardian.  Possession of the alcoholic
beverage at a place other than the household of his or her parent or guardian
shall be prima facie evidence of intent to consume the alcoholic beverage at
a place other than the household of his or her parent or guardian.



('82 Code, § 6.113)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alcoholic Beverages, see Chapter 111



§ 130.03  PREDATORY OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Findings; intent.



      (1)   Repeat predatory offenders present a threat to the
public safety of the community as a whole, especially children. Predatory
offenders assigned a risk level III under the risk assessment scale
established by the Minnesota Commissioner of Corrections are more likely than
other classifications of offenders to use physical violence, to repeat their
offenses, to have committed multiple offenses, to have more victims than are
ever reported, and, as a result, to be prosecuted for only a fraction of
their crimes. The cost of predatory offender victimization to society at
large, while not precisely calculable, is steep.



      (2)   As expressed in M.S. § 412.221(32), the city has power
to provide for the prevention of crime, the benefit of residence, and the
promotion of health, safety, order, convenience, and the general welfare, as
it deems necessary and expedient.



      (3)   The city has a compelling interest in promoting,
protecting, and improving the health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizens, and specifically has a compelling interest to protect against the
serious threat to children posed by predatory offenders, including the risk
of recidivism and harm that released sex offenders, assessed at a risk level
III due to their high risk of re-offense, will pose to this community.



      (4)   By this section, the city prohibits certain predatory
offenders of risk level III from establishing temporary or permanent
residence in certain locations where children are known to regularly
congregate in concentrated numbers.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CHILD. Any person under the age of 18.



      CHILD CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed by the Minnesota
Department of Human Services, or Carver County, to provide child care,
including facilities having programs for children known as nursery schools,
day nurseries, child care centers, day care centers, cooperative day care
centers, and Head Start programs.



      DESIGNATED OFFENDER. Any person who has been categorized as a
level III predatory offender under M.S. § 244.052, a successor statute, or a
similar statute from another state in which that person’s risk assessment
indicates a high risk of re-offense.



      PERMANENT RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges, or
resides for 14 or more consecutive days.



      PUBLIC PARK. A public recreation center or area, created,
established, designated, maintained, provided, or set aside by the city,
county, or state, for the purposes of public rest, recreation, and enjoyment,
and all buildings, facilities, and structures located thereon.



      PUBLIC PLAYGROUND. A city, county, or state-owned public improved
outdoor area designed, equipped, and set aside for children’s play,
including a school building playground, a child care building playground, a
play area of a public park, or an area that contains permanent play equipment
open to the public.



      SCHOOL. Any public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school.



      TEMPORARY RESIDENCE. A place where a person abides, lodges, or
resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not the person’s permanent residence, or a place where
the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more
consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the
person’s permanent residence.



   (C)   Residence prohibition.



      (1)   Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any
designated offender to establish a permanent or temporary residence within
1,000 feet of any school, public park, or public playground, or child care
facility.



      (2)   Measurement of distance. For purposes of determining the
minimum distance separation required by division (C)(1) above, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the permanent or temporary residence of the designated
offender to the nearest outer property line of the school, child care
facility, public park, or public playground.



      (3)   Official map. The City Clerk shall maintain an official
map showing prohibited locations as defined by this section. The Clerk shall
update the map annually to reflect any changes in the location of prohibited
zones. The map shall not be deemed conclusive or all encompassing, or relieve
any person subject to this section from their duty to comply with the
prohibitions herein, since prohibited zones change from time to time.



   (D)   Penalty. Any person convicted of violating any provision of
this section shall be punished as provided in § 10.99 of the City of Mayer
Code of Ordinances. Each day that a designated offender maintains a permanent
or temporary residence in violation of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (E)   Exemptions. A designated offender residing within the
prohibited area as described in division (C) above does not commit a
violation of that section if any of the following apply:



      (1)   The designated offender established the permanent or
temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to
M.S. §§ 243.166 and 243.167 or a successor statute, prior to the effective
date of this section.



      (2)   The designated offender was a minor when he or she
committed the offense and he or she was not convicted as an adult.



      (3)   The designated offender is a minor.



      (4)   The school, public park, or public playground within
l,000 feet of the designated offender’s permanent residence or temporary
residence or the child care facility of the designated offender’s permanent
residence or temporary residence was opened after the designated offender
established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and
registered the residence pursuant to M.S. §§ 243.166 and 243.167 or a
successor statute.



      (5)   The designated offender’s permanent or temporary
residence is also the primary residence of the designated offender’s
parent(s), grandparent(s), sibling(s), spouse, or child(ren).



      (6)   The designated offender’s permanent or temporary
residence is property purchased, leased, or contracted with and licensed by
the Minnesota Department of Corrections prior to the effective date of this
section.



(Ord. 210, passed 9-12-16)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   SUBDIVISIONS



      152.   ZONING



      153.   EXCAVATION



      154.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



   150.01   Minnesota State Building Code adopted



   150.02   Building Code optional chapters



   150.03   Application; administration; enforcement



   150.04   Permits; fees



   150.05   Perpetual existence



   150.06   Appeals



 



   150.99   Penalty



§ 150.01  MINNESOTA STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The Minnesota State Building Code (the “Code”), as adopted by the
Commissioner of Labor and Industry  pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 through
16B.75, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established,
adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of
Labor and Industry, through the Building Codes and Standards Unit, is hereby
adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless
specifically adopted in this chapter. The Minnesota State Building Code is
hereby incorporated in this chapter as completely as if fully set out herein.



(Ord. 138, passed 8-13-07)



§ 150.02  BUILDING CODE OPTIONAL CHAPTERS.



   The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§
16B.59 through 16B.75, allows the city to adopt by reference and enforce
certain optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State
Building Code. The following optional provisions identified in the most
current edition of the Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of
the building code for the City of Mayer:  none.



(Ord. 138, passed 8-13-07)



§ 150.03  APPLICATION; ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT.



   The application, administration, and enforcement of the Code shall be
in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code and Minnesota Rules,
Chapter 1300, as it may be amended from time to time. The Code shall be
enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62,
Subd. 1, when so established by this chapter. The Code shall be enforced by a
Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by the City Council to
administer this Code.



(Ord. 138, passed 8-13-07)



§ 150.04  PERMITS; FEES.



   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, Subd. 1. Permit fees shall be assessed for work
governed by the Code in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the City
Council. In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits
issued for work governed by the Code in accordance with M.S. § 16B.70.



(Ord. 138, passed 8-13-07)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.05  PERPETUAL EXISTENCE.



   This chapter shall perpetually include the most current edition of the
Minnesota State Building Code with the exception of the optional appendix
chapters. Optional appendix chapters shall not apply unless specifically
adopted.



(Ord. 138, passed 8-13-07)



§ 150.06  APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by an order, decision, or determination made by
the Building Official may appeal such order, decision or determination to the
State Appeals Board of the Minnesota Department of Labor and Industry,
Construction Codes and Licensing Division. Such appeal shall be made
according to the rules and regulations of the Appeals Board.



(Ord. 174, passed 10-24-11)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of the Code is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 138, passed 8-13-07)



CHAPTER 151:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section



   151.01   Regulations adopted by reference



§ 151.01  REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The subdivision regulations for the city are hereby adopted by
reference and shall be incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Am. Ord. 144, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 145, passed 5-12-08)



CHAPTER 152:  ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   152.001   Title



   152.002   Purpose



   152.003   Definitions



   152.004   Legal authority



   152.005   Geographic jurisdiction



   152.006   Deadline for actions



   152.007   Rules of construction



   152.008   Scope; interpretation



   152.009   Essential services




General Regulations




   152.020   Nonconforming uses and structures



   152.021   Lot provisions



   152.022   Home occupations



   152.023   Single-family dwelling requirements



   152.024   Temporary dwellings



   152.025   Street access required



   152.026   Driveway, parking area and hard surface improvements



   152.027   Public utilities required



   152.028   Abandoned vehicles



   152.029   Relocated buildings or structures



   152.030   Accessory structures



   152.031   Site plan review required




Zoning Districts; Zoning Map




   152.050   Zoning districts established



   152.051   Official zoning map



   152.052   Zone boundary interpretation



   152.053   (A) Agriculture



   152.054   (R-1) Low-Density Residential



   152.055   (R-2) Medium-Density Residential



   152.056   (R-3) Multiple-Family Residential



   152.057   (Reserved)



   152.058   (C-1) General Commerce



   152.059   (C-2) Central Business



   152.059A   (C-2) Central Business District design standards



   152.060   (C/I) Commercial/Industrial District



   152.061   (P/I) Public/Institutional



   152.062   Dimensional standards



   152.063   Parking requirements



   152.064   Shoreland overlay



   152.065   (PUD) Planned Unit Development Overlay District




Performance Standards




   152.080   Residual features



   152.081   Glare



   152.082   Noise



   152.083   Vibration



   152.084   Explosives



   152.085   Waste material



   152.086   Radiation and electrical emissions



   152.087   Traffic control



   152.088   Drainage



   152.089   Land slope



   152.090   Outside storage



   152.091   Screening



   152.092   Landscaping



   152.093   Fences



   152.094   Lot maintenance



   152.095   Surface water management



   152.096   Wetland protection and management



   152.097   Seasonal mineral extraction



   152.098   Dwelling below ground level



   152.099   Design by registered architect, engineer or land surveyor



   152.100   Commercial wireless telecommunication services towers and
antennae



   152.101   Building design standards



   152.102   Alternative energy systems




Sign Regulations




   152.120   Findings; purpose



   152.121   Severability



   152.122   Definitions



   152.123   Permit required



   152.124   Exemptions



   152.125   Sign area calculations



   152.126   Fees



   152.127   Maintenance; inspections



   152.128   Sign removal



   152.129   General standards



   152.130   Signs permitted in Residential Districts



   152.130A   Signs permitted in Agricultural District



   152.131   Signs permitted in Commercial, Industrial and
Public/Institutional Districts



   152.131A   Master and common sign plans required



   152.132   Sandwich board signs



   152.133   Temporary and portable signs (private property)




Administration and Enforcement




   152.150   Zoning Officer/Administrator



   152.151   Planning Commission duties in zoning administration



   152.152   Permits



   152.153   Board of Appeals and Adjustments; variances



   152.154   Interim uses



   152.155   Conditional use permits (CUP)



   152.156   Amendment



   152.157   Fees



 



   152.999   Penalty



Cross-references:



   Excavations, see Chapter 153



   Sexually oriented uses, see Chapter 114



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Mayer Zoning Ordinance, may be cited
as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.”



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.002  PURPOSE.



   The basic purpose of this chapter shall be to achieve the following
objectives:



   (A)   To protect the public health, safety and welfare;



   (B)   To maintain regulations that are consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan of the City of Mayer and which implement the plan;



   (C)   To protect existing urban development from potential negative
effects of conflicting uses, but also to permit broad development
opportunities within the community;



   (D)   To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of
land;



   (E)   To provide and maintain a safe and efficient traffic
circulation system;



   (F)   To preserve the area’s substantial natural amenities, such
as the rivers, lakes, wetlands, bluffs, hills, valleys and woodland;



   (G)   To promote a pleasing visual environment throughout the
community, within the urban, rural, commercial, industrial, public, and
residential areas;



   (H)   To provide for the protection of access to direct sunlight for
solar energy systems;



   (I)   To maintain the small town character of the community; and



   (J)   To maintain compatibility of land uses.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUTTING. Making contact with or separated only by public thoroughfare,
railroad, public utility, right-of-way or navigable waters.



   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with,
and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use
or structure.



   ADDITION. A physical enlargement of an existing structure.



   AGRICULTURE. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, forestry,
horticulture, and gardening, the keeping or raising of domestic animals and
fowl and including all activities and accessory uses incidental thereto.
AGRICULTURE shall not include the raising and feeding of hogs by feeding
garbage thereto, the raising of fur bearing animals, nor the operation of
riding academies, commercial stables or kennels.



   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property not to exceed 30 feet in width at its intersection with
a street.



   ALTERATION. Any change in the size, shape, character or use of a
building or structure.



   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM.  A ground source heat pump, hydronic
furnace, wind or solar energy system.



   ANIMAL UNIT. The equivalent weight or size relationship between
animals, as established by the State of Minnesota.



   ANTENNA. Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or
transmitting electromagnetic waves, including but not limited to directional
antennae, such as panels, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and
omni-directional antennae, such as whip antennae.



   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a one- or two-family structure
or a multiple dwelling structure which is arranged, designed, used or
intended to be used as a dwelling unit for a single family or individual.



   APARTMENT BUILDING. A multiple family dwelling originally designed and
constructed to accommodate three or more apartments, designed with more than
one single- or two-family dwellings converted for multiple-family use or
attached row dwelling (party wall type) as defined herein.



   AUTOMOBILE RECYCLING BUSINESS. Any open area where waste, discarded, or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled,
kept, stored or handled, including but not limited to scrap metals or scrap
materials, or the abandonment or dismantling of machinery, motor vehicles, or
other vehicles, or parts thereof.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning
of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, frame work and
major painting service.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repairs, replacement of parts, and
motor service to motor vehicles but not including any operation specified
under “automobile repair shop, major.”



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP. Any structure or building where major or minor
repair of motor vehicles is conducted for profit.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises used for the
dispensing or sale of automobile fuels, lubricating oil or grease, tires,
batteries, or minor automobile accessories. Services offered may include the
installation of tires, batteries, or minor accessories; minor automobile
repairs; and greasing or washing of individual automobiles. AUTOMOBILE
SERVICE STATIONS shall not include the sale or storage of junkers as defined
herein; shall not include premises offering major automobile repairs,
automobile wrecking, automobile sale, or detached car washes.



   BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its
floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of
the depth of excavation below ground level.



   BILLBOARD. An advertising sign, which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment not exclusively, related to premises
where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.



   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, waterways,
or boundary lines of the corporate limits of the city.



   BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS. The City Council of the City of Mayer.



   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a motel or hotel where, for
compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals or lodgings
are provided for three or more persons, but not to exceed eight persons.



   BROADCASTING ANTENNA, RADIO AND TELEVISION. Commercial or public
broadcasting towers over 200 feet in height or more than one tower in each
installation of any height or accessory use non-commercial towers of any
height if not located on the same lot or parcel as the principal use.



   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum
setbacks and open space requirements of this chapter are met.



   BUILDING. A structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or personal property of any kind and which is permanently
affixed to the land, and which provides permanent protection from the
elements. When such a building is divided by party, walls without openings,
each portion of that building so separated will be called a SEPARATE BUILDING.



   BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from
the adjacent open space or from other buildings or structures by a permanent
roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal
entrance and exit doors.



   BUILDING, DETACHED ACCESSORY. A building surrounded by open space on
the same lot as the principal building, clearly subordinate and incidental to
the principal use.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from curb level or its
equivalent, to the highest point of the roof surface on a flat roof, to the
deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of gable, hip and gamble roofs. For buildings set back from the street
line, the height of the building shall be measured from the average elevation
of the finished grade along the front of the building, provided its setback
from the street line is not less than the height of the finished grade above
the established curb level.



   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The building inspector provided for in the Building
Code.



   BUILDING-INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.  A solar energy system that
is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a
separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or
structural component of the building including, but not limited to,
photovoltaic or hot water solar systems contained within roofing materials,
windows, skylights and awnings.



   BUILDING, NONCONFORMING. Any building or structure which does not
comply with all the regulations of this chapter or any amendment thereto
governing the zoning district in which such building or structure is located.



   BUILDING LINE. An imaginary line separating buildable area and required
yards.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which the primary use
of the lot on which it is located is conducted.



   CELLAR. That portion of the building having more than one-half of the
floor to ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining grade.



   CHURCH. A building, together with its accessory buildings for public
worship as the principal use and where the buildings and uses are maintained
and controlled by an organized group for public worship.



   CITY/COMMUNITY. The City of Mayer, Minnesota.



   CLEARCUTTING. The complete (as opposed to selective) removal of
vegetation within an area.



   CLINIC, MEDICAL. A building in which a group of physicians, dentists or
combination thereof and professional assistants are associated for carrying
on their profession. The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory,
but shall not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery.



   CLOSED LOOP GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM.  A system that circulates
a heat transfer fluid, typically food-grade antifreeze, through pipes or
coils buried beneath the land surface or anchored to the bottom in a body of
water.



   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT. A grouping of buildings that occupy less space
than conventionally required, while maintaining allowable density and
creating additional open space or other public benefit.



   COMMERCE, RETAIL SERVICE. An enterprise that involves the offering of a
service or entertainment to the general public for compensation.



   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES. Licensed commercial
wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services.



   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Mayer.



   COMMERCE, RETAIL TRADE. An enterprise that involves the offering of a
product to the general public for compensation.



   COMMUNITY SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.  A solar-electric (photovoltaic) array
that provides retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power)
to multiple community members or businesses residing or located off-site from
the location of the solar energy system.



   CONDITIONAL USE. (See USE, CONDITIONAL.)



   CONDOMINIUM. A form of ownership within a multi-tenant structure which
entails joint ownership and responsibility for maintenance and repairs of
common areas in addition to individual ownership of specified private areas.



   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Mayer.



   DAYCARE FACILITY. A state licensed facility for the care of children,
as defined in M.S. Chapter 462, in a Single-Family District, or a state
licensed facility serving 16 or fewer children in a Multi-Family District.



   DECK.  An exterior, unenclosed above grade floor system with
independent supports attached to a principal building intended for outdoor
living space.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or
materials.



   DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the city within which regulations and
requirements govern the use of land and buildings.



   DUPLEX. A residential structure containing two dwelling units only
completely surrounded by open space.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
for residential occupancy including one-family, two-family, and multiple
family dwelling units with kitchens and bathrooms, but not including hotels,
motels, boarding or rooming houses, recreational vehicles, tents or cabins.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling that is attached to another at one or
more sides by a common wall.



   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling which is completely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.



   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A dwelling designed for occupancy by one
family.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A single structure specifically constructed
and designed for and containing more than two dwelling units.



   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit with one primary room which doubles as
a living room, dining room and bedroom.



   EROSION. The wearing away of the land surface by the action of natural
elements.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Public and private utility distribution systems
required to serve the resident and working population.



   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption
including foster children or a group of not more than five persons not so
related, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit.



   FEEDLOT, AGRICULTURAL. An enclosure for the purpose of feeding,
breeding, raising or holding poultry or livestock, not an accessory use
incidental to an agricultural operation.



   FENCE. A structure providing enclosure but not necessarily protection
against the elements.



   FENCE, SOLID. A fence that provides a visual barrier between adjacent
property and the area enclosed.



   FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the
stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry
areas.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a specific
flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (1% annual
chance flood) located outside of the floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is synonymous
with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance Study for
Carver County, Minnesota.



   FLOOD PROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes, or
adjustments to properties, structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of structures primarily for the reduction or elimination of damages.



   FLOODPLAIN. The channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a
wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by
the regional flood. Floodplain areas within the City of Mayer shall encompass
all areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).



   FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse
and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required
to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of a building or buildings on a zoning lot measured from the exterior faces
of exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two
buildings. In particular, FLOOR AREA will include:



      (1)   Basement space (see “basement” defined herein);



      (2)   Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds
seven and one-half feet;



      (3)   Interior balconies and mezzanines;



      (4)   Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways;



      (5)   Stairwells at each level;



      (6)   Accessory structures.



   FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE. The same area as defined in “floor area,”
excluding all areas occupied by basements, garages, porches, attics,
stairways and storage, utility and heating rooms and other accessory uses.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.). The floor area of the building or buildings
on a zoning lot divided by the area of the zoning lot, or in the case of
planned development, by the net site area. The F.A.R. requirements, as set
forth in each zoning district, shall determine the maximum floor area
allowable (total floor area of both principal and accessory buildings) in
direct ratio to the gross area of the zoning lot.



   GARAGE. A detached accessory building or portion of the principal
building (attached), including a carport, which is used primarily for storing
passenger vehicles and/or recreational vehicles.



   GARAGE SALE. An infrequent display of used goods and sale of the goods
on a property customarily used as a residence. The persons conducting the
sale shall be residents of the property.



   GEOTHERMAL ENERGY.  Renewable energy generated from the interior of
the earth and used to produce energy for heating buildings or serving
building commercial or industrial processes.



   GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent
to the exterior walls of the building or structure.



   GREENHOUSE. A structure used for the cultivation or protection of
flowers, vegetables and nursery stock.



   GROUND MOUNTED SES.  Freestanding solar energy system (panels) that
are mounted to the ground by use of stabilizers or similar apparatus.



   GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM (GSHPS).  A system that uses the
relatively constant temperature of the earth or a body of water to provide
heating in the winter and cooling in the summer. System components include
closed loops of pipe, coils or plates; a fluid that absorbs and transfers
heat; and a heat pump unit that processes heat for use or disperses heat for
cooling; and an air distribution system. The energy must be used on-site.



   HEAT TRANSFER FLUID.  A non-toxic and food grade fluid such as potable
water, aqueous solutions of propylene glycol not to exceed 20% by weight or
aqueous solutions of potassium acetate not to exceed 20% by weight.



   HOME OCCUPATION. A gainful occupation conducted in a residential
building which is clearly secondary and incidental to the principal
residential use of the building and generates no appreciable increase in
traffic in the district. A HOME OCCUPATION shall be carried on only by the
dwelling’s occupants. Retail sales and storage of stock shall be limited
and incidental to the principal HOME OCCUPATION.



   HORIZONTAL GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM.  A closed loop ground
source heat pump system where the loops or coils are installed horizontally
in a trench or series of trenches no more than 20 feet below the land surface.



   HOSPITAL. An institution providing persons with intensive medical or
surgical care and devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease
or injury, maternity cases, or mental illness.



   HOTEL. A building containing eight or more guest rooms in which lodging
is provided with or without meals for compensation and which is open to
transient or permanent guests, and which no provision is made for cooking in
any guest room, and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made
independently from one another.



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. An artificial or natural surface that is highly
resistant to infiltration by water. It includes, but is not limited to
surfaces such as compacted sand, clay or gravel as well as most
conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, swimming pools, sidewalks in excess
of three feet in width, parking lots, and other similar structures, but not
including decks or platforms where one-quarter inch gaps are provided between
deck boards for water to drain.



   INDUSTRY. An enterprise which involves the manufacture, production,
processing or storage of materials, goods or products.



   INTERIM USE. A temporary use of property until a particular date, until
the occurrence of a particular event, or until zoning regulations no longer
permit.



   KENNEL. Any structure or premises on which three or more dogs over four
months of age are kept for sale, breeding, profit, and the like.



   LANDSCAPING. Plantings such as trees, flowers, grass and shrubs and
improvements directly related thereto.



   LOADING SPACE. That portion of a lot designed to serve the purpose of
loading and/or unloading all types of vehicles.



   LOT. A parcel of land having a legal description and generally intended
for occupancy by a single use.



   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane within the front, side, and
rear lot lines.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more public
streets. On such a lot both yards fronting a street shall be deemed front
yards.



   LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot occupied by the principal building or
buildings, accessory structures, driveways, sidewalks, off-street parking
areas, parking pads and other impervious surface areas.



   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line of a lot (the greater frontage of a corner lot shall be
deemed its depth and the lesser frontage its width).



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot, including through lots.



   LOT LINE. The property line bounding a lot except that where any
portion of a lot extends into the public right-of-way the LOT LINE is deemed
to be the public right-of-way line for applying this chapter.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot abutting a street. On a corner
lot, from which street access is gained that lot line will be the front lot
line.



   LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is opposite, is most
nearly parallel and most distant from the front lot line. If the rear lot
line is less than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the
rear, the rear lot line shall be a line ten feet in length within the lot,
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision or plat, an
auditor’s subdivision or a registered land survey or a parcel of land not
so platted, which has been approved by the city or meets the following
conditions:



      (1)   Was a separate parcel of record April 1, 1945 or the
date of adoption of subdivision regulations under Laws 1945, Chapter 287,
whichever is later, or of the adoption of subdivision regulations pursuant to
a home rule charter;



      (2)   Was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered
into prior to such time;



      (3)   Was a separate parcel of not less than two and one-half
acres in area and 150 feet in width on January 1,



      (4)   Was a separate parcel of not less than five acres in
area and 300 feet in width on July 1, 1980.



      (5)   Is a single parcel of commercial or industrial land of
not less than five acres and having a width of not less than 300 feet and its
conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than five acres in area or 300 feet
in width;



      (6)   Is a single parcel of residential or agricultural land
of not less than 20 acres and having a width of not less than 500 feet and
its conveyance does not result in the division of the parcel into two or more
lots or parcels, any one of which is less than 20 acres in area or 500 feet
in width.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more
or less parallel public streets. On such a lot both yards fronting a street
shall be deemed front yards and front lot lines. Also defined as a “double
frontage lot”.



   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot
measured at right angles to the lot depth at the minimum front building
setback line.



   MOTEL. An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached
living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom, located on a single zoning
lot and designed for short term use by transient automobile tourists.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. A self-propelled vehicle for personal or business use
defined in M.S.§ 169.011.



   NURSING, CONVALESCENT AND RETIREMENT HOMES. A home for aged,
chronically ill, or convalescent persons in which two or more persons not of
the immediate family are received, kept or provided with food, shelter and
care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar
institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or
injury, maternity cases or mental illness.



   OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, dredged spoil, channel modification,
culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure,
stockpile, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel,
watercourse, lake bed, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or
change the direction of flow of water, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water.



   OPEN LOOP GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM.  A system that uses
groundwater as a heat transfer fluid by drawing groundwater from a well to a
heat pump and then discharging the water over land, directly in a water body
or into a injection well.



   OPEN SPACE. Any unoccupied land area.



   OUTDOOR HYDRONIC FURNACE.  A freestanding accessory structure housing
a wood or other approved solid fuel burning furnace, with a smoke stack, used
to provide heat or hot water to a building, or accessory structure, designed
to:



      (1)   Burn wood or other approved solid fuels;



      (2)   That the manufacturer specifies for outdoor installation
or installation in structures not normally occupied by humans; and



      (3)   Heat building space and/or water via the distribution,
typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or
a water/antifreeze mixture. This includes, without limitation, any structure,
equipment, device, or apparatus, or any part thereof, which is installed,
affixed, constructed or located outdoors for the primary purpose of
combustion of solid fuel, including but not limited to wood, to produce heat
or energy used as a component of a heating system.



   OUTDOOR WOOD BOILER.  See OUTDOOR HYDRONIC FURNACE.



   PARKING LOT. A structure utilized for the temporary storage of motor
vehicles.



   PARKING PAD. A pad used for parking vehicles not considered part of the
driveway, which shall be constructed of appropriate surface materials
depending on location.



   PARKING SPACE. A suitable surfaced and permanently maintained area off
the public street right-of-way, either within or outside of a building, of
sufficient size to store one standard motor vehicle, which has access to a
public street or alley, permitting satisfactory ingress or egress of a motor
vehicle, but in no event less than 180 square feet, exclusive of passageways,
driveways or other means of circulation.



   PARTY WALL. A common wall which divides a structure into two or more
buildings.



   PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM.  A system that captures solar light or
heat without transferring it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARDS. Criteria established to control noise, odor,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, glare or
heat, or other potential impacts generated by or inherent in uses of land and
buildings.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or political body; and includes any
trustee, receiver, assignee or other similar representative.



   PERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface that water can infiltrate into or percolate
through.



   PHOTVOLTAIC SYSTEM.  A solar energy system that converts solar energy
directly into electricity.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A development consisting of clustering or
mixed uses in which variations from conventional zoning standards may be
permitted in exchange for the protection of natural areas; creation of
additional parks, park facilities and pedestrian ways; and similar public
benefits.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Mayer.



   PORCH.  An architectural feature relating to a floor-like platform
structure attached to the front or back entrance of a residence. It is
external to the walls of the main building proper, but may be enclosed by
screen, latticework, broad windows, or other light frame walls extending from
the main structure.



   PROPERTY LINES. The lines bounding a described parcel of land or lot as
defined herein.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT. Any type of operable and licensed
vehicle as required by the state, either self-powered or drawn by another
vehicle that is used primarily for purposes of recreation or transportation
of recreational vehicles, equipment, and the like. A vehicle that is built on
a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use, including but not limited to campers, motor
homes, travel trailers, slide in campers, airplanes, converted buses,
snowmobiles and trailers, camper trailers, motorcycle trailers, snowmobile
trailers, horse trailers, boats/watercraft and trailers, fish house, all
terrain vehicles, and the like. A fish house boat, snowmobile, or other
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE when stored or kept on a trailer shall be considered as
one RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. For purposes of this chapter, the term RECREATIONAL
VEHICLE is synonymous with the term “travel trailer/travel vehicle.”



   REGIONAL FLOOD (100-YEAR FLOOD). A flood which is representative of
large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably
characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in
magnitude of the 1% chance or 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is
synonymous with the term “base flood” used in a flood insurance study.



   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An elevation not less
than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in
flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from
designation of a floodway.



   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A state licensed residential facility, defined by
M.S. Chapter 462, serving six or fewer persons, in a single-family
residential district and no more than 16 persons in a multiple family
residential district.



   ROOF OR BUILDING MOUNTED SES.  A solar energy system (panels) that are
mounted to the roof or building using brackets, stands or other apparatus.



   ROOF PITCH.  The final exterior slope of a building roof calculated by
the rise over the run, typically, but not exclusively, expressed in twelfths
such as 3/12, 9/12 or 12/12.



   ROTOR DIAMETER.  The diameter of the circle described by the moving
rotor blades on a (WECS).



   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure and lot
line, ordinary high water mark, or right-of-way easement. Distances are to be
measured from the most outwardly extended portion of the structure at ground
level.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USES. (See definitions in § 114.02.)



   SHORELAND. Land located within the following distances from public
waters: 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water level of a lake, pond, or
flowage; and 300 feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a
floodplain as designated by ordinance, on a river or stream, whichever is
greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved
are bounded by topographic divides which extend landward from the waters for
lesser distance and when approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Natural Resources.



   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or
device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or land in view of the general public and which directs
attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business.



   SOLAR ACCESS.  A view of the sun, from any point on the collector
surface that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object located
on parcels of land other than the parcel upon which the solar collector is
located, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. standard time on any
day of the year.



   SOLAR COLLECTOR.  A device, or combination of devices, structure, or
part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into
thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.



   SOLAR ENERGY.  Radiant energy received from the sun that can be
collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES).  A device or structural design feature, a
substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or
provide for the collection of storage and distribution of solar energy for
space heating or cooling, electricity generating, or water heating.



   SOLAR FARM.  A commercial facility that converts sunlight into
electricity, whether by photovoltaics (PV), concentrating solar thermal
devices (CST), or other conversion technology, for the primary purpose of
wholesale sales of generated electricity. A SOLAR FARM is the primary land
use for the parcel on which it is located.



   SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES.  Racking, frames, or other devices that allow
the mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface or ground.



   SOLAR SKYSPACE.  The space between a solar energy collector and the
sun, which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent
which precludes its cost effective operation.



   SOLAR SKYSPACE EASEMENT.  A right, expressed as an easement, covenant,
condition, or other property interest in any deed or other instrument
executed by or on behalf of any landowner, which protects the solar skyspace
of an actual, proposed, or designated solar energy collector at a described
location by forbidding or limited activities or land uses that interfere with
access to solar energy. The solar skyspace must be described as the three
dimensional space in which obstruction is prohibited or limited, or as the
times of day during which direct sunlight to the solar collector may not be
obstructed, or as a combination of the two methods.



   SOLAR STORAGE UNIT.  A component of a solar energy device that is used
to store solar generated electricity for later use.



   STORMWATER POND.  These are ponds created for stormwater treatment. A
stormwater pond shall not include wetlands created to mitigate the loss of
other wetlands.



   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor
above, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street which provides for traffic movement to and
from municipalities and the surrounding areas, to and from
freeways/expressways and collector streets, and between major parts of an
urban area. Intersections are at grade and direct access to abutting property
should be avoided.



   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which collects and distributes the internal
traffic within an area of a community such as a residential neighborhood or
industrial district, and between arterial and local streets. It provides some
access to abutting property.



   STREET, LOCAL. A street of little or no continuity designed to provide
access to abutting property and ideally leading into collector streets.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, which
would prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings,
factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, decks, manufactured homes,
recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in this
chapter and other similar items.



   STRUCTURE HEIGHT.  A distance to be measured from the mean ground
level to the top of the structure.



   SURFACE, IMPROVED.A surface that is either concrete, asphalt, or made
of pavers.



   SURFACE, SEMI-IMPROVED. A surface that is gravel, class five gravel,
crushed rock, or made of similar composite.



   SURFACE, UNIMPROVED. A surface that is grass, compacted earth, or
naturally occurring.



   TOWER. Any ground- or roof-mounted pole, spire, structure, or
combination thereof taller than 50 feet, including supporting lines, cables,
wires, braces, and masts, intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an
antenna, meteorological device, or similar apparatus above grade.



   TOWNHOUSE. A building designed for attached dwellings and includes
private and common areas which are regulated and maintained according to
homeowner association documentation.



   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation uses.



   USABLE OPEN SPACE. That required portion of a lot at ground level,
which is graded, developed, landscaped and equipped and intended and
maintained for either active or passive recreation or both, available and
accessible to an useable by all persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming
unit on the lot or a development project, and their guests. This space of
minimum prescribed dimensions shall not be devoted to service driveways or
off-street parking space and or loading berths but shall be usable for
greenery, recreational space and other leisure activities normally carried on
outdoors.



   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or buildings thereon
are designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained, and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with
respect to the performance standards of this chapter.



   USE, ACCESSORY. A use subordinate to the principal use or building on
the same lot and customarily incidental thereto as well as detached therefrom.



   USE, CONDITIONAL.



      (1)   A specific type of structure or land use listed in the
official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in this
chapter’s official zoning controls or building regulations and upon a
finding that:



         (a)   Certain conditions as detailed in this chapter
exist; and



         (b)   The structure and/or land use conform to the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan if one exists and are compatible with the
existing neighborhood.



      (2)   After due consideration in each case of the impact of
such use upon neighboring land, and the public need for the particular use at
the particular location, such CONDITIONAL USE may or may not be granted.



   USE, INCOMPATIBLE. A use which is incapable of direct association with
certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruent or discordant.



   USE, NONCONFORMING. Any use of land, buildings or structures lawfully
existing at the time of adoption of this chapter which does not comply with
all the regulations of this chapter or any amendments hereto governing the
zoning district in which such use is located.



   USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements,
regulations and performance standards, if any, of such district or districts.



   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
a subordinate or accessory use.



   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter
as applied to a specific piece of property.



   VERTICAL GROUND SOURCE HEAT PUMP SYSTEM.  A closed loop ground source
heat pump system where the loops or coils are installed vertically in one or
more borings below the land surface.



   WAREHOUSING. The commercial storage of merchandise and personal
property.



   WHOLESALING. A business engaged in selling to retailers or jobbers
rather than consumers.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS).  An electrical generating
facility comprised of one or more wind turbines and accessory facilities,
including but not limited to: power lines, transformers, substations, and
metrological towers that operate by converting the kinetic energy of wind
into electrical energy. The energy may be used on-site or distributed to the
electrical grid.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS), COMMERCIAL.  A WECS of equal to
or greater than 40kW in total nameplate generating capacity.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS), NON-COMMERCIAL.  A WECS of less
than 40kW in total name plate generating capacity.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED.  A WECS affixed to the
roof of a building or other structure.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS), TOTAL HEIGHT.  The highest point
above ground reached by a rotor tip or any other part of the WECS.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS), TOWER.  A vertical structure
that supports an electrical generator, rotor blades, and/or meteorological
equipment used in the operation of a WECS.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS), TOWER HEIGHT.  The total height
of the WECS exclusive of the rotor blades.



   YARD. A required open space on a lot which is unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure from its lowest level to the sky except as
permitted in this chapter. The yard extends along the lot line at right
angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the setback
regulations for the zoning district in which such lot is located.



   YARD ABUTTING A STREET, SIDE.  A yard adjacent to a street which
extends along a side lot line between the front yard and rear property line.
For the purposes of determining the required setbacks, a SIDE YARD ABUTTING A
STREET is identified as a front yard in the dimensional standards of the
district in which the yard is located.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot
line between side lot lines and extending from the abutting street
right-of-way line to depth required in the setback regulations for the zoning
district in which such lot is located. In the case of a corner lot abutting
one or more streets, both yards shall be considered front yards.



   YARD, REAR. The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal
building located between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line
and extending for the full width of the lot.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along a side lot line between the front
yard to the rear yard to a depth or width required by setback regulations for
the zoning district in which such lot is located.



   ZONING MAP. The map setting forth the boundaries of the zoning
districts of the City of Mayer which map is a part of this chapter.



   ZONING OFFICER. The Zoning Officer of the City of Mayer as duly
appointed by the City Council.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-J, passed 2-28-05; Am. Ord. 102-O,
passed 11-14-05; Am. Ord. 102-V, passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 163, passed
4-12-10; Am. Ord. 193, passed 8-11-14; Am. Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15; Am. Ord.
221, passed 6-11-18; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18; Am. Ord. 228, passed
3-11-19)



§ 152.004  LEGAL AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is enacted in accordance with authority granted by M.S. §
462.357, as amended.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.005  GEOGRAPHIC JURISDICTION.



   The geographic jurisdiction of this chapter shall be the entire area
within the corporate limits of Mayer, Minnesota.  All land annexed to the
city shall be classified automatically upon annexation as being A,
Agriculture District.  Further land development or subdivision shall require
a rezoning of such land according to the city’s adopted Comprehensive Plan
at the time of preliminary plat approval or other development or change in
use of the land.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-R, passed 6-26-06)



§ 152.006  DEADLINE FOR ACTIONS.



   It is the intent of the city to comply with state requirements for
timely review and actions requiring formal approval by the city. Information
submissions and applications must be determined by the city to be complete
before a timeline for action is initiated. The review for completeness will
be conducted within ten business days of receipt of an application. In the
event the city cannot act upon a request within a timeframe of 60 days, the
city will notify an applicant in writing that action will be completed within
120 days of the date the application was accepted by the city. In the event
that multiple approvals are involved in any action, such as a site plan
review requiring a variance or a zoning ordinance amendment requiring a
Comprehensive Plan amendment, each action shall require a separate,
independent timeline for action.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.007  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   For clarity and consistency in the understanding and application of
this chapter the following shall apply:



   (A)   Use of the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders unless otherwise specifically noted.



   (B)   Grammatical use of references made in the singular shall
include the plural and the plural shall include the singular, unless such use
or reference is otherwise specifically stated.



   (C)   Sentence construction and references in the future tense may
include the present.



   (D)   The word “shall” implies an obligation; whereas the word
“may” is permissive and does not imply obligation.



   (E)   Whenever in any zoning district a use is neither specifically
permitted nor specifically prohibited, the use shall be considered prohibited.



   (F)   The catchlines of the sections of this chapter are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section, and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern,
limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the
provisions of any sections.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.008  SCOPE; INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Scope. No structure, or part thereof, shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, altered or moved without a permit
approved by the city. No structure or land shall be used for any purpose or
altered in any manner that is not in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Relationship to Comprehensive Plan. Interpretation and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter are intended to be consistent
with the implementation of goals, policies and land use elements of the Mayer
Comprehensive Plan to the extent practical or required by law. The
application of or amendments to this chapter which are determined to be
inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan shall require amendments to the
Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, or both.



   (C)   Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.



   (D)   Uses not identified. Uses not specifically identified in this
chapter as permitted shall be prohibited. Amendments to this chapter shall be
required to allow any use that is not clearly permitted by right.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.009  ESSENTIAL SERVICES.



   Privately-owned and operated essential services (cable, electric, gas,
telephone, and the like) are subject to the provisions of this chapter,
unless specifically exempted by a provision of this chapter. These essential
services are also subject to other ordinances of the City of Mayer as
applicable.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 152.020  NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Any nonconformity, including the lawful use or occupation of
land or premises existing on November 14, 2005 may be continued, including
through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, but
not including expansion, unless:



      (1)   The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a
period of more than one year; or    



      (2)   Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other
peril to the extent of the greater than 50% of its market value and no
building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is
damaged. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon a building permit in
order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property.



   (B)   Any subsequent use or occupancy of the land or premises shall
be a conforming use or occupancy.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall limit the city’s ability to
enforce its nuisance or other regulations designed to protect the public
health, safety and welfare against any non-conforming use.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-O, passed 11-14-05)



§ 152.021  LOT PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lots of record.



      (1)   No lot of record shall be reduced in size below the
district requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   A lot of record shall be deemed a buildable lot even
though the lot area and/or dimensions are less than those required for the
district provided the following conditions are met:



         (a)   Evidence must be presented that the lot in
question met minimum requirements for the division of property under
ordinance regulations in effect at the time the property was divided.



         (b)   It fronts a public street.



         (c)   The lot is within 70% of the minimum lot area and
lot width required.



         (d)   A nonconforming single lot of record located
within an Agricultural Zone, guided for residential development, may be
allowed as a building site without variances from lot size requirements,
provided that:



            1.   A site plan is provided showing how the land
could be further subdivided in the future to accommodate further development
consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan density requirements;



            2.   Water and sewer connections are installed
within the house to the exterior foundation to allow future connection to
municipal utilities;



            3.   An agreement/letter of awareness is executed
which would require the property owner to connect to municipal utilities
within one year of the extension of municipal utilities to the site/area and
properly abandon the private well and/or septic system;



            4.   the site was previously utilized as a
building site for residential use;



            5.   The lot is a minimum five acres in size; and



            6.   The lot fronts a public street.



      (3)   If two or more lots are in single ownership and if all
or part of the lots do not meet the width and area requirements of this
chapter, the contiguous lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel
for the purpose of this chapter.



   (B)   One building per lot. No more than one principal building
shall be located on a lot unless specifically permitted herein.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 181, passed 6-14-12)



§ 152.022  HOME OCCUPATIONS.



   Home occupations as defined in § 152.003 will be allowed as provided
elsewhere in this chapter providing the following conditions are met:



   (A)   Conduct of the home occupation does not result in any
alteration to the exterior of the residence, which changes the character of
the residence.



   (B)   Signage consists of no more than one single- or double-faced,
unlighted sign with a maximum area of two square feet not located on a public
right-of-way.



   (C)   Conduct of the home occupation does not generate more noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference than is normally
associated with residential occupancy in the neighborhood.



   (D)   The use shall not generate sewage of a nature or rate greater
than that normally associated with residential occupancy nor shall it
generate hazardous waste or solid waste at a rate greater than that normally
associated with residential occupancy.



   (E)   No home occupation will be allowed that jeopardizes the health
and safety of the residents of the city.



   (F)   The home occupation should not increase vehicular traffic flow
and parking above levels normally associated with the neighborhood.



   (G)   The home occupation may employ no more than one full-time and
two part-time employees.



   (H)   No outdoor display of goods or outside storage of equipment or
materials is permitted.



   (I)   No accessory building shall be used for operations, display of
goods or the storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation.



   (J)   Equipment used in the home occupation shall be of a type
normally found in the home.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.023  SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING REQUIREMENTS.



   All single-family detached dwellings shall be constructed according to
the following minimum standards:



   (A)   All dwellings shall have a minimum width of 24 feet.



   (B)   All dwellings shall have a permanent, frost-free foundation as
defined in the State Building Code. Split level, split entry and
earth-sheltered homes shall comply with this requirement.



   (C)   Main roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 3:12 per definition
of the applicable building code.



   (D)   Roofs shall be shingled with asphalt, wood, tiles, sod or
other comparable materials as approved by the applicable building code.



   (E)   Metal siding, with exposed panels exceeding 16 inches in
width, shall not be permitted.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.024  TEMPORARY DWELLINGS.



    (A)   The use and occupancy of a tent, recreation vehicle or other
temporary dwellings for the purpose of living quarters is not permitted in
the city.



   (B)   Pursuant to authority granted by M.S. § 462.3593, Subd. 9,
the city opts-out of the requirements of M.S. § 462.3593, which defines and
regulates temporary family care dwellings.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 209, passed 8-22-16)



§ 152.025  STREET ACCESS REQUIRED.



   Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having
frontage on a public street, except as specifically permitted herein.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.026  DRIVEWAY, PARKING AREA AND HARD SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS.



    Except for minimal impact pavement construction projects and regular
maintenance approved by the City Administrator, a building permit shall be
required for all hard surface/pavement improvements and subject to the
following requirements:



   (A)   In all zoning districts, with the exception of the A
Agriculture District, all required ingress/egress points, driveways and
parking areas shall be surfaced with an improved surface, according to
minimum city specifications, except when waived by the City Administrator. In
the A Agriculture District, driveways shall be surfaced from the intersection
of the road, for the first 100 feet of the driveway, with bituminous,
concrete, brick pavers or other approved hard surface, as approved by the
City Engineer.



   (B)   Driveway ingress/egress points shall be a minimum of 12 feet
wide and a maximum of 30 feet wide measured at the property line.



   (C)   Location. All off-street parking facilities required by this
chapter, shall be located and restricted as follows:



      (1)   Same lot. Required accessory off-street parking shall be
on the same lot under the same ownership as the principal use being serviced,
except for combined or joint parking facilities as regulated by this section.



      (2)   Parking distance from property line. Except for required
driveway ingress/egress points, there shall be no off-street parking areas or
driveways within ten feet of any property line within the R-3 Multiple Family
Residential, C-1 General Commerce, C-2 Central Business, C/I
Commercial/Industrial and P/I Public/Institutional districts. The parking and
drive aisle setback shall be increased to 20 feet where said facilities are
located adjacent to the A Agriculture, R-1 Low Density Residential and R-2
Medium Density Residential districts.



      (3)   Boulevard parking prohibited. The boulevard (landscaped
portion) of the street right-of-way shall not be used for parking.



      (4)   All lots having direct driveway access onto major
collector or arterial roads shall provide turn around facilities on the lot
to eliminate vehicles backing onto said roads.



      (5)   The minimum corner clearance from the street
right-of-way line shall be at least 30 feet to the edge of the driveway.



      (6)   Driveways should be located as indicated on the
subdivision grading plan, however, an alternate location meeting the
requirements of this section will be permitted.



   (D)   Residential off-street parking and hard surfaced area
requirements. The purpose of this section is to provide minimum setback,
slope and miscellaneous standards for off-street parking and driveway
construction for single family detached dwelling units and single family
attached dwelling units not exceeding four units per building. The intent is
to reduce interference with drainage and utility easements by providing
setback standards; reduce erosion by requiring an improved surface for all
driveways: and, provide positive drainage to the street via establishment of
minimum driveway slope standards. The requirements of this section shall
apply to all building permits, for the construction of new structures and
modifications of existing structures, that require off-street parking. A
certificate of survey indicating the setback, slope and proposed elevations
shall be required to illustrate compliance with these provisions.



      (1)   Private parking areas, driveways, walkways and other
hard surfaced areas shall be permitted in residential districts so long as
all setbacks and lot coverage requirements are met.



      (2)   Each residential dwelling unit shall have two off-street
parking spaces. Each parking space shall be a minimum of ten feet in width
and 20 feet in length.



      (3)   Except for required driveway ingress/egress points, all
residential off-street parking areas, and  driveways within the A
Agriculture, R-1 Low Density Residential and R-2 Medium Density Residential
districts shall be set back at least five feet from all property lines.



      (4)   The vertical profile for a driveway shall not exceed 10%
maximum slope.



      (5)   The garage slab shall be constructed at an elevation
that will permit a driveway with a minimum slope of 18 inches above the top
of curb.



      (6)   Under unique circumstances where unusual topography,
existing conditions or physical disability of the property owner prohibit
compliance with division (D)(4) and/or (5) above, the City Engineer may
approve a driveway with a slope exceeding 10% and/or construction of said
garage slab less than 18 inches above the top of curb.



      (7)   A maximum of five operable and licensed motor vehicles
and/or recreational vehicles and equipment, may be parked or stored anywhere
outside the principal or accessory structures on the lot. Any such motor
vehicle and recreational vehicle and equipment placed upon a trailer shall
constitute one motor vehicle or recreational vehicle and equipment for
purposes of this section. All motor vehicles and recreational vehicles and
equipment must be owned by the resident of the dwelling, excluding occasional
guests. Motor vehicles and recreational vehicles and equipment parked in the
front yard area must be on a paved or hard surface driveway and shall not be
located on landscaping except as allowed by this section.



      (8)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1) and (3) of this
section, a residential off-street parking area, driveway or parking pad may
be constructed closer to the garage side property line subject to approval by
the city and the following conditions:



         (a)   The adjacent property owner(s) must consent in
writing to such reduction in setback requirement;



         (b)   A building permit shall be required. The property
owner shall submit a detailed drawing of the proposed location of the parking
area including dimensions and distances from the property line, the hard
surface material to be used and the lot coverage for the lot. The application
shall be reviewed by city staff. The city may require a certificate of survey
if determined necessary; and



         (c)   If the off-street parking area or driveway
encroaches into a city easement area it shall be subject to removal at any
time by order of the city. The property owner shall be liable for all costs
and expenses of such removal. Any unpaid costs and expenses shall be subject
to special assessment by the city. The property owner(s) shall be responsible
and liable for all consequences of such construction including drainage
matters and shall indemnify and hold the City of Mayer harmless from all
damages and injuries of any kind.



   (E)   Parking pads.



      (1)   General rules.



         (a)   Parking on landscaping is prohibited except as
provided for herein.



         (b)   All motor vehicles and recreational vehicles and
equipment must be operable and licensed.



         (c)   Parking pad surface materials shall be orderly
contained by delineated edging or in some other effective fashion.



         (d)   All parking pads must not disturb proper drainage
or utilities and shall be setback a minimum of five feet from the property
line and shall not be located in a drainage and utility easement.



         (e)   In cases where improved or semi-improved surface
materials are required, the pad must cover the entire area under the vehicle
and cannot be placed solely under the wheels of the vehicle. The pad must be
approved by the city and be suitable to control dust, drainage and prevent
spillage.



      (2)   Rear yard.



         (a)   A parking pad is allowed.



         (b)   A maximum of two operable and licensed motor
vehicles and/or recreational vehicles and equipment are allowed only on
improved surfaces in the rear yard.



         (c)   Any grass or weeds growing around the motor
vehicles and recreational vehicles and equipment shall be regularly cut and
subject to the noxious weed ordinance (§§ 93.35 through 93.43).



      (3)   Side yard.



         (a)   A maximum of two operable and licensed motor
vehicles and/or recreational vehicles and equipment are allowed only on
improved surfaces in the side yard. The improved surface parking pad is
allowed on the garage side only in line with the garage or in other cases
subject to the judgment of the City Administrator. A side yard parking pad
shall not exceed 450 square feet.



         (b)   Any grass or weeds growing around the motor
vehicles and recreational vehicles and equipment shall be regularly cut and
subject to the noxious weed ordinance (§§ 93.35 through 93.43).



      (4)   Front yard.



         (a)   Improved or semi-improved parking pads in the
front yard are not allowed, however, the access portion to a side yard
parking pad may be constructed with an improved surface.



         (b)   A maximum of one operable and licensed motor
vehicle and recreational vehicle and equipment are allowed only on a
unimproved surface parking pad in the front yard for a period not to exceed
one week at a time for up to five weeks within a calendar year. The front
yard vehicle parking area shall not exceed 200 square feet.



         (c)   Any grass or weeds growing around the motor
vehicles and recreational vehicles and equipment shall be regularly cut and
subject to the noxious weed ordinance (§§ 93.35 through 93.43).



   (F)   Recreational vehicles and equipment.



      (1)   Recreational vehicles and equipment.



         (a)   Recreational vehicles and equipment may be stored
in the side or rear yards subject to the following standards:



            1.   Recreational vehicles and equipment cannot
exceed 36 feet in length.



            2.   Parking for recreational vehicles and
equipment must be on parking pads with improved surfaces that meet the
requirements of this section. All parking pads must be constructed as
improved surfaces.



            3.   The designated parking pad shall be setback
at least five feet from side or rear property lines and shall not be located
within a drainage and utility easement.



         (b)   Any front yard parking of recreational vehicles
and equipment shall not be located on the street and must be located on the
improved driveway surface in the front yard, except as provided for in this
section. The recreational vehicle and equipment shall not encroach on any
sidewalk, trail or public right-of-way.



         (c)   Storage shall not occur in a required off-street
parking stall.



      (2)   Residential occupancy prohibited. Recreational vehicles
and equipment, including tents, shall not be used for residential dwelling
purposes or living quarters, temporarily or permanently, except as may be
approved in emergency cases by the City Council.



         (a)   Recreational uses. Tents, playhouses, or similar
structures may be used for play.



         (b)   Vacant lots – recreational vehicles and
equipment prohibited. No recreational vehicle and equipment shall be placed
upon any vacant lot within the city to be used for residential dwelling
purposes.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-R, passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 102-Y,
passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 102-Z, passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. 157, passed 7-13-09;
Am. Ord. 221, passed 6-11-18)



§ 152.027  PUBLIC UTILITIES REQUIRED.



   All residential, commercial, industrial, public, institutional or other
uses that include plumbing facilities shall be connected to the public sewer
and water system.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.028  ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or leave any
abandoned motor vehicle upon any public or private property within the city,
or for any property owner or occupant to permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any abandoned vehicle upon such private property, unless such
vehicle is within an enclosed building or structure.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.029  RELOCATED BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   No existing building or structure shall be relocated anywhere in the
city without a permit. A permit for the relocation of any building or
structure shall not be issued without site plan approval by the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission shall not approve a site plan without
certifying the following:



   (A)   The building or structure is compatible in appearance, age and
character with existing buildings and structures in the area of the
relocation destination.



   (B)   The building or structure meets all code requirements for new
buildings or structures.



   (C)   The building or structure is compatible with any other
buildings or structures existing on the same property.



   (D)   The building or structure meets all other requirements of this
chapter and any other city ordinances.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.030  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Accessory buildings and structures in residential districts
shall be subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   No accessory building or structure shall be constructed
on a parcel without a principal building.



      (2)   There shall be no more than one accessory building on a
lot, unless no attached garage is present, then there shall be no more than
one accessory building permitted in addition to a detached garage. When an
attached garage is present, then a detached garage shall be considered an
accessory building.



      (3)   A building permit is required for all accessory
buildings and structures over 200 square feet.



      (4)   Setback. Accessory buildings and structures attached to
or part of the principal building shall maintain the same setbacks as
required for the principal buildings.



         (a)   Decks - or porch extension. A deck or porch that
is attached to the rear (backyard) side of a principal building may extend up
to 50% of the required rear setback for the principal building. Such
extension shall be subject to council review and approval.



         (b)   Detached accessory buildings and structures shall
be at least five feet from side lot lines, and five feet from rear lot lines.



      (5)   Location.



         (a)   No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed within a front yard or corner side yard.



         (b)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not be
permitted within an easement.



      (6)   Size. Tool houses, sheds, and similar buildings for
storage of domestic supplies and non-commercial recreational equipment shall
not exceed 200 square feet.



      (7)   Height. No accessory building or structure shall exceed
17 feet in height.



      (8)   Design characteristics. In all cases, accessory
buildings shall be constructed of materials similar to the principal
structure, and in character with the surrounding built environment.



      (9)   The requirements of this section do not apply to
domesticated animal enclosures (doghouses) or children’s playhouses,
provided such structures are less than 25 square feet in area and five feet
in height.



   (B)   Accessory buildings in commercial and industrial zoning
districts shall maintain setbacks as defined for principal structures. All
accessory buildings and structures for commercial and industrial uses shall
require site plan approval.



   (C)   Accessory structures that are constructed in any required yard
shall not occupy more than 30% of the yard area in which it is located. The
30% maximum coverage shall include the total of all accessory buildings and
structures.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-E, passed 6-14-04; Am. Ord. 102-R,
passed 6-26-06; Am. Ord. 163, passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 199, passed 4-13-15)



§ 152.031  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIRED.



   For all zoning actions or permit applications, except single-family
residential new construction building permits, a site plan review is required.



   (A)   Submittal requirements.



      (1)   Boundary survey of parcel including identification of
all monuments.



      (2)   Scaled location of all buildings, structures, driveways,
sidewalks, trails, parking stalls, and curbing.



      (3)   Scaled identification of all setback dimensions from
property lines.



      (4)   Scaled locations of all existing and proposed utilities
and easements.



      (5)   Scaled depictions of floor plans for each story.



      (6)   Scaled depictions of each building elevation and
descriptions of exterior building materials and color schemes.



      (7)   Scaled site grading plans, including erosion and
sedimentation control mechanisms and procedures.



      (8)   Scaled delineations of any shoreland, floodplain, or
wetland areas on the site.



      (9)   Identification of any floodplain or wetland
encroachments and detailed mitigation plans.



      (10)   Detailed landscape plans, illustrating size, types, and
locations of all materials, a description of site seeding or sodding, a
description of the timetable for site landscaping, and the identification of
any irrigation systems.



      (11)   Detailed descriptions of any site fencing, including
type, location and height.



      (12)   All plans shall be dated and shall bear the name(s) of
the preparer(s), including professional registrations or certifications when
appropriate or required.



   (B)   Review requirements.



      (1)   Applicants shall submit 12 sets of site plans with a
required application form to the City Clerk for distribution. Site plans will
be evaluated for consistency with documentation requirements. Upon acceptance
of the application, site plans will be distributed to the appropriate city
entity for review and recommendation, according to § 152.006. Application
fees and reimbursement of the city’s out-of-pocket expenses shall be in
accordance with § 152.157.



      (2)   Action to approve, modify, or deny site plan
applications shall be based upon consistency of the application with the
city’s Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, other policies and official
controls, and the compatibility of the proposed action with existing area
land uses, existing area investments and neighborhood character, capacity of
public streets and utilities, and future planned land uses.



      (3)   Actions on site plans are effective upon a simple
majority of members present.



   (C)   Waiver requirements. The city zoning officer may find that
certain characteristics of an application make it unnecessary for the
applicant to submit all of the information for an application required by
this section. In such cases, the zoning officer may waive, modify or reduce
some of the requirements if it is also found that the absence of such
information will not inhibit the city’s ability to evaluate the compliance
of the proposed site development with the standards of this chapter and any
other requirements of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mayer.



   (D)   Plan modifications. An amended site plan involving major
changes as determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall be applied for and
administered as required for a new site plan.



   (E)   Expiration. Unless the City Council specifically approves a
different time when action is officially taken on the request. site plans
which have been issued under the provisions of this section shall expire
without further action by the Planning Commission or the City Council within
one year of the date the site plan is approved, unless the applicant has
substantially started the construction of any building, structure, addition
or alteration, or use requested as part of the approved site plan. The
applicant shall have the right to submit an application for time extension
before the expiration of the one year period and the applicant shall apply
for an extension thereof by completing and submitting a request for
extension, including the renewal fee as established by City Council
resolution. The request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith
attempt to complete any building, structure, addition or alteration, or use
approved in the site plan. Said extension shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 159, passed 7-27-09; Am. Ord. 205, passed
11-9-15)



ZONING DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP



§ 152.050  ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.



    The City of Mayer is hereby divided into classes of zoning districts
as listed below and as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with
all the explanatory and supplemental matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared part of this chapter:



 



A
 
Agriculture District


R-1
 
Low Density Residential District


R-2
 
Medium Density Residential District


R-3
 
Multiple Family Residential District


C-1
 
General Commerce District


C-2
 
Central Business District


C/I
 
Commercial/Industrial District


P/I
 
Public/Institutional District


SO
 
Shoreland Overlay District


PUD
 
Planned Unit Development Overlay District




 



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 223, passed 8-27-18)



§ 152.051  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   The locations and boundaries of the districts established by this
chapter are set forth on the Zoning Map of the City of Mayer, which is made
part of this chapter.



(Ord. 170, passed 10-11-10)



§ 152.052  ZONE BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION.



   The location and boundaries of each zoning district established by this
chapter are as set forth in zoning district sections of this chapter and are
shown on the Official Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundaries as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules will
apply:



   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline
of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.



   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.



   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits
and orderly annexation boundaries shall be construed as following such city
limits and orderly annexation boundaries.



   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.



   (E)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be
construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the
shoreline, the boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual
shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams, river canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such centerlines.



   (F)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in the above divisions (A) through (E) shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by the scale of the map.



   (G)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variances with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered by divisions (A) through (E) above, the Planning
Commission shall interpret the district boundaries.



   (H)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in
single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the Planning
Commission may permit as a special exemption the extension of the regulations
for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line
into the remaining portion of the lot.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.053  (A) AGRICULTURE.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   To recognize the existing agricultural use of the land;
and



      (2)   To preserve the undeveloped state of the land until
development at urban densities with public sewer and water occurs.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)    Vegetable, fruit, crop, sod and horticulture production.



      (2)   Animal husbandry, not exceeding one animal unit per acre.



      (3)   Agricultural use accessory structures.



      (4)    Single-family detached residence and customary
accessory uses.



      (5)   Public parks and recreation facilities.



      (6)   Home occupations.



   (C)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Seasonal mineral extraction.



      (2)   New development information and marketing centers.



      (3)   Occasional, rummage, barn, and/or yard sales defined as
the infrequent intermittent and/or sporadic sale of tangible personal
property at retail by a person who is or is not in the business or does or
does not hold himself or herself out to be in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (2)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (3)   Roof or building mounted, ground mounted and community
solar energy systems.



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1) Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) mounted on a tower.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-T, passed 1-8-07; Am. Ord. 185, passed
9-10-12; Am. Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15)



§ 152.054  (R-1) LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   To recognize fully- or partially-developed low-density
residential areas, including supporting public and semi-public facilities;



      (2)   To provide for future development of a similar nature;
and



      (3)   To protect the desired low intensity living environment
from encroachment by potential conflicting uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached residences; customary accessory
uses incidental to the principal use such as private garages, screen houses
and play equipment.



      (2)   Public parks and recreation facilities.



      (3)   Daycare facilities.



      (4)   Residential facilities.



      (5)   Home occupations.



   (C)   Special conditions. In all single family residential
subdivisions approved after the date of this chapter, the following
conditions shall be met:



      (1)   The usable back yard area of each single family lot at
the time of plat approval shall include a minimum depth of 50 feet of yard
area unencumbered by wetlands, lakes, rivers, floodplains, ponding areas, and
other restrictive use areas or easements, as measured from the rear of the
proposed building pad to the rear lot line and including an area equal to the
average width of the lot. Exceptions to this provision is that typical side
yard and rear yard drainage and utility easements as required in Chapter 151
shall be allowed in the unencumbered area, and a wetland buffer area may
occupy one-half of the required 50 feet unencumbered area. After plat
approval, proposed lot improvements and structural improvements are subject
to normal permitting requirements and dimensional standards in this chapter.



      (2)   All public streets shall include a minimum pavement
width of 32 feet, as measured from back of curb to back of curb. Public
rights-of-way shall be 60 feet wide, except that the city may allow a 50-foot
right-of-way on cul-de-sacs and other minor streets. A ten-foot trail
easement shall be required adjacent to all rights-of-way less than 60 feet in
width.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (2)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (3)   Roof or building mounted and ground mounted solar energy
systems.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-C, passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. 201,
passed 8-24-15)



§ 152.055  (R-2) MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   To recognize fully- or partially-developed
medium-density residential areas;



      (2)   To allow for the development of new medium-density
residential areas;



      (3)   To recognize a variety of housing options other than
conventional single-family detached dwellings; and



      (4)   To allow the development of such housing to occur under
certain conditions in areas.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwellings; customary accessory
uses incidental to the principal uses such as private garages, screen houses,
and play equipment.



      (2)   Single-family attached dwellings, not exceeding four
units per building; customary accessory uses to the principal use.



      (3)   Public parks and recreation facilities.



      (4)   Daycare facilities.



      (5)   Residential facilities.



      (6)   Home occupations.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (2)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (3)   Roof or building mounted and ground mounted solar energy
systems.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15)



§ 152.056  (R-3) MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   Intent. In addition to the purposes stated in § 152.002, it
is intended that the R-3 District provide for higher-density single-family
attached, owner-occupied and rental housing opportunities in areas where
public utilities are available and required for service. The design and
circulation of new residential areas are also intended to be complementary
with and enhance the community’s small town atmosphere.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Single-family attached dwellings with more than four
dwelling units per building.



      (2)   Apartments or condominiums at a density not exceeding 22
units per acre.



      (3)   Customary accessory uses and structures.



      (4)   Public parks and recreation uses.



      (5)   Daycare facilities.



      (6)   Residential facilities.



      (7)   Home occupations.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (2)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (3)   Roof or building mounted and ground mounted solar energy
systems.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-Y, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 102-Z,
passed 4-13-09; Am. Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15)



§ 152.057  (RESERVED).



§ 152.058  (C-1) GENERAL COMMERCE.



   (A)   Intent. To provide appropriate areas in proximity to
thoroughfares for commercial retail and service establishments that are
oriented to the motoring public are not compatible with the desired character
of the downtown.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Commercial establishments which are oriented to the
motorist, such as eating and drinking places, motor vehicle fuel stations and
convenience stores, motor vehicle repair shops, car washes, and hotels and
motels.



      (2)   Essential service structures.



      (3)   Offices and administrative facilities.



      (4)   Medical related clinics/uses and offices.



      (5)   Banking/financial institutions.



      (6)   Laundromats and dry cleaners.



      (7)   Barber and beauty shops.



      (8)   Churches.



      (9)   Off-liquor sales.



      (10)   Day care facilities.



      (11)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



      (12)   Veterinary clinic, animal care, animal shelter, pet
daycare, pet training, or animal hospital.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (2)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (3)   Roof or building mounted, ground mounted and community
solar energy systems.



      (4)   Customary accessory uses incidental to the principal
use, such as off-street parking and signs.



   (D)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) mounted on a tower.



      (2)   Drive-in businesses (for the purposes of this section,
shall mean: drive-in restaurants and fast food businesses with a drive-thru).
Restrictions include:



         (a)   No drive-in business shall be located within 300
feet of a school or church.



         (b)   No drive-in shall be located within 100 feet of
any residentially zoned property, provided:



            1.   No public address system shall be audible
from any residential zone; and



            2.   Screening of the property from residential
areas will be required. The city may require fencing, earthen berms and
landscaping, or any other method or combination deemed appropriate to
accomplish the required screening.



         (c)   No drive-in shall be located on any street other
than an arterial roadway, collector roadway or business service road.



         (d)   No access drive shall be within 100 feet of
intersecting street right-of- way lines.



         (e)   Adequate areas shall be designated for snow
storage such that clear visibility shall be maintained from the property to
any public street.



      (3)   Motor vehicle sales lots provided that all display lots
for vehicles provide curb and gutter per city specifications for storm
run-off purposes and all outdoor signs meet city sign regulations.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-J, passed 2-28-05; Am. Ord. 201,
passed 8-24-15; Am. Ord. 218, passed 3-12-18)



§ 152.059  (C-2) CENTRAL BUSINESS.



   (A)   Intent. To recognize the existing “downtown” area of Mayer
and its function as a social, trade, and service center for residents of the
city and surrounding agricultural areas.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)    Commercial establishments including, but not limited
to, retail establishments (grocery store, hardware, drug, clothing,
furniture, eating and drinking places).



      (2)   Personal services (laundry, barber, shoe repair, beauty
salon, photography studio).



      (3)   Professional services (medical, dental, attorney).



      (4)   Finance, insurance and real estate services.



      (5)   Repair services (jewelry, radio/television, but not
auto).



      (6)   Public and semi-public facilities such as municipal
offices, non-residential structures.



      (7)   Accessory uses incidental to the principal use, such as
off-street parking and signs.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Sexually oriented uses, accessory, as regulated by
Chapter 114.



      (2)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (3)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (4)   Roof or building mounted, ground mounted and community
solar energy systems.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted after
issuance by the city of a conditional use permit:



      (1)   Convenience store with vehicle fuel stations, provided
that:



         (a)   The sale of food items is in compliance with state
and county standards;



         (b)   Vehicle fuel facilities are installed in
accordance with state standards. Adequate space shall be provided to access
fueling station and allow maneuverability around the pumps. Underground fuel
storage tanks are to be positioned to allow adequate access by automotive
fuel transports and unloading operations minimize conflict with circulation,
access and other activities on the site;



         (c)   Wherever fuel stations are to be installed,
station islands shall be installed; and



         (d)   An internal site pedestrian circulation system
shall be defined and appropriate provisions made to protect such areas from
encroachments by parked cars or moving vehicles.



      (2)   Mixed use of a permitted use and multiple-family
residential dwelling units; but only if at least 25% of the interior square
footage (exclusive of the basement or cellar) is used full time for a
permitted use, and the permitted and residential uses are not conflicting.



      (3)   Parking of vehicles; need not be enclosed.



      (4)   Auto repair, minor establishments provided all storage
is completely enclosed and no items are stored outside.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-J, passed 2-28-05; Am. Ord. 102-O,
passed 11-14-05; Am. Ord. 186, passed 10-8-12; Am. Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15)



§ 152.059A  (C-2) CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The intent of the (C-2) Central Business District is to
encourage the continuation of a viable downtown by promoting uses dependent
on high volumes of pedestrian traffic; to provide for regulation of the high
intensity commercial and public uses located within the original core of the
city; and, to encourage limited areas of parks and greenspace in the
downtown. The Central Business District provides space for concentrated
general business and commercial activities at locations where they are easily
accessible to residential areas and, at the same time, minimizing negative
impacts to residential neighborhoods. The standards and guidelines set forth
in this district are intended to encourage sensitive architectural
rehabilitation and preservation of the older significant buildings as well as
establish standards for new developments which emphasize harmonious and
unifying architectural design that will tie the entire district together.



      (2)   All property located within this district shall be
subject to all other applicable standards, procedures and regulations as
specified within the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mayer (“City
Code”). Where the provisions of this district and the other portions of the
City Code are in conflict, the more stringent requirement shall apply.



   (B)   Permitted and special uses. All buildings, structures, land or
premises shall be used, erected, constructed, reconstructed moved or altered
according to the uses identified or described in the City Code.



   (C)   Accessory uses. In addition to other uses specifically
identified in § 152.059, the following are permitted accessory uses within
the C-2 Central Business District:



      (1)   Off-street parking and loading areas, as regulated by §
152.063;



      (2)   Signs as regulated within §§ 152.120 through 152.133;
and



      (3)   Dwellings, provided that they meet the following
stipulations:



         (a)   The dwelling units shall not be located on the
main or street level story of the structure;



         (b)   The number of dwelling units shall not exceed two
per structure;



         (c)   The number of occupants per dwelling unit shall
not exceed the equivalent of one adult for every 200 square feet of living
space in the dwelling unit; with persons under the age of 16 counting as
one-half that of an adult;



         (d)   Parking for this residential accessory use shall
be provided, as specified in § 152.063, in addition to the requirements for
the principal use of the structure;



         (e)   Stair access to the dwelling units shall not be
located on any side of the structure which faces a public right-of-way except
for alleys; and



         (f)   The design of the dwelling units shall be such
that their use for residential purposes is not readily apparent from a public
right-of-way.



   (D)   Lot and setback requirements.



      (1)   Minimum lot area - 7,500 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot width - 50 feet abutting a public street.



      (3)   Maximum lot coverage - none.



      (4)   Maximum building height - 40 feet.



      (5)   Minimum setbacks -no setbacks required except as
provided elsewhere in this section, there shall be no front yard, side yard
or rear yard setback required for a structure provided that the structure
meets the following requirements:



         (a)   Structures must be designed to prevent snow, ice
and other precipitation from falling on any public sidewalk;



         (b)   In order to reinforce the existing building line
and to facilitate pedestrian access and circulation, all new principal
buildings shall be built to the front property lines and shall be oriented so
that the front of the building faces the public street, unless a variation
meeting the general intent of this district and performance standards is
approved by the City Council following review by the Planning Commission; and



         (c)   All entrance and exit doors to buildings built to
the front property line shall be recessed inwards so as not to open directly
onto the adjoining street or sidewalk.



      (6)   Parking/paving setbacks.



         (a)   None, unless adjoining residential districts, then
15 feet.



         (b)   All off-street loading berths shall be a minimum
of ten feet from any residential district.



   (E)   Building materials. Prohibited exterior materials. Unadorned
pre-stressed concrete panels, non-decorative concrete block, metal siding
with exposed fasteners, corrugated metal or unfinished metal shall not be
used as exterior materials on that part of a building facing a public
right-of-way except an alley. Painting previously unpainted brick on the
facades of buildings is prohibited.



   (F)   Visual relief. No front elevation or elevation facing a public
right of way may exceed 40 feet without the incorporation of visual relief.
All new building elevations shall include a minimum of three of the following
elements creating visual relief.



      (1)   Accent materials.



      (2)   A visually pleasing front entry that, in addition to
doors, shall be accented by a minimum of one-hundred fifty (150) square feet
around the door entrance for single occupancy buildings and a minimum of 300
square feet total for the front of multi-tenant buildings (this entry and
accenting shall be counted as one element).



      (3)   A minimum of 25% of the front elevation and each front
that faces a street shall be glass. Glazing patterns and window styles of
adjacent buildings shall be matched as much as possible.



      (4)   Contrasting, yet complementary material colors (not
painted).



      (5)   A combination of horizontal and vertical design features.



      (6)   Varying wall depths.



   (G)   Design elements.



      (1)   Architectural features which create a sculptural or
three-dimensional quality such as marquees, balconies, grill work, sculpted
keystones, caryatids, detailed cornices, brackets, niches, and awnings shall
be incorporated into the design of buildings or structures. Buildings shall
be designed to match existing cornices, brick corbelling, details and
patterns of adjacent buildings as much as possible.



      (2)   Flat roofs must have parapets and sloped roofs must be
sloped a minimum of 4/12.



   (H)   Franchise architecture. To maintain the unique character of
downtown Mayer, buildings shall not be constructed or renovated using typical
franchise architecture. Franchise architecture is defined as building design
that is trademarked or identified with a particular franchise, chain or
corporation and is generic or standard in nature. Franchises or national
chains must follow the standards of this section to create a building that is
compatible with downtown Mayer.



   (I)   Colors. Colors are an important element of the overall design
concept for the Central Business District and should be complementary to the
historical palette of the Central Business District, or other historic and
significant buildings in the vicinity. Color can be used to enhance or draw
attention to specific parts of a building such as entries. Colors can be used
to mask or diminish the visual importance of features such as service entries
or storage and trash areas. The following items shall be observed with
respect to building colors.



      (1)   The predominant exterior colors shall be muted earth
tones.



      (2)   Trim and detail colors should provide contrasting
accent. The number of accent colors should be limited to prevent a gaudy
appearance.



      (3)   Colors should represent the architectural style of the
building.



      (4)   Materials with natural colors such as brick or copper
should be left unfinished unless there is a compelling reason to the contrary.



      (5)   Bright or intense colors or very dark colors should be
used sparingly and should typically be reserved for more delicate or
intricate design elements such as grille work, as well as more transient
features such as awnings, signs and flags.



      (6)   Doors, screening walls, or other architectural features
should be painted or finished to complement the color of the building.



   (J)   Awnings. Awnings may be used to enhance the character of
buildings while providing sun protection for display windows, shelter for
pedestrians, and a sign panel for businesses.



      (1)   Awnings cannot extend across multiple storefronts and/or
multiple buildings, unless the multiple buildings are used to operate the
same use.



      (2)   Awnings must be constructed of durable, protective, and
water repellant materials.



      (3)   Replacement of existing awnings must meet the
requirements of divisions (J)(1) and (2) of this section.



   (K)   Expansions, exterior renovations and exceptions.



      (1)   All subsequent expansion and/or additions shall be
constructed of those materials comparable to those used in the original
construction and shall be designed in a manner conforming to the original
architectural design and general appearance of the original building.



         (a)   All portions of any buildings undergoing expansion
or addition, so as to require the issuance of a building permit, shall be
brought into conformance with all provisions of this section at the time the
renovations or additions are completed unless the proposed additions do not
exceed 30% of the floor area of the structure. Re-shingling, re-roofing or
replacement of windows shall not constitute a renovation which requires the
existing building to be brought into conformance with this Section.



         (b)   Any buildings undergoing exterior facade changes
which do not include structural changes to the building shall bring the
exterior building materials into compliance with this section unless the
proposed facade changes do not exceed 30% of the gross wall elevations for
all sides of the entire structure. For structures on corner lots this
percentage is increased to 50% of the gross wall elevation of all sides of
the structure.



      (2)   Existing building materials not specifically approved in
this section may be allowed to be repaired or replaced only after it is
demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that the
proposed building meets three or more of the following standards.



         (a)   The building shall be an accessory structure.



         (b)   The building shall not be occupied by personnel.



         (c)   The building shall be used to house materials,
parts, or equipment that would otherwise constitute open storage.



         (d)   The building shall be generally not visible from
major arterial roadway corridors, as defined in City Code.



         (e)   The landscaping of the area surrounding the
location shall provide natural visual barriers to the building.



         (f)   The building shall be constructed of long-term
maintenance free materials. A manufacturer’s warranty shall be prima-facie
evidence of compliance with this standard.



         (g)   The proposed building is an addition to a
structure that currently utilizes such materials and application of required
design standards would be infeasible or impractical as determined by the
Planning Commission.



      (3)   It is recognized that there may be projects that require
a departure from the requirements in this section in order to be feasible.
Any deviance from the standards prescribed in this section will require a
variance according to § 152.153. Additional possible grounds to be
considered in determining possible reasons for granting exceptions to this
section are as follows: safety, public benefit, unique site or building
characteristics or that complying with this section would have a detrimental
effect on the use of the property. Financial hardship alone is not a basis to
grant an exception. Exceptions will be reviewed by the Planning Commission
with a recommendation to the City Council for action.



   (L)   Site plan and building design review required. No building
permit shall be issued for construction, expansion or remodeling in the (C-2)
Business District until a building design review pursuant to this section and
a site plan review pursuant to § 152.031 has been approved to determine that
the use and development is consistent with the requirements of this section.



(Ord. 158, passed 7-27-09)



§ 152.060  (C/I) COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this district is to provide land in
proximity to major thoroughfares for the development of certain activities
that will strengthen local employment opportunity and tax base of the city.
Such a zone will be characterized by a positive overall visual appearance
that is compatible with the predominant residential aesthetic character of
the city.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses for the
Commercial/Industrial (C/I) District are as follows:



      (1)   Commercial establishments requiring large sites for
outdoor display, sales, and storage (farm implement sales, motor vehicle
sales, mobile home sales, and building material sales are examples).



      (2)   Wholesaling all commodities except live animals.



      (3)   Uses permitted in C-1 General Commerce District.



      (4)   Offices and administrative facilities.



      (5)   Commercial/industrial establishments used for
fabricating, manufacturing, production, processing, and storage of materials,
goods, and products.



      (6)   Warehousing.



      (7)   Mini-storage facilities.



      (8)   Veterinary clinic, animal care, animal shelter, pet
daycare, pet training, or animal hospital.



      (9)   Funeral homes and mortuaries.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Off-street parking and loading.



      (2)   Signs as regulated by §§ 152.120 through 152.133.



      (3)   Offices ancillary to the principal use.



      (4)   Outdoor storage.



      (5)   Sexually oriented uses, accessory, as regulated by
Chapter 114.



      (6)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (7)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (8)   Roof or building mounted, ground mounted and community
solar energy systems.



   (D)   Conditional uses. The conditional uses for the
Commercial/Industrial (C/I) District are as follows:



      (1)   Commercial towers as regulated by § 152.100.



      (2)   Sexually oriented uses as regulated by Chapter 114.



      (3)   Drive-in businesses (for the purposes of this section,
shall mean: drive-in restaurants and fast food businesses with a drive-thru).
Restrictions include:



         (a)   No drive-in business shall be located within 300
feet of a school or church.



         (b)   No drive-in shall be located within 100 feet of
any residentially zoned property, provided:



            1.   No public address system shall be audible
from any residential zone; and



            2.   Screening of the property from residential
areas will be required. The city may require fencing, earthen berms and
landscaping, or any other method or combination deemed appropriate to
accomplish the required screening.



         (c)   No drive-in shall be located on any street other
than an arterial roadway, collector roadway or business service road.



         (d)   No access drive shall be within 100 feet of
intersecting street right-of- way lines.



         (e)   Adequate areas shall be designated for snow
storage such that clear visibility shall be maintained from the property to
any public street.



      (4)   Motor vehicle sales lots provided that all display lots
for vehicles provide curb and gutter per city specifications for storm
run-off purposes and all outdoor signs meet city sign regulations.



   (E)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Solar farms as regulated by § 152.102 of this chapter.



   (F)   Special requirements. The following special requirements shall
apply to those uses in the Commercial/Industrial (C/I) District:



      (1)   Prohibited structures.



         (a)   Building types. No basement, shack, shed, trailer,
tent, or other structure of a temporary character shall be constructed,
placed, maintained, or used on any lot except accessory to and during
construction of the permanent building.



         (b)   Building materials. Face materials, which rapidly
deteriorate or become unsightly such as galvanized metal, unfinished
structural clay shall not be used.



      (2)   Permitted building materials. Structural systems of all
buildings shall be in compliance with the Uniform Building Code as adopted
and in effect in the City of Mayer at the time of application for a building
permit. The lower 30% of the exterior front of all buildings, as measured
from ground elevation, facing the main access street shall consist of
materials comparable in grade and quality to the following:



         (a)   Brick;



         (b)   Natural stone;



         (c)   Pre-cast concrete units and concrete block,
provided that surfaces are molded, serrated or treated with a textured
material in order to give the wall surface a three-dimensional character;



         (d)   Wood, provided surfaces are finished for exterior
use and only woods of proven exterior durability such as cedar, redwood and
cypress.



      (3)   Variance to 30% requirement. The 30% requirement may be
varied as determined appropriate to accommodate taller buildings or new
buildings constructed next to or in the immediate vicinity of other buildings
in order to provide a uniform and consistent effect for the area.



      (4)   Planning Commission approval. If material other than
those listed above or a variance for the 30% requirement is proposed, it
shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Commission.



      (5)   Storage and screening. All materials, supplies,
merchandise or other similar matter not on display for direct sale, rental or
lease to the ultimate consumer or user, except those items exempt in §
152.090, shall be stored within a completely enclosed building or within the
confines of a 100% opaque wall or fence eight feet in height. Merchandise
that is offered for sale as described heretofore may be displayed beyond the
confines of a building, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall
not constitute a greater number of square feet than 10% of the ground floor
area of the building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is of
a type customarily displayed outdoors, such as garden supplies.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-G, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 163,
passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15; Am. Ord. 218, passed 3-12-18)



§ 152.061  (P/I) PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL.



   (A)   Intent. In addition to the purposes stated in § 152.002, it
is intended that the P/I District provide opportunities for government
facilities, schools, churches, hospitals, libraries and other similar public
and institutional uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Government buildings, structures and facilities,
including community centers, public works buildings and fire stations,
utilities, rights-of-way, easements, parks, open spaces and vacant land.



      (2)   Schools, churches, cultural and educational facilities,
and uses, libraries, hospitals, health facilities, and emergency medical
facilities.



      (3)   Communication towers, subject to requirements in §
152.100.



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (2)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (3)   Roof or building mounted, ground mounted and community
solar energy systems.



   (D)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS) mounted on a tower.



   (E)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Solar farms as regulated by § 152.102 of this chapter.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-Y, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 155,
passed 6-22-09; Am. Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15)



§ 152.062  DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.



 


District

 

Lot Area

 

Lot Width2

 

Maximum Density3

 

Front Yard4

 

Side Yard5

 

Rear Yard6

 

Maximum Height

 

Lot Coverage7






Ag

 

40 acres1

 

300 ft.

 

1/40 acre

 

50 ft.

 

50 ft.

 

50 ft.

 

50 ft.

 

N/A




R-1

 

10,000 sq. ft.1

 

85 ft.

 

3/acre

 

30 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

35%




R-2

 

7,000 sq, ft.1

 

100 ft.

 

6/acre

 

30 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

50%




R-3

 

2,720 sq. ft.1

 

120 ft.

 

22/acre

 

30 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

75%




PRD

 

Varies

 

Varies

 

Varies

 

30 ft.

 

10 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

Varies




C-1

 

20,000 sq. ft.

 

120 ft.

 

N/A

 

20 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

75%




C-2

 

7,500 sq. ft.

 

50 ft.

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

40 ft.

 

N/A




C/I

 

15,000 sq. ft.

 

100 ft.

 

N/A

 

30 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

85%




P/I

 

20,000 sq. ft.

 

120 ft.

 

N/A

 

30 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

40 ft.

 

50%




1    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit.




2    Minimum lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot
lines of a lot measured at the front yard building setback line.




3    Units per net acreage (net acreage equals gross acreage less
wetlands, surface water, floodplain, and existing road easements or
rights-of-way).




4    Parking and loading areas shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet.




5    Side yards with street frontage (corner lots) in residential
districts shall be the same distance as the required front yard setback for
that district. Parking and loading areas shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet.




6    Parking and loading areas shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet.




7    Relationship of impervious surface area to total site area.










(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-A, passed 6-24-02; Am. Ord. 102-C,
passed 6-23-03; Am. Ord. 102-E, passed 6-14-04; Am. Ord. 102-Q, passed
4-10-06; Am. Ord. 102-Y, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 102-Z, passed 4-13-09; Am.
Ord. 182, passed 6-14-12; Am. Ord. 196, passed 12-8-14; Am. Ord. 204, passed
11-9-15; Am. Ord. 208, passed 5-9-16)



§ 152.063  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   The following table illustrates the minimum number of on-site parking
spaces required for various uses permitted in the city. The city may modify
minimum parking requirements in the C-2 District, if it is determined that
the use is consistent with the purpose of the district and that street
parking is sufficient to accommodate the use. Parking and maneuvering areas
may be set back only ten feet from all property lines or road easements.



 


Uses

 
Minimum Number of Parking Spaces Required




Residential
 
2/dwelling unit


Church
 
1/3 seats in largest assembly


School
 
1/classroom plus 1/3 seats in largest assembly


Theater
 
1/3 seats


Restaurant
 
1/3 seats


Office
 
5/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area


Retail
 
6/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area


Convenience Store
 
7/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area


General Service
 
4/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area


Trade Business
 
3/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area


Manufacturing
 
3/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area


Other Industry
 
3/1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area


Car Wash
 
5 stacking plus 1/bay


Drive-up Restaurant
 
5 stacking plus 1/3 seats




 



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-A, passed 6-24-02)



§ 152.064  SHORELAND OVERLAY.



   (A)   Intent. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of Mayer affects
the public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to
pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base.
Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and
welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of
shorelands of public waters. The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated
responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision,
use and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and
enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural
environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters
and related land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by Mayer.



   (B)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of this section shall apply to
the shorelands of the public waters as classified in division (E) of this
section. Pursuant to Minnesota Rules, Parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900,
lakes, ponds, or flowage less than ten acres in size are exempt from this
chapter. A body of water created by a private user where there was no
previous shoreland is exempt from this section.



   (C)   Variances. The Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall hear and
decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has
adopted for the conduct of business. When a variance is approved after the
Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the
hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required in
division (D) hereof shall also include the summary of the public
record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported
the issuance of the variance. For existing developments, the application for
variance shall clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment
system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if
issued, shall require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment
system.



   (D)   Notifications to the Department of Natural Resources. Copies
of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances or amendments
under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to the Department of
Natural Resources Commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked
at least ten days before the hearings. Notices of hearings to consider
proposed subdivisions/plats shall include copies of the subdivision/plat. A
copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions
granting variances under local shoreland management controls shall be sent to
the Commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked within ten days
of final action.



   (E)   Shoreland Classification System. The public waters of Mayer
have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota
Rules, Part 6120.3300, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Carver
County, Minnesota. The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed below shall
be as defined in this section and as shown on the Official Zoning Map.



      (1)   Rivers and streams.



         (a)   Tributary streams: South Fork Crow River.



   (F)   Lot area and width standards. The lot area (in square feet)
and lot width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex and quad
residential lots created after the date of enactment of this chapter for the
lake and river/stream classification are as follows:



      (1)   Sewered tributary rivers/streams lot widths. There are
no minimum lot size requirements for rivers and streams. The lot width
standards for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential developments for
tributary rivers or streams are as follows:



 


Unit

 

Lot Width



Single
 
75 feet


Duplex
 
100 feet


Triplex
 
120 feet


Quad
 
120 feet



 



      (2)   Additional special provisions. Residential subdivisions
with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in the table in § 152.062 can
only be allowed if designed and approved as Planned Residential Development
Districts pursuant to Section § 152.057. Only land above the ordinary high
water level of public waters shall be used to meet lot area standards, and
lot width standards shall be met at both the ordinary high water level and at
the building line.



   (G)   Placement of structures on lots.



      (1)   When more than one setback applies to a site, structures
and facilities shall be located to meet all setbacks. Structures and on-site
sewage treatment systems shall be set back from the ordinary high water level
as follows:



 


Classes of Public Waters

 

Sewered Structures

 

Unsewered Structures

 

Sewage Treatment System




Tributary River

 

50 feet

 

100 feet

 

75 feet




 



      (2)   When a structure exists on a lot on either side, the
setback of a proposed structure shall be the greater of the distances set
forth in the above table or the setback of the existing structure. One
water-oriented accessory structure, designed in accordance with these
provisions, may be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from the ordinary
high water level.



   (H)   Additional structure setbacks. The following additional
structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the waterbody.



 


Setback from

 

Setback



Top of bluff
 

30 feet



Unplatted cemetery
 

50 feet



Right-of-way line of federal, state, county highway
 

50 feet



Right-of-way line of town road, public street, or other roads or streets not
classified
 

20 feet




 



   (I)   Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities,
except stairways and landings, shall not be placed within bluff impact zones.



   (J)   Non-residential uses without water-oriented needs.
Non-residential uses without water-oriented needs shall be located on lots or
parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels
with public waters frontage, shall either be set back double the normal
ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from
the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.



   (K)   Design criteria for structures.



      (1)   High water elevations. Structures shall be placed in
accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site as outlined
in Chapter 154: Floodplain Management. Where these controls do not exist, the
elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or
flood-proofed shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level
at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above
the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher.



         (b)   For rivers and streams classified by the Minnesota
Department of Natural Resources, by placing the lowest floor at least three
feet above the flood of record, if data are available. If data are not
available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary
high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine
effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to
establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical
evaluations shall be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent
with Minnesota Rules, Parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200, governing the management
of floodplain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood
protection elevation determined shall be used for placing structures and
other facilities.



         (c)   Water-oriented accessory structures may have the
lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the
structure is construed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation,
electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if
long-duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand
ice action and wind-driven waves and debris.



      (2)   Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have
one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure
setback in this subchapter if this water-oriented accessory structure
complies with the following provisions:



         (a)   The structure or facility shall not exceed ten
feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater
than 250 square feet. Detached decks shall not exceed eight feet above grade
at any point.



         (b)   The setback of the structure or facility from the
ordinary high water level shall be at least ten feet.



         (c)   The structure or facility shall be treated to
reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by
vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, or color, assuming summer,
leaf-on conditions.



         (d)   The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails,
but shall not be enclosed or used as a storage area.



         (e)   The structure or facility shall not be designed or
used for human habitation and shall not contain water supply or sewage
treatment facilities.



      (3)   Stairway, lifts and landings. Stairways and lifts are
the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving
access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and
lifts shall meet the following design requirements:



         (a)   Stairways and lifts shall not exceed four feet in
width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial
properties, public open-space recreational properties, and planned
residential developments.



         (b)   Landings for stairways and lifts on residential
lots shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square
feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space, and
recreational properties.



         (c)   Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways,
lifts, or landings.



         (d)   Stairways, lifts, and landings may be either
constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, or placed into the ground,
provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil
erosion.



         (e)   Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be located in
the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface
of the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical.



         (f)   Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths
for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to
shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of
division (K)(3)(a) to (e) are complied with in addition to the requirements
of Minnesota Rules, Chapter 1340.



      (4)   Significant historic sites. No structure shall be placed
on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the
site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and
documented in a public repository.



      (5)   Steep slopes. The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate
possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters
before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads,
driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined
necessary, conditions shall be attached to permits to prevent erosion and to
preserve existing vegetative screening of structures, vehicles, and other
facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer,
leaf-on vegetation.



   (L)   Height of structures. All structures in residential districts,
except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, shall not exceed
35 feet in height.



   (M)   Vegetation alterations.



      (1)   Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of
structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and
parking areas regulated herein are exempt from the following vegetation
alteration standards.



      (2)   Removal or alteration of vegetation is allowed subject
to the following standards:



         (a)   Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and
bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation
clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is
allowable if permitted as part of a development approved by the City Council
if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the
soil and water conservation district in which the property is located.



         (b)   In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep
slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and
trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view of the water from the
principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and
landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and
watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or
facilities, provided that:



            1.   The screening of structures, vehicles, or
other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on
conditions, is not substantially reduced;



            2.   Along rivers, existing shading of water
surfaces is preserved; and



            3.   The above provisions are not applicable to
the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose
safety hazards.



   (N)   Connections to public waters. Excavations where the intended
purpose is connection to public waters, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons,
and harbors, shall be controlled by this section. Permission for excavations
may be given only after the Commissioner of the Department of Natural
Resources has approved the proposed connection to public waters.



   (O)   Placement and design of roads, driveways, and parking areas



      (1)    Public and private roads and parking areas shall be
designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve
maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation shall be
provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are
designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters
consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water
conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.



      (2)   Roads, driveways, and parking areas shall meet structure
setbacks and shall not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when
other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no
alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and shall be
designed to minimize adverse impacts.



      (3)   Public and watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and
access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided
the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are
met.



   (P)   Stormwater management. Impervious surface coverage of lots
shall not exceed 25% of the lot area.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 152.065  (PUD) PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide
for the modification of certain regulations under a flexible regulatory
process as compared to the more rigid development regulations common to
traditional zoning districts when it can be demonstrated that such
modification would result in a high quality development that would preserve
or create features or facilities of benefit to the community, such as, but
not limited to open space, or active recreational facilities or preserving
natural resources, which features or facilities would not have been provided
if no regulations were modified. These features or facilities would be
compatible with surrounding development, and would conform to the goals and
policies of the Comprehensive Plan. Throughout this section, PUD shall mean
the same as “Planned Unit Development.”



   (B)   Benefit to the public intended. PUDs are intended to encourage
the efficient use of land and resources, to promote greater efficiency in
public utility serves and encourage innovation in the planning and building
of all types of development. Planned unit developments shall demonstrate at
least one benefit to the pubic, including but not limited to the following.
The applicant bears the burden of demonstrating that one or more pubic
benefits exist:



      (1)   Innovations in residential development that:



         (a)   Proactively and tangibly address the demand for
housing for all economic levels;



         (b)   Provide greater variety in tenure, type, design,
and siting of dwellings;



         (c)   Provide for the creation of affordable housing
units through an efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of
utilities and streets, thereby lowering housing costs and public investments,
except that tangible plans to maintain dwelling unit affordability provided
one or more additional public benefits are found to exist.



      (2)   The reestablishment, preservation and/or enhancement of
desirable site characteristics such as natural topographic and geologic
features.



      (3)   A variety of housing types/densities together with
preservation of open space/natural features within one development.



      (4)   The creation of active and/or passive recreational
opportunities and/or facilities that would not have been provided if no
regulations were modified.



      (5)   A more desirable environment than would be possible
through the application of zoning and subdivision regulations of the city.



   (C)   Types of planned unit developments – where permitted.



      (1)   Two types of planned unit developments are hereby
established subject to the use regulations of the zone in which the PUD is
proposed to be located and provided the standards of division (C)(2) below
are achieved:



         (a)   Single-family PUDs, comprised of detached dwelling
units on individual lots, necessary street right-of-way to serve such
dwelling units and any common open space, recreational facilities or other
areas or facilities.



         (b)   Non-single family PUDs, comprised of attached
dwelling units, detached dwelling units not on individual lots, commercial,
retail, office, service, public, quasi-public or industrial buildings, or any
combination thereof, the necessary streets and other public and/or private
rights-of-way to serve such uses, and any appurtenant common open space,
recreational facilities or other areas or facilities.



         (c)   A PUD may comprise both of the above types,
subject to compliance with the use regulations of the zone in which the PUD
is proposed to be located.



      (2)   Planned unit developments may be located in any zone
subject to use regulations; provided, that:



         (a)   The use(s) permitted in the PUD shall be governed
by the use regulations of the underlying zoning classification or other
generally applicable city regulations governing permitted uses, permitted
accessory uses, conditional uses and interim uses, including overlay and
special district regulations;



         (b)   A PUD for any parcel or tract of land shall have a
minimum net site area for each zoning district as set forth below excluding
areas not suitable to development:



            1.   Residential Districts – Five acre minimum.



            2.   General Business District – Two acre
minimum.



            3.   Central Business District – One acre
minimum.



            4.   Commercial/Industrial District – Five acre
minimum.



            5.   Mixed Use PUD – Five acre minimum.



         (c)   The design of a PUD shall take into account the
relationship of the site to the surrounding areas. The perimeter of the PUD
shall be so designed as to minimize undesirable impact of the PUD on adjacent
properties and, conversely, to minimize undesirable impact of adjacent land
use and development characteristics on the PUD.



         (d)   Common open space shall be either held in common
ownership by all owners of that specific use in the PUD or dedicated for
public use with approval of the City Council. Whenever possible, common open
space shall be linked to the open space areas of adjoining developments.
Common open space shall be of such size, shape, character, and locations as
to be useable for its proposed purpose.



   (D)   General requirements/permitted modifications.



      (1)   In general. In considering a proposed PUD project, the
approval thereof may involve modifications in the regulations, requirements
and standards of the zoning district in which the project is located, and in
Chapter 151. In modifying such regulations, requirements and standards as
they may apply to a PUD project, the standard identified within this division
(D)(1) and the limitations set forth in division (D)(2) and (3) shall apply.
In order to be granted any such modifications, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the proposed development complies with the purpose of this
chapter. The applicant shall bear the burden of supporting any change in
requirements. The city may increase any requirements necessary to make the
project conform to the purposes of this chapter.



         (a)   Front yard setbacks. The requirements for minimum
front yard setbacks for the zoning district in which the planned unit
development is located shall apply to all exterior boundary lines of the
site, except if the proposed use in the PUD adjacent to the exterior property
line of the site, is substantially the same use as the existing uses adjacent
to the exterior boundary line of the site of the planned unit development.



         (b)   Distance between buildings. The minimum distance
between structures shall be 14 feet.



         (c)   Building height. Building height shall be governed
by the requirements of the underlying zoning district classification as set
forth therein.



         (d)   All permitted, permitted accessory, conditional
and interim uses contained in the underlying zoning district shall be treated
as permitted, permitted accessory, conditional and interim uses in the PUD
overlay district. Uses not listed as permitted, permitted accessory, or
conditional or interim in a specific district shall not be allowed in a PUD
unless it is found that the use is complementary to the functionality of the
development and the other uses found therein.



         (e)   An increase in density may be permitted to
encourage the preservation of natural resources, topography and geological
features. Excluded from the calculation shall be areas which would normally
not be developable such as waterways or water bodies, wetlands, shorelands,
floodplains, steep slopes, hydric soils and the like in addition to areas
required for streets, parks, pedestrian facilities, storm water controls and
placement of public utilities.



         (f)   Off-street parking and loading space shall be
provided in each PUD in the same ratios for types of building and uses as
required in the underlying zoning district. However, the city may reduce the
number of parking spaces required provided PUD applicants submit information
demonstrating a reduced need for parking facilities (e.g., senior housing
complex, PUDs featuring joint parking facilities, parking study, proximity to
and availability of bus service coupled with transit-friendly design, and the
like).



         (g)   The streets connecting with any PUD must be of
sufficient size and character to accommodate the traffic to be produced by
the project. The streets connecting with any PUD shall not significantly
alter the character of existing residential neighborhoods. Evaluation of the
proposal pursuant to this section shall include consideration of the
following criteria:



            1.   The increase in traffic which will be
generated by the development;



            2.   The present width and condition of streets to
be affected;



            3.   Presence or absence of improved sidewalks and
trails;



            4.   Potential impacts upon the value of
surrounding properties;



            5.   Anticipated effect upon availability of
parking;



            6.   Existence of a particular conflict between
vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



            7.   The street type designated in the
Comprehensive Plan.



         (h)   The city may reduce paved right-of-way width
requirements outlined in Chapter 151 for streets contained within the PUD
providing:



            1.   A demonstrated benefit to the public exists
that would not exist if not for the reduction of street width; and



            2.   The City Engineer and city’s emergency
service providers (fire, ambulance, and police) review the PUD to determine
adequacy of proposed street widths. The city may require total right-of-way
widths (including non-paved) to adhere to standards contained within Chapter
151.



      (2)   Single-family PUDs. Single-family PUDs shall be subject
to the following limitations in modification of regulations in addition to
those limitations set forth in division (D)(1):



         (a)   The minimum lot size and lot width, as required in
the underlying zoning district, may be reduced by up to 25% provided that an
area, in addition to conventional park dedication requirements, in the amount
of 8% of the total site area, shall be preserved for common open space and
held in common ownership or dedicated for public use provided the City
Council finds the open space is set aside for the following:



            1.   Common useable open space comprising
landscaping and facilities such as but not limited to play areas, trails,
picnic tables and benches;



            2.   Areas containing significant trees as defined
by the city;



            3.   Other non-critical areas, the preservation or
creation of which promote one or more goals and/or policies of the
Comprehensive Plan;



      (3)   Non-single-family PUDs. Non-single-family PUDs shall be
subject to the following limitations in modification of regulations in
addition to those limitations set forth within the underlying zoning district:



         (a)   When a PUD containing dwelling units is proposed
on property having more than one underlying residential district, zone the
total number of dwelling units allowed may be determined by totaling the
number of dwelling units allowed to be located on each portion of the PUD
area located in a separate zone according to the regulations of that zone.



         (b)   The city, at its discretion, may allow the number
of units arrived at under division(D)(3)(a) above to be located anywhere
within the PUD subject to the PUD approval process set forth in this section
and provided the city makes a finding of fact that a public benefit resulting
from such action is present.



   (E)   Subdivision requirements. The approval of a preliminary and
final plat shall be required of all projects which involve or contemplate the
subdivision of land and the procedures set forth in Chapter 151 shall be
followed concurrently herewith. The approved final development plan shall be
a binding site plan. A lease of land not involving a residential structure
shall be exempt from Chapter 151 if the lease conforms to the final
development plan.



   (F)   Pre-application/informational meeting and concept plan
required.



      (1)   Informal meeting. Prior to filing an application for
preliminary PUD plan approval, the applicant of the proposed PUD shall
arrange for and attend an informational meeting with city staff. At such
conference, the applicant shall be prepared to generally describe the
applicant’s proposal for a PUD. The primary purpose of the meeting shall be
to provide the applicant with an opportunity to gather information and obtain
guidance as to the general suitability of the conformity to the provisions of
this chapter before incurring substantial expense in the preparation of
detailed plans, surveys, and other data.



      (2)   Following a pre-application/informational meeting but
prior to submitting an application for preliminary plan approval, the
applicant for a proposed PUD shall submit to the city a general concept plan
for review by city staff and/or the Planning Commission and City Council.



         (a)   Purpose. The general concept plan provides an
opportunity for the applicant to submit a plan to the city showing the
applicant’s basic intent and the general nature of the entire development
without incurring substantial cost. This concept plan serves as the basis for
the informational meeting so that the proposal may be considered at an early
stage. The following elements of the proposed general concept plan represent
the immediate significant elements which the city shall review and for which
a decision shall be rendered:



            1.   Overall maximum PUD density range.



            2.   General location of major streets and
pedestrian walkways.



            3.   General location and extent of public and/or
common open space.



            4.   General location of residential and
non-residential land uses with approximate intensities of development.



            5.   Staging and timetable of development.



            6.   Other special criteria for development.



   (G)   Preliminary and final PUD plan approval required.



      (1)   Each PUD shall require preliminary and final plan
approval according to the following process.



         (a)   Preliminary PUD plan review.



            1.   Process.



               A.   The applicant for a PUD shall apply for
a preliminary plan review. The Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council to approve or deny the preliminary plan
and the City Council shall take final action on the application. City Council
approval of the preliminary plan indicates that the applicant can proceed to
final plan review. The application for preliminary plan review shall be
accompanied by supporting information as listed in this section or as deemed
necessary by the city to fully explain the property, the applicant and the
proposed development. The application may include further information, as the
applicant deems appropriate for the preliminary plan review for the proposed
PUD. The city may require additional information depending on the complexity
of the proposal.



               B.   The timeframe for the city action
begins at the point of submittal of a complete application for the
preliminary PUD plan review. An approved preliminary PUD plan shall expire
within one year, if a final plan has not been filed and approved, unless an
extension is granted by the City Council.



         (b)   Final PUD plan review.



            1.   Process. The applicant shall have secured
final plan review approval by the City Council within one year following the
date of approval of the preliminary PUD plan review. If application for final
plan review is not received within one year, the preliminary plan review will
be considered abandoned and a new application for preliminary plan review
must be submitted. The City Council shall make a final determination on
approval of the final PUD plan review.



         (c)   Fees. The required application fee shall accompany
applications for concept plan, preliminary PUD plan and final PUD plan. The
applicant shall pay fees as set forth by the City Council.



         (d)   Public hearing notices. All preliminary PUD plan
applications shall require a public hearing and shall be noticed and
processed as follows.



            1.   After the filing of an preliminary PUD plan
application, the city shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of the
hearing shall be posted and published at least ten days prior to the date of
the hearing. Notice of proposed preliminary PUD plan shall be mailed to each
property owner within 350 feet of the proposed PUD boundary. Upon hearing the
request, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, denial or
conditional approval of the preliminary PUD plan and shall state the reasons
for its action. The City Council shall consider the recommendation by the
Planning Commission shall approve, deny or modify the request for the
preliminary PUD plan.



         (e)   Developers agreements. A developer’s agreement
may be executed, at the discretion of the city, reflecting all terms and
conditions of the approved PUD plans and financial requirements.



      (2)   If land subdivision is requested in conjunction with the
PUD plan, both preliminary and final PUD plan approvals shall be processed
concurrently with the platting procedures set forth in Chapter 151. Required
data, parkland/fee-in-lieu of parkland dedication, design standards and
required improvements shall be the same as per a conventional subdivision and
as set forth within Chapter 151. In addition to the data requirements
itemized within Chapter 151 the application shall also include information
necessary to process the PUD preliminary and final plan(s) as contained
within this section. The city may waive requirements determined to be
redundant.



      (3)   The preliminary plan and the final plan may be combined
and together processed through review as a final PUD plan. In addition, the
applicant may need to file concurrent rezoning, preliminary plat, or final
plat applications in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter
or Chapter 151.



   (H)   Phased development. Development of the project may be phased,
in which case each complete phase may be processed separately through both
preliminary development plan review and final PUD plan review. A map showing
all property owned or controlled by the developer which is contiguous to the
development site or which is within the area determined by the city to be
relevant for comprehensive planning and environmental assessment purposes,
together with a conceptual plan of the property’s eventual development
through all potential phases shall be submitted with the application for the
first phase. The developer is not responsible for providing a conceptual plan
for contiguous or nearby property which is not owned or controlled by the
developer. The conceptual plan shall conform to the purposes of this chapter
and shall be used by the city to review all phases of the development. All
phases of the development shall conform to the conceptual plan, all
conditions of approval, and applicable regulations.



   (I)   Preliminary PUD Plan – contents of complete application.



      (1)   The applicant shall file with the city a preliminary PUD
plan (seven large scale copies and fifteen 11x17 copies), which includes the
following:



         (a)   A legal description of the property proposed to be
developed;



         (b)   A map of the subject property and surrounding area
determined by the city to be relevant for comprehensive planning,
environmental assessment or zoning review purposes, which shall depict
comprehensive plan designations, zoning classifications and existing land
uses and utility mains/urban facilities including parks and streets;



         (c)   A proposed site plan for the subject property
depicting the following:



            1.   Topography at two-foot contours.



            2.   Individual trees over eight inches in trunk
diameter measured four feet above the base of the trunk in areas to be
developed or otherwise disturbed;



            3.   Designated placement, location, and principal
dimensions of lots, buildings, streets, parking areas, recreation areas and
other open space, landscaping areas and utilities;



            4.   If the developer owns or otherwise controls
property adjacent to the proposed development, a conceptual plan for such
property demonstrating that it can be developed in a compatible manner with
the proposed development;



         (d)   A conceptual landscape plan showing existing and
proposed landscaping including groundcover, shrubbery and tree species;



         (e)   Drawing and/or text showing scale, bulk and
architectural character of proposed structures;



         (f)   For single-family PUDs, a conceptual drawing
depicting the number and location of lots which would be allowed if no
regulations were modified;



         (g)   Special features including but not limited to
critical areas and sites or structures of historic significance;



         (h)   Text describing conditions or features which
cannot be adequately displayed on maps or drawings;



         (i)   A narrative stating how the proposed development
complies with the goals and policies of the Comprehensive Plan;



         (j)   A narrative stating how the proposed plan impacts
adjacent property owners;



         (k)   A narrative describing the public benefit of the
proposed PUD;



         (l)   A narrative describing proposed
operation/maintenance of the development including open areas, stormwater
features and recreational facilities resulting from the subdivision;



         (m)   If applicable, draft conditions, covenants and
restrictions and other documents relating to operation and maintenance of the
development, including all of its open areas and recreational facilities;



         (n)   Information normally required within the
underlying zoning classification relating to site plan review;



         (o)   Other information required by the city.



   (J)   Preliminary PUD plan – criteria for approval.



      (1)   Preliminary PUD approval shall be granted by the city
only if the applicant demonstrates that:



         (a)   The proposed project shall not be detrimental to
present and potential surrounding land use.



         (b)   Land surrounding the proposed development can be
planned in coordination with the proposed development and can be developed so
as to be mutually compatible.



         (c)   Streets and sidewalks, existing and proposed, are
suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic within the proposed
project and in the vicinity of the proposed project, in light of the criteria
set forth in Chapter 151 and the Comprehensive Plan.



         (d)   Services including potable water, sanitary sewer
and storm drainage are available or can be provided by the development prior
to occupancy.



         (e)   Each phase of the proposed development, as it is
planned to be completed, contains the required parking spaces, recreation
spaces, landscape and utility areas necessary for creating and sustaining a
desirable and stable environment.



         (f)   The project conforms with the purposes and
standards prescribed in this chapter.



         (g)   The project conforms to the Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   Conformance with the design standards and required
improvements as set forth within Chapter 151.



   (K)   Preliminary PUD plan – minor and major changes to an
approved preliminary PUD.



      (1)   A proposed minor change to an approved preliminary PUD
shall be incorporated into the application for final PUD approval, and any
notification regarding such final PUD approval shall describe the proposed
minor change(s). A MINOR CHANGE means any departure from the conditions of
preliminary approval which is not a “major change” and includes but is
not limited to the following:



         (a)   Reductions to the number of dwelling units in a
structure;



         (b)   Reductions to the number of residential dwelling
units;



         (c)   Reductions to the number of nonresidential
structures;



         (d)   Revisions to heights of structures;



         (e)   Revisions to location of internal roads;



         (f)   Revisions similar in nature to those above as
determined by the city.



      (2)   A proposed major change to an approved preliminary PUD
shall require reapplication for preliminary PUD approval and a public hearing
and any notification regarding such preliminary PUD approval shall describe
the proposed major change or changes. A MAJOR CHANGE is any departure from
the conditions of preliminary PUD approval which would result in any of the
following:



         (a)   Revisions to the approved design concept;



         (b)   Revisions to the approved use(s);



         (c)   An increase in the number of residential dwelling
units;



         (d)   An increase in square footage of nonresidential
structures;



         (e)   A decrease in the amount of landscaping, site
perimeter buffering, and open space; and



         (f)   An increase in traffic volumes or change in
circulation patterns which impacts surrounding development.



   (L)   Final PUD plan – contents of complete application.



      (1)   Within 12 months following the approval of the
preliminary PUD, the applicant shall file the final PUD conforming to the
approved preliminary PUD. The final PUD shall include the following:



         (a)   A survey of the property, showing for all areas to
be developed or disturbed, existing features, including topography at
two-foot contours, buildings, structures, trees over eight inches in trunk
diameter measured four feet above the base of the trunk, streets, utility
easements, rights-of-way, and existing land uses;



         (b)   Elevation and perspective drawings of project
structures and improvements;



         (c)   Proposed final association documents, declarations
of covenants, conditions and restrictions and other documents relating to
operation and maintenance of the development, including all of its open areas
and recreational facilities, which documents shall be recorded upon final PUD
approval;



         (d)   Proposed final agreements which may have been
required as conditions of preliminary PUD approval;



         (e)   A development schedule;



         (f)   The following plans and diagrams:



            1.   An off-street parking plan;



            2.   A circulation diagram indicating the proposed
movement of vehicles and pedestrians within the planned unit development, and
to and from existing and programmed thoroughfares; any special engineering
features and traffic regulating devices needed to facilitate or ensure the
safety of this circulation pattern must be shown;



            3.   Landscaping and tree planting plan, including
site grading;



            4.   A topographic map or model of the site and
surrounding vicinity;



      (2)   In the event that development standards were submitted
and approved as part of the preliminary PUD plan, development standards shall
be made binding upon all future owners of the property in a manner acceptable
to the city and may be submitted in lieu of elevation and perspective
drawings of project improvements.



   (M)   Final PUD plan – criteria for approval. Final PUD approval
shall be granted by the city only if the applicant demonstrates that the
final PUD substantially conforms to the approved preliminary PUD. For the
purposes of this section, SUBSTANTIALLY CONFORMS means that, as compared to
the preliminary PUD, the final PUD contains no revisions in density, uses,
design, or development standards or in the site plan, other than the minor
changes pursuant to division (K) above.



   (N)   Final PUD plan – extension of time for filing. For good
cause shown, the city, at its discretion, may grant an extension of time of
one year for filing the final PUD and required accompanying papers, and may
grant additional one-year extensions; provided, however, the city shall have
the right to reexamine and update any conditions made to mitigate development
impact.



   (O)   Final PUD plan – failure to file and termination.



      (1)   In the event the final PUD or any required application
and materials are not filed within 12 months following approval of a
preliminary PUD, except as provided elsewhere in this chapter or as noted in
division (O)(2) below, the approval of the preliminary PUD shall lapse and
the approval shall be deemed null and void and without force or effect.



      (2)   When it is determined as part of the preliminary PUD
approval that the final PUD is to be phased, the final PUD for the first
phase shall be submitted within 12 months of preliminary approval. The final
development plan for each subsequent phase shall be submitted within the
schedule established at the time of preliminary PUD approval. In the case of
a PUD which includes a subdivision, the final PUD shall be submitted within
two years of receiving preliminary approval.



      (3)   The time period for filing a of final PUD shall not
include periods of time during which progress on the final PUD was reasonably
halted or delayed due to the filing and pendency of legal actions challenging
an approval granted by the city pursuant to this chapter; provided, that in
all cases when more than two years have elapsed subsequent to the date of
approval of a preliminary PUD the applicant shall be required to comply with
all current building, construction, subdivision and other applicable
standards of the city prior to being granted approval of the final PUD;
provided, that a change in zoning district classification enacted subsequent
to approval of the final development plan shall not affect the project.



   (P)   Final PUD plan – adjustments to approved final PUD.



      (1)   City staff is authorized to allow adjustments in
accordance with division (P)(2) below. City staff shall allow only such
adjustments as are consistent with guidelines established in division (P)(2),
and in no case shall an adjustment be allowed if it will increase the total
amount of floor space authorized in the approved final PUD, or the number of
dwelling units or density, or decrease the amount of parking or loading
facilities or permit buildings to locate substantially closer to any boundary
line or change substantially any point of ingress or egress to the site.



      (2)   For the purposes of this division (P), ADJUSTMENTS means
any departure from the conditions of final PUD approval which complies with
the following criteria:



         (a)   The adjustment maintains the design intent and
quality of the original approval;



         (b)   The amount of landscaping, buffering and open
space shall not be reduced;



         (c)   The number of dwelling units in residential
developments and the square footage of structures shall not increase;



         (d)   The adjustment shall not relocate a building,
street or other use more than 20 feet in any direction and shall not reduce
any required yard and/or setback;



         (e)   The height of buildings and other structures shall
not increase;



         (f)   Views from both structures on-site and off-site
shall not be substantially reduced;



         (g)   Traffic volumes shall not increase and circulation
patterns shall not change;



         (h)   Changes in colors, plant material and parking lot
configurations are minor;



         (i)   The adjustment does not add significant new
environmental impacts or significantly increase environmental impacts
disclosed in the original documents;



         (j)   City staff determines that the change will not
increase any adverse impacts or undesirable effects of the project, or that
the change in no way significantly alters the project.



   (Q)   Letter of credit required for final PUD plan. No final PUD
shall be implemented until the applicant files with the city a letter of
credit approved by the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do
business in the state, or other equivalent security approved by the City
Attorney, in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of all public
improvements, utilities and landscaping, conditioned upon the applicant’s
completion of such portions of the project according to the submitted final
PUD and the provisions of this chapter, and, in addition, providing that no
change, extension of time, alteration or addition to the project will in any
way affect the obligation on the letter of credit. Such letter of credit
shall also be conditioned upon full restoration of the site in the event that
grading, clearing or any other site preparation or work is begun and
abandoned, and in the determination of the city, it will better serve the
public health, welfare and safety to restore the site rather than to require
completion of public improvements, utilities and landscaping. If the PUD is
also being subdivided, the letter of credit required to be posted by the
subdivision of property as per Chapter 151, to the extent that it satisfies
the requirements of this section, shall be accepted as full or partial
fulfillment of the requirements hereof.



   (R)   Operating and maintenance requirements for PUD common open
space and service facilities.



      (1)   Whenever common open space or service facilities are
provided within the PUD, the PUD plan shall contain provisions to assure the
continued operation and maintenance of such open space and service facilities
to a predetermined reasonable standard.



      (2)   Common open space and service facilities within a PUD
shall be placed under the ownership of one or more of the following:



         (a)   Landlord control where only use by tenants is
anticipated.



         (b)   Property owners’ association, provided all of
the following conditions are met:



            1.   Prior to the use, occupancy, sale or the
execution of contracts for sale of an individual building unit, lots, parcel,
tract, townhouse, apartment, or area, a declaration of covenants, conditions
and restrictions or an equivalent document as specified in Minnesota Statutes
shall be filed with the city prior to the filings of the documents with the
County Recorder’s Office.



            2.   The declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions or equivalent document shall specify that deeds, leases or
documents of conveyance affecting buildings, units, lots, parcels, tracts,
townhouses or apartments shall subject the properties to the terms of the
declaration.



            3.   The declaration of covenants, conditions and
restrictions shall provide that an owners’ association or corporation may
be formed and if such an association or corporation is formed, property
owners must be members of the association or corporation which shall maintain
all properties and common areas in good repair and which shall assess
individual property owners’ proportionate shares of joint or common costs.
This declaration may be subject to the review and approval of the City
Attorney. The intent of this requirement is to protect the property values of
the individual owner through establishing effective private control.



            4.   The declaration shall additionally provide
that in the event the association or corporation fails to maintain properties
in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the city, or fails
to pay taxes or assessments on properties as they become due, and in the
event the city incurs any expenses not immediately reimbursed by the
association or corporation, then the city shall have the right to assess each
property its pro rata share of the expenses. Such assessments, together with
interest thereon and costs of collection, shall be a lien on each property
against which such assessment is made.



            5.   Membership in the association must be
mandatory for each owner within that neighborhood in the PUD, as determined
with the approval of the final PUD, and any successive buyer and the
association must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes, and the
maintenance of the open space facilities to be deeded to it.



            6.   The open space restrictions must be permanent
and not for a given period of years.



            7.   Property owners must pay their pro rata share
of the cost of the association by means of an assessment to be levied by the
association which meets the requirements for becoming a lien on the property
in accordance with state law and the association must be able to adjust the
assessment to meet changing needs.



            8.   The by-laws and rules of the association and
all covenants and restrictions to be recorded must be approved by the City
Council prior to the approval of the final PUD plan.



      (3)   Staging of common open space. The construction and
provision of all of the common open space and public improvements and
recreational facilities that are shown on the final development plan for a
PUD must proceed at the same rate as the construction of dwelling units or
other private facilities.



   (S)   Building permits – certificates of occupancy. The city shall
issue building permits for buildings and structures which conform with the
approved final PUD and with all other applicable city ordinances and
regulations. The city shall issue a certificate of occupancy for completed
buildings or structures which conform to the requirements of the approved
final PUD and all other applicable city ordinances and regulations. The
construction and development of all the open spaces and public and
recreational facilities of each project phase must be completed or bonded
before any certificate of occupancy will be issued.



   (T)   Extension of time for construction. For good cause shown, the
city, at its discretion, may grant one extension of time for commencement or
continuation of construction subsequent to approval of the final PUD.



   (U)   Termination of PUD – failure to commence or continue
construction.



      (1)   If construction has not been started within two years
from the date of approval of a final PUD with an associated subdivision, or
two years from the date of approval of any other final PUD, or if
construction has been commenced but the work has been abandoned for a period
of one year or more, and if no extension of time has been granted as provided
in herein, the authorization granted for the PUD project shall terminate and
all permits and approvals issued pursuant to such authorization shall expire
and be null and void.



      (2)   The time period of commencing or continuing construction
shall not include periods of time during which commencement of construction
or continuation of construction was reasonably halted or reasonably delayed
due to the filing of pendency of legal action challenging an approval granted
by the city pursuant to this chapter; however, in all cases, when more than
two years have elapsed subsequent to the date of approval of a final PUD with
associated subdivision, or more than two years have elapsed subsequent to the
date of approval of any other final PUD the applicant shall be required to
comply with all current building, construction, subdivision and other
applicable standards of the city; provided, that a change in zoning district
classification enacted subsequent to approval of the final development plan
shall not affect the project.



   (V)   Sale of lots. Lots in a platted PUD may be sold to separate
owners according to the separate lots as shown in the plat filed and approved
in connection therewith. No sale shall be permitted which subdivides a lot in
such a manner as to create a new lot line except as provided in Chapter 151.



   (W)   Lots subject to final PUD plan. All lots or other divisions of
a subdivided PUD shall remain subject to compliance with the final
development plan regardless of the fact of subdivision in compliance with
Chapter 151 or lot(s)/division(s) of a subdivided PUD were subsequently
conveyed.



(Ord. 223, passed 8-27-18)



PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 152.080  RESIDUAL FEATURES.



   No activity or operation shall be established or maintained which by
reason of its nature or manner of operation will cause the emission of noise,
odor, toxic or noxious fumes, gases, smoke, dust and particulate matter in
such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
welfare, comfort and safety or cause injury to property or business as
regulated by federal and state laws and regulations.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.081  GLARE.



   Direct or reflected glare, such as from floodlights, spotlights, or
high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination,
shall not be visible beyond the site of origin at any property line. Any
lighting used for exterior illumination (including off-street parking areas)
shall be directed away from adjacent properties.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.082  NOISE.



   Noise generated from any use shall be in compliance with and regulated
by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.083  VIBRATION.



   Vibration generated from any use shall be in compliance with and
regulated by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.084  EXPLOSIVES.



   Any use requiring the storage, utilization, or manufacturing of
products which could decompose by detonation shall be located not less than
1,000 feet from any Residential or Planned Residential Development District.
This standard shall not apply to the storage or usage of liquefied petroleum
or natural gas for normal residential or commercial purposes.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.085  WASTE MATERIAL.



   All waste generated from any use shall be managed in compliance with
and regulated by Minnesota Pollution Control Agency rules. Waste generated on
any premises shall be kept in containers designed for waste collection and
stored in a structure or within an enclosed or screened area. The
accumulation, storage, processing or disposal of waste, compost or recyclable
materials on any premises, which is not generated on that premises, is
prohibited, except as specifically provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.086  RADIATION AND ELECTRICAL EMISSIONS.



   No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity
beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance (except from
domestic household appliances) adversely affecting the operation at any point
of any equipment including but not limited to radio and television reception
other than that of the creator of the disturbance.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.087  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   The traffic generated by any use shall be channeled and controlled in a
manner that will not contribute to congestion on public streets, safety
hazards and excessive traffic through residential areas. Traffic into and out
of all commercial and industrial uses and areas shall in all cases be forward
moving with no backing onto streets or pedestrian ways. No access drive to
any lot shall be located within 30 feet of any two intersecting street
right-of-way lines.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.088  DRAINAGE.



   No land shall be developed in a way and no use shall be permitted that
results in flooding or erosion affecting adjacent properties. Such runoff
shall be properly channeled into a storm drain, water course ponding area, or
other suitable facility approved by the city.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.089  LAND SLOPE.



   No building or structure shall be constructed on slopes of 18% or more
in grade.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.090  OUTSIDE STORAGE.



   In all districts, all material and equipment shall be stored within a
building or be fully screened (see § 152.091) so as not to be visible from
adjoining properties, except in the following instances:



   (A)   Construction and landscaping materials and equipment
temporarily being used on the premises, as long as they are kept in a manner
so as not to create a blighting issue.



   (B)   Agricultural equipment and materials if these are being used
or intended for use on the premises.



   (C)   Private recreational vehicles, boats and equipment, as long as
they are in an operable state.



   (D)   Public recreational equipment and facilities.



   (E)   Off-street parking facilities except as otherwise herein
regulated and except in residential districts where any off-street parking
area containing over six spaces may be required to be screened. Auto repair
shops shall at no time have in excess of six disabled vehicles on the
premises that are not screened from view. A disabled vehicle shall be
maintained on the premises for no longer than six months.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-A, passed 6-24-02; Am. Ord. 102-G,
passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 102-Y, passed 5-12-08; Am. Ord. 102-Z, passed
4-13-09)



§ 152.091  SCREENING.



   (A)   Outside storage. The screening of outside storage areas and
solar farms required herein shall consist of a solid fence or wall that is
100% opaque and not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height.
Such a screen wall or fence shall be designed and constructed as to be
architecturally harmonious with the principal structure or solar farm and
located so as to not extend within 25 feet of any street. Landscaping (trees,
shrubs, grass and other plantings) shall be on the right-of-way side of any
screening or fencing. A screen planting may be substituted for a screen wall
or fence at the discretion of the Council, provided that any such screen
planting shall fulfill the foregoing height and opacity requirements
throughout each season of the year within 24 months after date of planting,
and that no such screen planting shall be located across any existing
easements.



   (B)   Commercial and industrial screening. All commercial and
industrial uses abutting and/or adjacent to a residential district shall be
required to provide screening according to this section. All screening shall
consist of either a fence or a green belt planting strip as provided for
below:



      (1)   A green belt planting strip shall consist of evergreen
trees and/or deciduous trees and plants and shall be of sufficient width and
density to provide an effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be
designed to provide complete visual screening to a minimum height of six
feet. Earth mounding or berms may be used, but shall not be used to achieve
more than three feet of the required screening. The planting plan and type of
plantings shall require the approval of the city.



      (2)   A screening fence may be incorporated into the green
belt planting strip and shall be constructed of masonry, brick, or wood. Such
fence shall provide a solid screening effect six feet in height. The design
and materials used in constructing a required screening fence shall be
subject to the approval of the city.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-G, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 201,
passed 8-24-15; Am. Ord. 207, passed 4-11-16)



§ 152.092  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Intent. It is the policy of the city to preserve its
significant natural resources as a complement to existing and future
development. In particular, wetlands and drainageways shall be preserved in
their natural state for their functional and ecological value as well as for
their positive impact upon proximate urban development.



      (1)   Development within woodland areas may be permitted but,
as far as practical, retention of substantial tree stands shall be encouraged
and incorporated into the required landscape plan.



      (2)   In addition to preservation of existing woodland areas,
the city shall require significant landscaping/planting in open or disturbed
areas as a normal part of land development. Specific requirements shall be
set forth in this section.



   (B)   Landscape plan required. In every case where landscaping is
required by provision of this chapter or by an approval granted by the city,
for a building or structure to be constructed on any property, the applicant
for the building permit shall submit a landscape plan prepared by a
registered landscape architect, in accordance with the provisions of this
section. The landscape plan shall include the following information:



      (1)   General. Name and address of developer/owner; name and
address of landscape architect; date of plan preparation; date and
description of all revisions; name of project or development.



      (2)   Site plan. A scale drawing of the site based upon a
survey of property lines with indication of scale and north point; name and
right-of-way of proposed and existing streets; location of all proposed
utility easements and rights-of-way; location of existing and proposed
buildings; parking areas; water bodies; proposed sidewalks; percent of site
covered by impervious surface.



      (3)   Landscape plan. A scale drawing of proposed landscaping
for the site based upon a survey of property lines with indication of scale
and north point; existing and proposed topographic contours at two-foot
contour intervals; details of proposed planting beds and foundation
plantings; location and identification of all planting (trees, shrubs,
flowers, ground cover, and the like); details of fences, tie walls planting
boxes, retaining walls, tot lots, picnic areas, berms, and other landscape
improvements, location of landscape islands and planter beds with
identification of plant materials used; and location and details of
irrigation systems.



      (4)   Planting schedule. A table containing the common names
and botanical names, size of plant materials, root specifications,
quantities, and special planting instructions.



   (C)   General requirements.



      (1)   Landscape requirements applicable to all districts.



         (a)   Unless otherwise directed by the Planning
Commission, all plantings shall be placed on the private property on which
the development is taking place.



         (b)   All areas not otherwise improved in accordance
with approved site plans or subdivisions shall be sodded, seeded, or
otherwise established with vegetation approved by the city, and maintained in
accordance with this division (C), unless otherwise stated in this section.
All front yards, rear yards, and side yards shall be sodded or seeded over a
minimum of four inches of black dirt, such sodding or seeding to be completed
no later than six months from the date of issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. Developed properties for which a certificate of occupancy has been
issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be sodded or seeded
in conformance with the above requirements within six months of the date of
issuance of the certificate or within 90 days of the effective date of this
chapter, whichever is later. Grass, sod and seed shall be clean and free of
noxious weeds and pests or diseases and shall be of a species normally grown
as permanent lawns and suitable to this climate.



         (c)   Off-street parking and loading areas shall be
screened from public streets which afford an unobstructed view of the parking
or loading area, and from adjacent properties zoned or developed for
residential or public use with shrubbery. Height of screening shall be at
least three and one-half  feet but no more than five feet above the level of
the parking lot. Spacing of shrubbery shall be no more than ten feet.



         (d)   One landscaped island shall be required for every
12 uninterrupted parking stalls.



         (e)   Plant materials shall be provided for in each
landscaped island at the discretion of the Planning Commission.



         (f)   The owner shall provide the city with cash,
corporate surety bond, approved letter of credit or other surety or security
satisfactory to the city to guarantee the proper installation and growth of
the approved landscape plan. The security shall be furnished by the owner of
the property prior to obtaining a building permit that is equal to the amount
of the required landscaping to be installed, unless specified otherwise in
this section. The security shall be held by the city and must cover one full
calendar year subsequent to the installation of the landscaping and must be
conditioned upon complete and satisfactory implementation of the approved
landscape plan.



      (2)   R-1 (Low-Density Residential) and R-2 (Medium-Density
Residential).



         (a)   Each platted lot shall have two over-story trees
per street frontage, located in the front yard, and when required, the
side-street yard.



         (b)   For all R-1 and R-2 lots, the front and side yard
shall be fully sodded. The back yard shall be sodded to a distance of 50 feet
from the rear of the house. All remaining unsodded areas shall be seeded with
grass seed appropriate to the climate area.



         (c)   A landscape escrow shall be secured on all
residential lots at the time the building permit is issued to assure
completion of landscaping requirements. The amount of the escrow shall be
established from time to time by City Council resolution. The escrow shall be
released when landscaping improvements have been completed as required in
this section. If any portion of the landscaping is not completed within the
timeframe required above, the city may cause such landscaping to be completed
and draw upon the landscaping escrow deposit for the cost of completion. The
owner of the property or lot shall be given notice by certified mail that the
city plans to proceed with completion of the landscaping improvements at
least ten days prior to the commencement of work. The city, its employees,
agents or contractors shall have the right to go upon the property to
complete the landscaping improvements without permission of the owner of the
property or lot, and shall not be liable for trespass.



      (3)   R-3 (Multiple-Family Residential).



         (a)   One over-story tree for every 40 feet of street
frontage.



         (b)   One landscape planting for every two dwelling
units.



         (c)   One foundation planting for every ten feet of
street-facing building frontage.



      (4)   PRD (Planned Residential Development). At a minimum, the
landscaping for PRD Districts shall follow the respective land-use
guidelines. In other words, if the PUD contains uses consistent with R-1, R-2
or R-3 uses, the landscaping requirements applicable to those districts shall
apply to the PUD. However, additional landscape requirements may be requested
at the discretion of the Planning Commission.



      (5)   C-1 (General Commerce), P/I (Public/Institutional
District) and C/I (Commercial/Industrial District).



         (a)   One over-story tree for every 30 feet of street
frontage.



      (6)   C-2 (Central Business District).



         (a)   One tree for every 1,000 square feet of total
building area. If landscaping can not be accommodated on site the plantings
shall be placed in a city park or city right-of-way. Placement of such
landscaping shall be approved by the City Council.



   (D)   Minimum standards.



      (1)   Over-story trees.



         (a)   Deciduous trees. Two-and-one-half inch caliper
planting size.



         (b)   Coniferous trees. Six feet in height planting size.



      (2)   Foundation plantings. Five-gallon minimum per planting.



      (3)   Front yard trees. All front yard trees shall be hardwood
shade trees or flowering trees.



      (4)   Over-story mix. When multiple quantities of over-story
trees are required, at least 75% of the trees required shall be deciduous
trees.



      (5)   Hardiness. All landscape materials proposed shall be
consistent with Minnesota hardiness zones, whether indigenous or foreign.
Plant species must also be tolerant to snow storage, exposure to salt and sun
scald in parking areas.



      (6)   Diversification. In any development in which at least
eight over-story trees or foundation  plantings are required, at least three
varieties of plantings are required. In residential subdivisions, at least
three varieties of boulevard trees are required on each side of a block.



      (7)   Warranty. All required landscape materials shall be
warranted for growth for a minimum of two years after planting.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-E, passed 6-14-04; Am. Ord. 102-K,
passed 2-14-05; Am. Ord. 207, passed 4-11-16)



§ 152.093  FENCES.



   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      FENCE.  Any lineal structure, including walls, hedges, or
similar barriers, used to prevent access by persons or animals or prevent
visual or sound transference.



   (B)   Building permit required.



      (1)   No fence shall be constructed without a building permit.
An application for a fence building permit shall be submitted to the city and
shall be accompanied by the following:



         (a)   A fence elevation sketch showing/describing the
type, dimensions, and color.



         (b)   Two copies of a certified survey (to scale)
prepared by a registered land surveyor showing and including the following:



            1.   Property address;



            2.   Legal descriptions of adjoining properties
and property lines;



            3.   Existing structures and hard surface areas;



            4.   North arrow;



            5.   Easements;



            6.   Setback dimensions;



            7.   Proposed fence location;



            8.   Dimensions from property line to fence.



         (c)   Method of anchoring the fence.



      (2)   Property lines shall be clearly marked with stakes
and/or paint as a guide for proper placement and necessary inspections.



   (C)   Exempt fences (building permit not required).



      (1)   Temporary fences not exceeding one year in duration.



      (2)   Underground pet fencing located outside of an easement
area.



   (D)   Fencing in all districts shall conform to the following:



      (1)   Fences shall be located entirely upon the private
property of the party constructing the fence unless the adjoining property
owner(s) agree to a common boundary fence, by signing a City of Mayer common
property line fence form.



      (2)   Except for common property line fences, all other fences
shall be set back a minimum distance of two feet from the property line
unless otherwise stated within this section.



      (3)   The owner(s) of the property upon which the fence is
constructed shall be responsible for maintaining that part of their property
between the fence and the property line.



      (4)   Fences in all districts shall be maintained so that the
exposed outer surface shall be uniformly painted or stained in a neat and
aesthetically pleasing condition.



      (5)   No fence shall be permitted on a public right-of-way or
boulevard area without special permission from the City Council.



      (6)   No fence, greater than two and one-half feet in height,
shall be erected within a corner lot sight triangle so that clear visibility
of approaching vehicular or pedestrian traffic can be maintained. Such sight
triangle means that triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the
point of intersection of the right of way of two intersecting streets, thence
30 feet along one right of way line, thence diagonally to a point on the
other right of way line 30 feet from the point of beginning, thence to the
point of beginning.



      (7)   All snow-brake fencing may be used from November 1 to
April 1. No permit shall be required for temporary winter snow-brake fencing.



      (8)   Any fence which is unsightly or dangerous to the public
safety or general welfare and health is a public nuisance and the city may
commence proceedings for the abatement thereof.



      (9)   Barbed wire and electrical fencing shall require special
City Council approval. This requirement shall not be construed to prohibit
the use of underground electric pet fencing or similar use.



      (10)   The side of the fence considered to be the face
(finished side as opposed to structural supports) shall face the
outside/abutting property.



   (E)   Fencing in residential districts.



      (1)   Side and rear yard fences shall not exceed a maximum
height of seven feet. Front yard fences and fences located within the side
yard abutting a street of a corner lot, shall not exceed a maximum height of
four feet.



      (2)   Double frontage lots and corner lots. Fences greater
than four feet in height, located within side yards abutting a street on a
corner lot, shall be setback 30 feet from the property line. Fences running
along arterial or collector roads in the rear yard of a double frontage lot
shall not exceed a maximum height of eight feet. Fences in the rear yard of a
double frontage lot running along other streets shall not exceed a maximum
height of seven feet and shall be setback 30 feet from the property line.



      (3)   Fences around dog kennels not exceeding 50 square feet
in size, fences around garbage cans, and garden fences will not require fence
permits but shall adhere to the other regulations of this section.



   (F)   Fencing in commercial and industrial districts.



      (1)   Fences may be located in any yard not to exceed a height
of eight feet. Fences over eight feet in height shall require a variance.



      (2)   District screening requirements shall be met.



   (G)   Required fences - swimming pools.



      (1)   Outdoor swimming pools shall be adequately fenced to
prevent uncontrolled access from the street or adjacent property.



      (2)   Outdoor swimming pools with a capacity of 1,500 gallons
or more, or with a depth of three feet or more of water shall be fenced in
compliance with the following: a fence at least four feet in height measured
from ground level shall completely enclose any permanent outdoor swimming
pool, whether it is above ground, or below ground. Any fence over seven feet
in height measured from ground level shall require a variance.



   (H)   Existing fences. No existing fence in violation of this
section will be allowed to be replaced or rebuilt. Should an existing fence
be replaced or rebuilt, it must comply with the requirements of this section.



   (I)   Violation. Violation of this section may be enforced by
injunction and the city shall be entitled to the remedy of abatement in order
that a fence erected in violation of this section may be removed.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-G, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 102-U,
passed 3-12-07; Am. Ord. 193, passed 8-11-14)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.094  LOT MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All lots with grass, hedges, landscaping, or other lawn flora
(including clippings, trimmings, fallen leaves, and the like) must be
maintained so as to not protrude onto public rights-of-way.



   (B)   No person shall throw, put, place, push, dump, deposit or
blow, or cause to be thrown, put, placed, pushed, dumped, deposited or blown,
any grass, grass clippings, weeds, trees limbs, paper products, chemicals, or
any other kind of rubbish or debris into or onto any public street, roadway,
lane or alley.



   (C)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and subject to the imposition of a fine of not more than $300
plus the costs of prosecution.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 183, passed 6-25-12)



§ 152.095  SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Stormwater shall be managed in accordance with the National
Urban Runoff Program (NURP) standards for the design of new stormwater ponds.
The provisions of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s urban “best
management practices,” titled “Protecting Water Quality in Urban
Areas,” shall be used to review any proposed development in order to reduce
non-point source pollutant loadings in stormwater runoff.



   (B)   Existing natural drainageways, natural water storage or
retention areas, and vegetated soil surfaces should be used to the greatest
extent possible to store, filter and retain stormwater runoff before
discharge occurs into any public waters. When natural features and vegetation
are not available to handle stormwater runoff, constructed facilities such as
diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, and man-made waterways
and ponds may be used. Preference shall be given to designs using surface
drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made
materials and facilities. Development should be planned and conducted in a
manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities,
erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.096  WETLAND PROTECTION AND MANAGEMENT.



   In accordance with the Wetlands Conservation Act of 1991, the following
regulations shall apply to wetland areas:



   (A)   Permanent natural buffer areas shall be maintained and
appropriate erosion control measures shall be taken in areas surrounding
wetland areas to prevent sedimentation of the wetland.



   (B)   Wetlands shall not be drained or filled, wholly or partially,
unless replaced by restoring or creating wetland areas of at least equal
public value. Wetland encroachment must be guided by the following principles
in descending order:



      (1)   Avoid the direct or indirect impact of the activity that
may destroy or diminish the wetland;



      (2)   Minimize the impact by limiting the degree or magnitude
of the wetland encroachment activity;



      (3)   Rectify the impact by repairing, rehabilitating, or
restoring the affected wetland environment;



      (4)   Reduce or eliminate the impact over time by preservation
and maintenance operations during the life of the activity; and



      (5)   Replace or provide substitute wetland resources or
environments.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.097  SEASONAL MINERAL EXTRACTION.



   (A)   Any seasonal or temporary mineral extraction activity in the
city requires a permit approved by the City Council and must meet the
following conditions:



      (1)   An application for seasonal extraction must be filed
with the City Clerk, and an approved permit must be received from the City
Council prior to beginning of operations.



      (2)   The applicant shall furnish the city with detailed
plans, identifying existing elevations and contours, material quantities,
access/haul routes and final grades/contours.



      (3)   The duration of a seasonal extraction permit shall be
from April 15 to October 15 of the permit year.



      (4)   Material stockpiles shall not remain after the duration
of the permit.



      (5)   Topsoil shall not be removed from the site, unless
authorized by the City Council.



   (B)   A seasonal extraction permit shall not be required for any of
the following:



      (1)   Excavation for a foundation, cellar or basement of a
building if a building permit has been issued.



      (2)   Excavation by federal, state, county, city authorities
in connection with construction or maintenance of roads, highways or
utilities.



      (3)   Excavation less than 100 square feet in area or one foot
in depth in a calendar year.



      (4)   Excavation or grading for agricultural purposes.



   (C)   The following rehabilitation standards shall apply to the site
of any seasonal extraction operation:



      (1)   Topsoil shall be removed from the excavation area(s) and
stockpiled for rehabilitation.



      (2)   Rehabilitation shall be continuous, occurring as quickly
as possible after the extraction operation has moved into another part of the
extraction site.



      (3)   The excavation area shall be graded to blend in with the
unexcavated area, without changing or impacting the natural course of
drainage.



      (4)   Topsoil shall be replaced and the disturbed area
re-seeded prior to permit expiration.



      (5)   All water areas resulting from excavation shall be
eliminated upon rehabilitation of the site, unless previously approved by the
city.



      (6)   The slope of the restored site shall not exceed a
five-to-one ratio.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.098  DWELLING BELOW GROUND LEVEL.



   Earth-sheltered dwellings, meaning residential structures constructed
so that 50% or more of the exterior surface area of the building excluding
garages and accessory buildings is covered with earth and all applicable
codes and ordinances including the State Building Code are satisfied, are
permitted pursuant to applicable regulations of this chapter. Partially
completed buildings shall not be considered earth sheltered.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.099  DESIGN BY REGISTERED ARCHITECT, ENGINEER OR LAND SURVEYOR.



   The design of buildings and the drawing of site plans, and the like,
shall be by qualified persons as required pursuant to M.S. § 326.03 or
amendments thereof.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.100  COMMERCIAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES TOWERS AND
ANTENNAE.



   (A)   Commercial wireless telecommunication services towers must
meet the following height limitations:



      (1)   Towers designed for single users shall not exceed 80
feet in height.



      (2)   Towers over 80 feet and not exceeding 110 feet in height
must be designed for one co-location use.



      (3)   Towers over 110 feet and not exceeding 150 feet in
height must be designed for two co-location uses.



      (4)   Towers over 150 feet and not exceeding 199 feet in
height must be designed for three  co-location uses.



   (B)   No advertising shall be allowed on any commercial wireless
telecommunication services tower. Warning and informational signs not
exceeding six square feet in area are permitted at ground level.



   (C)   The City Council shall determine the type of tower
construction (monopole or trellis) and the color of the commercial wireless
telecommunication services tower.



   (D)   No guy wires shall be used to support commercial wireless
telecommunication services towers.



   (E)   Communication equipment shall be fully enclosed in a structure
approved by the City Council.



   (F)   Commercial wireless telecommunication services towers and
equipment shall be totally enclosed with security fencing.



   (G)   The City Council may require landscaping materials or other
appropriate screening around all commercial wireless telecommunication
services facilities.



   (H)   The setback of commercial wireless telecommunication services
towers from property lines shall be determined by the City Council.



   (I)   No commercial wireless telecommunication services tower or
commercial wireless telecommunication service shall interfere with public or
private use of telecommunication devices, televisions, radios, computers,
garage door openers, security systems or other equipment or devices.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.101  BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The purpose of establishing building design standards is to encourage
development of aesthetically pleasing structures, to create minimum standards
for non-residential design, and to protect the investments of non-residential
building owners.



   (A)   Buildings located in the C-1, C-2, and P/I Districts shall
include combinations of exterior building materials that achieve a higher
standard of design and aesthetic appearance. Architectural controls,
including but not limited to steep-pitch roofs, window and door treatments,
awnings, wainscoting, and color bands, are encouraged in all buildings and
may be considered in lieu of combinations of exterior materials.



   (B)   Buildings located in the C/I District must include design
treatments to all-metal-exterior structures. Such treatments include but are
not limited to steep-pitch roofs, awnings, wainscoting, color bands,
shutters, extra windows, and combinations of other building materials.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-C, passed 6-23-03)



§ 152.102  ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards
for alternative energy systems within the city.



   (B)   Ground source heat pump systems.



      (1)   Accessory use.



         (a)   Ground source heat pump systems shall be allowed
as a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts in accordance with the
standards in this section.



         (b)   Ground source heat pump systems in public water
bodies or water bodies owned or managed by the City of Mayer shall be
prohibited except for stormwater ponds managed by the City of Mayer and when
accessory to a City of Mayer facility.



      (2)   System requirements.



         (a)   All ground source heat pump systems shall be
closed loop systems that circulate heat transfer fluids as allowed by this
section through pipes or coils buried beneath the land surface.



         (b)   Heat transfer fluids shall be limited to Minnesota
Department of Health approved nontoxic, food grade fluids such as potable
water, aqueous solutions of propylene glycol not to exceed 20% by weight or
aqueous solutions of potassium acetate not to exceed 20% by weight.



      (3)   Location.



         (a)   Ground source heat pump systems shall only be
located in the rear yard as defined by the City of Mayer zoning ordinance.



         (b)   All components of ground source heat pump systems
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from interior side lot lines and ten
feet from rear lot lines.



         (c)   Ground source heat pump systems shall not encroach
upon drainage and utility easements or any other easement.



      (4)   Screening. Ground source heat pump systems installed for
use in a commercial, industrial or institutional uses are considered
mechanical equipment and shall be screened in accordance with the
requirements of the city’s zoning ordinance, if required. Ground source
heat pumps installed for residential use shall be exempt from the screening
requirement.



      (5)   Noise. Ground source heat pump systems shall comply with
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency standards outlined in Minnesota Rules
Chapter 7030.



      (6)   Certification. The ground source heat pump system shall
be certified by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., and comply with the
requirements of the international building code.



      (7)   Abandonment. Any ground source heat pump system which is
inoperable for 12 successive months shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall
be deemed a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned system at
their expense after obtaining a demolition permit as follows:



         (a)   The heat pump and any external or aboveground
mechanical equipment shall be removed.



         (b)   Pipes or coils below the land surface shall be
filled with grout to displace the heat transfer fluid, which is to be
captured and disposed of in accordance with state and federal regulations.



         (c)   The top of the pipe, coil or boring shall be
uncovered and sealed.



      (8)   Building permit.



         (a)   A building permit shall be obtained for any ground
source heat pump system prior to installation.



         (b)   Borings for ground source heat pump system where
the pipes or coils are installed vertically below the land shall also be
subject to approval by the Minnesota Department of Health.



   (C)   Solar energy systems (SES).



      (1)   Purpose and intent. Mayer finds that it is in the public
interest to encourage the use and development of renewable energy systems
that have a positive impact on energy conservation with limited adverse
impact on nearby properties. As such, the city supports the use of solar
energy systems and the development of solar farms. Mayer also finds that the
development of solar farms should be balanced with the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare. The city intends the following standards
will ensure that solar farms can be constructed within the city while also
protecting public safety and the natural resources of the city. Consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan, it is the intent of the city, with this section,
to create standards for the reasonable capture and use, by households,
businesses and property owners, of their solar energy resource and encourage
the development and use of solar energy.



      (2)   Severability. The provisions of this section shall be
severable and the invalidity of any paragraph, subparagraph or subdivision
thereof shall not make void any other paragraph, subparagraph or subdivision
of this section.



      (3)   Applicability. These regulations are for all SES and
solar farms on properties and structures under the jurisdiction of the zoning
ordinance except that the city requires the owner or operator of solar farms
that would generate more than 50 megawatts of power to get approval for such
a system from the Minnesota Public Utilities Commission (PUC).



      (4)   Types of SES.



         (a)   Roof or building mounted SES. Accessory to the
primary land use, designed to supply energy for the primary use.



            1.   Roof or building mounted SES are permitted
accessory uses in all districts in which buildings are permitted.



            2.   All roof or building mounted SES shall meet
the standards of the Minnesota Building Code and the owner or contractor
shall receive a building or mechanical permit before installing a roof or
building mounted SES.



            3.   Color. All roof or building mounted SES shall
use colors that are the same or similar with the color of the building or
roof material of the building on which the system is mounted.



            4.   Roof or building mounted SES shall not exceed
the maximum allowed height in any zoning district and shall not extend beyond
the perimeter of the roof line of the building on which it is mounted. For
purposes of height measurement, roof or building mounted SES other than
building-integrated systems shall be considered to be mechanical devices and
are restricted consistent with other building mounted mechanical devices for
the zoning district in which the system is being installed.



            5.   Roof mounted SES shall be placed on the roof
to limit visibility from the public right-of-way or to blend into the roof
design, provided that minimizing visibility still allows the property owner
to reasonably capture solar energy.



         (b)   Ground mounted SES. Accessory to the primary land
use, designed to supply energy for the primary use.



            1.   Ground mounted SES are permitted accessory
uses in all districts in which buildings are permitted and shall be limited
to a maximum area of 200 square feet in residential districts and shall not
encompass more than 10% of the total property area or lot size in all other
districts.



            2.   Ground mounted SES require a city building
permit and is subject to the accessory use standards for the district in
which it is located, including setback, height and impervious surface
coverage limits.



            3.   The city does not consider the collector
surface of a ground mounted SES that is not in a DNR designated Shoreland
District as impervious surface. Any collector surface of a ground mounted SES
foundation that is in a DNR designated Shoreland District and compacted soil
or other component of the solar installation that rests on the ground is
considered impervious surface.



            4.   The height of a ground mounted SES shall not
exceed 20 feet at maximum tilt.



            5.   Ground mounted SES shall only be located in
the rear yard as defined by this Chapter.



            6.   Ground mounted SES shall not encroach upon
drainage and utility easements.



         (c)   Community SES. Community SES shall be accessory to
the primary land use and designed to supply energy for off-site uses on the
distribution grid, but not for export to the wholesale market or connection
to the electric transmission grid. These systems shall be subject to the
following conditions:



            1.   Community SES are permitted accessory uses in
all districts in which buildings are permitted except for residential
districts.



            2.   Prohibitions. The city prohibits community
SES within:



               i.   Shoreland districts as designated by
the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Mayer Zoning Map.



               ii.   Wetlands to the extent required by the
Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act.



               iii.   The Floodplain Management Area as
approved by ordinance by the city.



               iv.   Residential districts.



            3.   An interconnection agreement must be
submitted to the utility company and proof be provided to the city that the
utility company has deemed the agreement “complete”.



            4.   All structures must meet the setback, height
and coverage limitations for the zoning district in which the system is
located, except as otherwise stated in this section.



            5.   Ground mounted community SES must meet all
required standards for structures in the district in which the system is
located.



            6.   Site plan required. The owner or operator
shall submit to the city a detailed site plan for both existing and proposed
conditions. These plans shall show the location of all areas where solar
arrays would be placed, the existing and proposed structures, property lines,
access points, fencing, landscaping, surface water drainage patterns,
floodplains, wetlands, the ordinary high water mark for all water bodies, any
other protected resources, topography, electric equipment and all other
characteristics requested by the city.



            7.   Power and communication lines. Power and
communication lines running between banks of solar panels and to electric
substations or interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground.
The city may grant exemptions to this requirement in instances where shallow
bedrock, water courses or other elements of the natural landscape interfere
with the ability to bury lines.



            8.   Decommissioning plan. The city requires the
owner or operator to submit a decommissioning plan for community SES to
ensure that the owner or operator properly removes the equipment and
facilities upon the end of project life or after their useful life. The owner
or operator shall decommission the solar panels in the event they are not in
use for 12 consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for the
removal of all structures and foundations, the removal of all electrical
transmission components, the restoration of soil and vegetation and a
soundly-based plan ensuring financial resources will be available to fully
decommission the site. The disposal of structures and/or foundations shall
meet all city requirements. The city also may require the owner or operator
to post a bond, letter of credit or establish an escrow account to ensure
property decommissioning.



         (d)   Solar farms. Solar farms shall be ground mounted
SES arrays that are the primary use on parcel on which it is located and are
designed for providing energy to off-site uses or export to the wholesale
market. Solar farms, including those that are not permitted or regulated by
the State of Minnesota Public Utilities Commission (PUC), shall be subject to
the following conditions:



            1.   Solar farms shall be permitted as an interim
use in the C/I Commercial/Industrial and P/I Public/Institutional zoning
districts, and shall be processed according to the standards of Chapter 1006
of the Zoning Ordinance.



            2.   Shall be on properties of at least five acres
in size.



            3.   Stormwater management and erosion and
sediment control shall meet the requirements of the city and best management
practices.



            4.   Prohibitions. The city prohibits solar farms
within:



               i.   Shoreland districts as designated by
the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the Mayer Zoning Map.



               ii.   Wetlands to the extent required by the
Minnesota Wetland Conservation Act.



               iii.   The Floodplain Management Area as
approved by ordinance by the city.



            5.   Foundations. The manufacturer’s engineer or
another qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation and design of
the solar panels meets the accepted professional standards, given local soil
and climate conditions.



            6.   Other standards and codes. All solar farms
shall meet all applicable local, state and federal regulatory standards,
including the State of Minnesota Building Code, as amended; and the National
Electric Code, as amended.



            7.   Power and communication lines. All power and
communication lines running between banks of solar panels and to electric
substations or interconnections with buildings shall be buried underground.
The city may grant exemptions to this requirement in instances where shallow
bedrock, water courses or other elements of the natural landscape interfere
with the ability to bury lines.



            8.   Interconnection. The owner or operator of the
solar farm must complete an interconnection agreement with the electric
utility in whose service territory the system is located.



            9.   Site plan required. The owner or operator of
the solar farm must submit to the City a detailed site plan for both existing
and proposed conditions. These plans shall show the location of all areas
where solar arrays would be placed, the existing and proposed structures,
property lines, access points to the site, fencing, landscaping, surface
water drainage patterns, floodplains, wetlands, the ordinary high water mark
for all water bodies, any other protected resources, topography, electric
equipment and all other characteristics requested by the city. The plan shall
be reviewed and approved by the city’s Emergency Management Director.



            10.   The owner or operator of the solar farm must
submit to the city a detailed emergency shutdown plan as part of the review
process.



            11.   The city allows the installation of small
operations, security and equipment buildings on the site of solar farms as
permitted accessory uses to the solar farm.



            12.   The owner or operator shall contain all
unenclosed electrical conductors located above ground within structures that
control access. In addition solar farms shall be protected from entry by a
minimum six foot tall fence. Razor wire is prohibited on all fences. All
electrical connections to the utility system must meet or exceed the National
Electrical Safety Code.



            13.   Signage shall be posted at all entrance
points to the property the solar farm is located on that includes at a
minimum, the owner and operator’s name, contact information and emergency
phone numbers.



            14.   The solar farm owner or operator shall
provide access to the Mayer Fire Department either in the form of a lock or
key to all access points to the property the solar farm is located on.



            15.   Solar farms that have panels that are ten
megawatts or more shall meet the review and design standards of the MN
Department of Commerce and/or MM Public Utilities Commission (PUC) for solar
farms, as applicable.



            16.   Decommissioning plan. The city requires the
owner or operator to submit a decommissioning plan for solar farms to ensure
that the owner or operator properly removes the equipment and facilities upon
the end of project life or after their useful life. The owner or operator
shall decommission the solar panels in the event they are not in use for 12
consecutive months. The plan shall include provisions for the removal of ail
structures and foundations, the removal of all electrical transmission
components, the restoration of soil and vegetation and a soundly-based plan
ensuring financial resources will be available to fully decommission the
site. The disposal of structures and/or foundations shall meet all city
requirements. The city also may require the owner or operator to post a bond,
letter of credit or establish an escrow account to ensure property
decommissioning.



         (e)   Additional standards. In addition to the standards
allowed above, all SES shall meet the following standards.



            1.   The owners or operators of SES that are
connected to the electric distribution or transmission system, either
directly or through the existing service of the primary use on the site,
shall obtain an interconnection agreement with the electric utility in whose
service territory the system is located. Off-grid systems are exempt from
this requirement.



            2.   Electric SES components that are connected to
a building electric system must have an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing.



            3.   All SES shall meet the standards of the
Minnesota and National Electric Code.



            4.   All SES using a reflector to enhance solar
production shall minimize glare from the reflector that affects adjacent or
nearby properties. Steps to minimize glare nuisance may include selective
placement of the system, screening on the north side of the solar array,
reducing use of the reflector system or other remedies that limit glare.



            5.   Setbacks. All SES structures and equipment
shall meet the setback and coverage limitations for the zoning district in
which the system is located, except that solar farms shall be setback from
all property lines at least 100 feet. In addition, solar farms shall be
screened from adjacent residential uses in accordance with § 152.091
Screening.



            6.   Abandonment. Any SES which is inoperable for
12 successive months shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be deemed a
public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned system at their expense
after obtaining a demolition permit.



            7.   Building permit. A building permit shall be
obtained for any SES prior to installation.



            8.   All SES shall meet ail federal and state
requirements including the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) including size
requirements.



   (D)   Wind energy conversion systems (WECS).



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish
standards and procedures by which the installation and operation of wind
energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be governed within the city.



      (2)   Application.



         (a)   Conditional use permit required.



            1.   The erection of a wind energy conversion
system shall require approval of a conditional use permit, according to §
152.155 of this chapter.



            2.   Commercial wind energy conversion systems
shall only be allowed as conditional uses within the A Agriculture zoning
district on lots at least ten acres in area. The acreage restriction is
required to protect WECS from encroachment by other uses or structures and to
accommodate required setback between the WECS and property lines.



            3.   Non-commercial, tower-mounted WECS shall be
allowed as conditional uses within A Agriculture, C-1 General Commerce, C/I
Commercial/ Industrial, and P/I Public/Institutional zoning districts of the
city, subject to the regulations and requirements of this section, provided
the property upon which the system is to be located is constructed and
maintained on any parcel of at least two and one-half acres In size. The
acreage restriction is required to protect WECS from encroachment by other
uses or structures and to accommodate required setback between the WECS and
property lines.



            4.   Non-commercial, roof-mounted WECS shall be
allowed as an accessory use on all properties within all zoning districts in
the City of Mayer, subject to the regulations and requirements of this
section. Only one roof-mounted WECS shall be allowed per lot.



            5.   Site plan drawing. All applications for a
WECS conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan
drawn to scale and dimensioned, displaying the information as specified in §
152.031 of this chapter, including the following:



               i.   Location and height of all buildings,
structures, aboveground utilities and trees on the lot, including both
existing and proposed structures and guy wire anchors.



               ii.   Location and height of all adjacent
buildings, structures, aboveground utilities and trees located within 350
feet of the exterior boundaries of the property in question.



               iii.   Sketch elevation drawing of the
premises accurately depicting the proposed WECS and its relationship to
structures on the subject site and adjacent lots.



               iv.   A description of the project
including: nameplate generating capacity, proposed tower height, and proposed
rotor diameter.



               v.   Engineer’s certification of structure
design, electrical design, and fall zone.



               vi.   An elevation drawing of the premises
accurately depicting the proposed WECS and its relationship to structures on
the subject site and adjacent lots.



               vii.   In addition, applications for
commercial WECS shall include:



                  a.   An FAA permit application, if
required.



                  b.   A decommissioning plan.



            6.   Declaration of conditions. The Planning
Commission may recommend and the City Council may impose such conditions on
the granting of a WECS conditional use permit as may be necessary to carry
out the purpose and provisions of this section.



      (3)   Code compliance.



         (a)   Compliance with State Building Code. Standard
drawings of the structural components of the wind energy conversion system
and support structures, including base and footings shall be provided along
with engineering data and calculations to demonstrate compliance with the
structural design provisions of the State Building Code. Drawings and
engineering calculations shall be certified by a Minnesota licensed engineer.



         (b)   Compliance with National Electrical Code. WECS
electrical equipment and connections shall be designed and installed in
adherence to the National Electrical Code as adopted by the city.



      (4)   Warranty. Applicant shall provide documentation or other
evidence from the dealer or manufacturer that the WECS has been successfully
operated in atmospheric conditions similar to the conditions within Mayer.
The WECS shall be warranted against any system failures reasonably expected
in severe weather operation conditions.



      (5)   Design standards.



         (a)   Height of tower-mounted WECS.



            1.   The permitted maximum height of a tower
mounted WECS shall be determined in one of two ways. In determining the
height of the WECS the total height of the system shall be included. System
height shall be measured from the base of the tower to the highest possible
extension of the rotor blades.



               i.   A ratio of one foot to one foot (1:1)
between the distance of the closest property line to the base of the WECS to
the height of the system. If the property the WECS is located on is adjacent
to a residential zoned property an additional setback of ten feet shall be
added.



               ii.   A maximum system height of 175 feet.



            2.   The shortest height of the two above
mentioned methods shall be used in determining the maximum allowable height
of a WECS system. The height of a WECS must also comply with FAA regulation
part 77 “Objects Affecting Navigable Air Space” and/or MNDOT Rule 14,
MCAR 1.3015 “Criteria for Determining Obstruction to Air Navigation”.



         (b)   Height of roof-mounted WECS. A roof-mounted WECS
shall only be allowed a maximum six feet above the roof line of the building
or structure.



         (c)   Setbacks. No part of a WECS (including guy wire
anchors) shall be located within or above any required front, side or rear
yard setback. WECS towers shall be setback from the closest property line one
foot for every one foot of system height. WECS shall not be located within 30
feet of an aboveground utility line.



         (d)   Rotor size. All WECS rotors shall not have rotor
diameters greater than 26 feet, except that roof-mounted WECS shall not have
a rotor diameter greater than three feet.



         (e)   Rotor clearance. Blade arcs created by the WECS
shall have a minimum of 30 feet of clearance over any structure or tree
within a 200 foot radius.



         (f)   Rotor safety. Each WECS shall be equipped with
both a manual and automatic braking device capable of stopping the WECS
operation in high winds (40 miles per hour or greater).



         (g)   Lightning protection. Each WECS shall be grounded
to protect against natural lightning strikes in conformance with the National
Electrical Code as adopted by the city.



         (h)   Tower access. To prevent unauthorized climbing,
WECS towers must comply with one of the following provisions:



            1.   Tower climbing apparatus shall not be located
within 12 feet of the ground.



            2.   A locked anti-climb device shall be installed
on the tower.



            3.   Towers capable of being climbed shall be
enclosed by a locked, protective fence at least six feet high.



         (i)   Signs. WECS shall have one sign, not to exceed two
square feet posted at the base of the tower and said sign shall contain the
following information.



            1.   Warning high voltage.



            2.   Manufacturer’s name.



            3.   Emergency phone number.



            4.   Emergency shutdown procedures.



         (j)   Lighting. WECS shall not have affixed or attached
any lights, reflectors, flasher or any other illumination, except for
illumination devices required by FAA regulations part 77 “Objects Affecting
Navigable Air Space” and FAA Advisory circular 70/7460-1F, September 1978
“Obstruction Marking and Lighting”.



         (k)   Electromagnetic interference. WECS shall be
designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference.



         (l)   Noise emission. Noises emanating from the
operation of WECS shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of
Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulations NPC 1 and 2, as
amended.



         (m)   Utility company interconnection. No WECS shall be
interconnected with a local electrical utility company until the utility
company has reviewed and commented upon it. The interconnection of the WECS
with the utility company shall adhere to the National Electrical Code as
adopted by the city.



      (6)   Ornamental wind devices. Ornamental wind devices that
are not a WECS shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter and shall
conform to other applicable provisions of this title.



      (7)   Inspection. The city hereby reserves the right upon
issuing any WECS conditional use permit to inspect the premises on which the
WECS is located. If a WECS is not maintained in operational condition and
poses a potential safety hazard, the owner shall take expeditious action to
correct the situation.



      (8)   Abandonment. Any WECS or tower which is not used for 12
successive months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and
removed from the. property at the expense of the property owner.



   (E)   Outdoor hydronic furnaces.



      (1)   Purpose. To promote the public health, safety and
welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Mayer due to air pollution and human
health impacts caused by the use of outdoor hydronic furnaces and similar
devices.



      (2)   Prohibited use. No outdoor hydronic furnace or similar
device shall be permitted within any zoning district of the city.



(Ord. 201, passed 8-24-15; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



SIGN REGULATIONS



§ 152.120  FINDINGS; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Findings. The City Council hereby finds as follows:



      (1)   Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the
character and quality of the environment.



      (2)   Signs provide an important medium through which
individuals may convey a variety of messages.



      (3)   Signs can create traffic hazards, aesthetic concerns and
detriments to property values, thereby threatening the public health, safety
and welfare.



      (4)   Over the years, the city’s zoning regulations have
included the regulation of signs in an effort to provide adequate means of
expression and to promote the economic viability of the business community,
while protecting the city and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a
type, size, location and character that would adversely impact upon the
aesthetics of the community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of
the community. The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs within
the city has had a positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of
the community.



   (B)   Purpose and intent. A sign may be erected, placed,
established, painted, created, or maintained in the city only in conformance
with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this
ordinance. It is not the purpose or intent of this subchapter to regulate the
message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this
subchapter to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a
sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building. The purpose
and intent of this subchapter is to:



      (1)   Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination
and other physical characteristics of signs within the city in order to
promote the public health, safety and welfare.



      (2)   Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment
of the city by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of
the community.



      (3)   Improve the visual appearance of the city while
providing for effective means of communication, consistent with
constitutional guarantees and the city’s goals of public safety and
aesthetics.



      (4)   Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign
regulations set forth herein under the zoning authority of the city.



      (5)   Provide for the safety of the traveling public by
limiting distractions, hazards, and obstructions.



      (6)   To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types
of signs in commercial and industrial zones and a limited variety of signs in
other zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this
subchapter.



      (7)   To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and
incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are
located, subject to the substantive requirements of this subchapter, but
without a requirement for permits.



      (8)   To provide for temporary signs without commercial
messages in limited circumstances in the public right-of -way.



      (9)   To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this
subchapter.



      (10)   To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of
this subchapter.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.121  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
subchapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this subchapter. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this subchapter in each
section, division, sentence, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, divisions, sentences, clauses, or phrases be
declared invalid.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.122  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED SIGN.



      (1)   Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which
remains without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period
of one year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose
which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.



      (2)   Signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended
because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be
deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of one year
or more.



      (3)   Any sign remaining after demolition of a principal
structure shall be deemed to be abandoned.



      (4)   Signs which are present because of being legally
established nonconforming signs or signs which have required a conditional
use permit or a variance shall also be subject to the definition of ABANDONED
SIGN.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Administrator of the City of Mayer or his or
her designee. The person designated by the City Council to administer this
subchapter.



   AWNING.  A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal or glass
designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative
embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure
primarily over a window, walk, or the like. Any part of an awning which also
projects over a door shall be counted as an AWNING.



   AWNING SIGN.  A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion
attached directly to the awning material.



   BALLOON SIGN.  A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material
supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air which is greater than 24 inches
in diameter.



   BANNER.  A sign of any lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or building by a permanent frame at one or more
edges. National, state, and municipal flags and any official business and/or
institutional flag are not banners.



   BLADE SIGN.  Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the
ground or mounted on a base which has a height exceeding its width.



   BUILDING.  Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.



   BUILDING SIGN.  Any sign attached or supported by any structure used
or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.



   CABINET SIGN.  Any wall sign that is not of channel or individually
mounted letter construction.



   CANOPY.  A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass
on a support, which provides shelter over a doorway.



   CANOPY SIGN.  Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made
of fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A
CANOPY SIGN is not a marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.



   COMMERCIAL SIGN.  Any sign wording, logo, or other representation
that, directly or indirectly, names advertises, or calls attention to a
business, product, service, or other commercial activity.



   COMMERCIAL SPEECH.  Speech advertising a business, profession,
commodity, service or entertainment.



   DYNAMIC SIGN.  A motion sign or a digital flat panel/screen that can
display video, LCD, plasma, or other moving images.



   ELEVATION.  The view of the side, front, or rear of a given
structure(s).



   ELEVATION AREA.  The area of all walls that face any lot line.



   ERECT.  Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling,
placing, affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of
bringing into being or establishing.



   FLAG.  Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end
of the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the
material by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors,
patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.



   FREESTANDING SIGN.  Any sign which has supporting framework that is
placed on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any
building or other structure.



   FRONTAGE.  The line of contact of a property with the public
right-of-way.



   GRADE.  The final ground elevation after construction. Earth mounding
criteria for landscaping and screening is not part of the final grade for
sign height computation.



   GROUND SIGN.  Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the
ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a
total height not exceeding eight feet.



   HEIGHT OF SIGN.  The height of the sign shall be computed as the
vertical distance measured from the base of the sign at grade to the top of
the highest attached component of the sign.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign which contains an element designed to
emanate artificial light internally or externally.



   INCIDENTAL SIGN.  A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as “no
parking”, “entrance”, “loading only,” “telephone,” and other
similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position
off the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.



   INTERIOR SIGN.  A sign which is located within the interior of any
building, or within an enclosed lobby or court of any building, and a sign
for and located within the inner or outer body, court or entrance of any
theater.



   ISSUING AUTHORITY.  City of Mayer.



   LEGALLY ESTABLISHED NONCONFORMING SIGN.  Any sign and its support
structure lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this subchapter
which fails to conform to the requirements of this subchapter. A sign which
was erected in accordance with a variance granted prior to the adoption of
this subchapter and which does not comply with this subchapter shall be
deemed to be a LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN.



   MARQUEE.  Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a
building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building,
generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.



   MARQUEE SIGN.  Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or
attached in any manner, on a marquee.



   MONUMENT SIGN.  Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on
the ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a
height exceeding eight feet.



   MULTIPLE TENANT SITE.  Any site which has more than one tenant, and
each tenant has a separate ground level exterior public entrance.



   NON-COMMERCIAL SPEECH.  Dissemination of messages not classified as
commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning
political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational
topics.



   OFF-PREMISE SIGN.  Any sign that with a message that is related to an
establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainments which is not sold
produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is
located, e.g. billboards, or outdoor advertising.



   ON-PREMISE SIGN.  A sign which message is related to the premises or
the activity and use occurring on the premises on which the sign is located



   PARAPET (WALL).  That portion of building wall that rises above the
roof level.



   PENNANT.  Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.



   POLE SIGN.  See PYLON SIGN.



   PORTABLE SIGN.  Any sign which is manifestly designed to be
transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the
wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is
converted to another sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the
ground since this characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.



   PORTE COCHERE.  A roofed structure or roof-like cover, extending from
the entrance of a building and which provides shelter over a doorway.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING.  The building in which the principal primary use
of the lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple
principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly
accessory uses shall not be considered PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS.



   PROJECTING SIGN.  Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in
such a manner that its leading edge extends more than two feet beyond the
surface or such building or wall face.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  Legal owner of property as officially recorded by
Carver County.



   PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The planned right-of-way for a public
street.



   PYLON SIGN.  Any freestanding sign which has its supportive
structure(s) anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above
ground level by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.



   READER BOARD SIGN.  A sign on which copy is designated so that it can
be changed manually. This may include but is not limited to a panel on which
individual letters or pictorials are mounted, or displayed.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  Any district zoned for residential uses.



   RESIDENTIAL SIGN.  Any sign located in a district zoned for
residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for
goods or services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located,
if offering such service at such location conforms with all requirements of
the zoning ordinance.



   ROOF.  The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of
a building or structure, the structural make-up of which conforms to the roof
structures, roof construction and roof covering sections of the Uniform
Building Code.



   ROOF LINE.  The upper-most edge of the roof or in the case of an
extended facade or parapet, the upper-most height of the facade.



   ROOF SIGN.  Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the
roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.



   ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL.  Any building sign erected or constructed as an
integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any
design, so that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest
portion of the roof and so that no part of the sign is separated from the
rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.



   ROTATING SIGN.  A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an
axis.



   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN.  A freestanding temporary sign, with no moving
parts or flashing lights, no larger than eight square feet total sign size
per side (no taller than four feet from grade), displayed outside an
establishment during business hours. It is not intended as permanent business
signage.



   SETBACK, FRONT.  The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
public right-of-way and a structure on the premises. In instances in which a
property fronts on more than one street, front setbacks are required on all
street frontages.



   SETBACK, REAR.  The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
property line opposite the principal street frontage and a structure on the
premises.



   SETBACK, SIDE.  The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
side lot line and a structure on the premises.



   SHIMMERING SIGNS.  A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes
distorted visual image.



   SIGN.  Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color,
form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the
purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate
information of any kind to the public, including brackets, supports, and the
like.



   SIGN FACE.  The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which
the message of the sign is exhibited.



   SIGN STRUCTURE.  Any structure including the supports, uprights,
bracing and framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.



   SITE.  A plot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land, which are intended, designated, and/or approved to function
as an integrated unit.



   STRINGER.  A line of string, rope, cording, or an equivalent to which
is attached a number of pennants.



   SUSPENDED SIGN.  Any building sign that is suspended from the
underside of a horizontal plane surface and is connected to this surface.



   TEMPORARY SIGN.  Any sign, balloon, banner, blimp, flag, free-standing
sign, pennant, poster, reader board, or advertising display which is intended
to be displayed for a limited period of time and that is not permanently
fixed to the land or a structure. Temporary signs may be constructed of
paper, cloth, canvas, cardboard or any other light and nondurable material.
Signs other than temporary signs shall be considered permanent signs.



   TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE.  The maximum permitted combined area of all
freestanding and wall identification signs allowed on a specific property.



   VISIBLE.  Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity
(whether legible or not) without visual aid.



   WALL.  Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts
of a building or structure and which has a slope of 60 degrees or greater
with the horizontal plane.



   WALL SIGN.  Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two
feet of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined
within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is
supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.



   WINDOW SIGN.  Any building sign, pictures, symbol, or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.123  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No sign shall be erected, altered, reconstructed, maintained
or moved in the city without first securing a permit from the city. The
content of the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining
whether to approve or deny a sign permit. Application for a permit shall be
in writing addressed to the issuing authority and shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Names and addresses of the owners of the display
structure and property;



      (2)   The address at which any signs are to be erected;



      (3)   The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be
erected and the street on which they are to front;



      (4)   A complete set of colored plans showing the necessary
elevations, distances, size and details to fully and clearly represent the
construction and place of the signs;



      (5)   The cost of the sign;



      (6)   Type of sign (i.e., building sign, monument sign, and
the like);



      (7)   Certification by applicant indicating the application
complies with all requirements of this subchapter;



      (8)   If the proposed sign is along a state trunk highway or
interstate highway, the application shall be accompanied by proof that the
applicant has obtained a permit from the state for the sign; and



      (9)   Such other information as the Administrator shall
require to show full compliance with this subchapter and all other laws and
ordinances of the city.



   (B)   The issuing authority shall approve or deny the sign permit in
an expedited manner no more than 60 days from the receipt of the complete
application, including applicable fee. All permits not approved or denied
within 30 days shall be deemed approved. If the permit is denied, the issuing
authority shall prepare a written notice of within ten days its decision,
describing the applicant’s appeal rights under Section 525.15, and send it
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.124  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following signs shall not require a permit. These
exemptions, however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the
sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance and its
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter or any other law or
ordinance regulating the same.



      (1)   The changing of the display surface on a painted,
printed, or changeable copy sign/reader board signs only.



      (2)   Signs six square feet or less in size, per surface.



      (3)   Window signage as permitted in the general standards.



      (4)   Temporary and portable signage as permitted in this
section.



      (5)   The standards of M.S. § 211B.045 as may be amended and
relating to noncommercial signs are hereby incorporated by reference.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.125  SIGN AREA CALCULATIONS.



   (A)   The area of a sign shall be computed by means of the smallest
circle, rectangle or triangle that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material
of color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the building facade against which it is placed,
but not including any supporting framework, pole, or bracing. Each surface
utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a
separate sign and shall be calculated in the overall sign area. Symbols,
flags, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of graphics painted on or
attached to windows, walls, awnings, free-standing structures, suspended by
balloons, or kites or on persons, animals, or vehicles are considered a sign
and are included in calculating the overall sign area.



   (B)   For monument, ground, and blade signs, the method in division
(A) shall be used. Only the face that is specifically intended to be used for
signage shall be included when computing the sign area. Any base or other
supporting structure, along with all adjoining structures such as fences or
walls shall not be included when computing the sign area.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.126  FEES.



   Sign permit fees shall be established by ordinance.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.127  MAINTENANCE; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Maintenance. All signs requiring a permit pursuant to this
subchapter, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors,
shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation. The display
surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.
Every sign and the immediate surrounding premises shall be maintained by the
owner or person in charge thereof in a clean, sanitary, and unoffensive
condition and free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, and weeds.
Notice shall be given to the Administrator of any change in the sign user,
sign owner or owner of the property on which the sign is located.



   (B)   Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Administrator. The Administrator or his or her
designee is authorized to enter upon any property or premises to ascertain
compliance with this subchapter. Such entrance shall be made during business
hours unless an emergency exists. The Administrator may order the removal of
any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the maintenance provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.128  SIGN REMOVAL.



   (A)   Any sign legally existing at the time of the passage of this
subchapter that does not conform to the provisions of this subchapter shall
be considered a legal nonconforming sign and may be continued through repair,
replacement, restoration, maintenance or improvement but not including
expansion. EXPANSION shall be defined as any structural alteration, change or
addition that is made outside of the original sign structure, sign area, or
design.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the return of a sign
structure that has been declared unsafe by the city’s Building Inspector to
a safe condition.



   (C)   When any legal nonconforming sign is discontinued for a period
of more than one year or is changed to a conforming sign, any future sign
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this subchapter. Any legal
nonconforming sign shall be removed and shall not be repaired, replaced, or
rebuilt if it is damaged by fire or similar peril to the extent of greater
than 50% of its market value at the time of destruction and no sign permit or
building permit has been applied for within 180 days of the date of
destruction. The city’s Building Inspector shall be responsible for making
the determination of whether a nonconforming sign has been destroyed greater
than 50% at the time of destruction. In making the determination the Building
Inspector shall consider the market value of the entire sign at the time
prior to the destruction and the replacement value of the existing sign. In
the event that a building permit or sign permit is applied for within 180
days of the date of destruction, the city may impose reasonable conditions
upon the building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on
adjacent properties.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.129  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   Signs are a permitted accessory use in all districts subject to the
following regulations:



   (A)   No sign shall exceed 250 square feet in area.



   (B)   Signs shall not be erected, placed, or maintained on rocks,
fences, trees, and the like and shall not interfere with any electric light,
power, telephone, or cable wire/fiber or their support.



   (C)   Substitution clause. The owner of any sign which is otherwise
allowed by this subchapter may substitute non-commercial speech signs in lieu
of any other commercial speech sign or other non-commercial speech sign. The
purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of
commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular
non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision
prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.



   (D)   Window signs are permitted in street facing windows provided
they do not exceed 25% of the window area which has street frontage. Window
signage shall be counted towards the overall permitted signage on a building.



   (E)   Freestanding, temporary, sandwich board, portable, or building
signs that project/encroach into the public right-of-way shall be approved by
the City Council and/or the jurisdictional authority. Projecting signs shall
maintain a ground clearance of at least ten feet. Irrespective of the City
Council’s and/or other jurisdictional authority’s approval of the
foregoing, the owner of such sign shall be liable for any related bodily
injury or property damage however caused and shall save harmless the city its
agents and representatives from any and all loss or damages.



   (F)   Illuminated signs shall be subject to the electrical
requirements of the Electrical Code of the State of Minnesota. Illuminated
signs shall have a shielded light source and meet the glare standards stated
in § 152.081.



   (G)   No sign shall be attached to or placed upon any building in
such a manner to obstruct any window or door for fire escape or be attached
to any fire escape.



   (H)   All off-premise commercial signs are prohibited.



   (I)   Every home or structure having an official address shall have
an address sign that is visible from the street. Address signs shall not
count towards the overall permitted signage on a building.



   (J)   Sight triangle. No sign, except for authorized signs, shall be
erected within a corner lot sight triangle so that clear visibility of
approaching vehicular or pedestrian traffic can be maintained. Such sight
triangle means that triangular area defined as follows: beginning at the
point of intersection of the right of way of two intersecting streets, thence
30 feet along one right of way line, thence diagonally to a point on the
other right of way line 30 feet from the point of beginning, thence to the
point of beginning. Exception: signs within the C-2, Central Business
District.



   (K)   Any additional or other signage not stated in this subchapter
shall require approval of the City Council and/or other jurisdictional
authority.



   (L)   All signs along state and federal highways shall conform to
state and federal sign regulations.



   (M)   No sign shall contain statements, words, pictures or drawings
of an obscene nature or character as defined by M.S. § 617.241, Subd. 1(a),
as may be amended.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13; Am. Ord. 200, passed 6-8-15)  Penalty, see §
152.999



§ 152.130  SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   



 


District

 

Maximum sign area of single sign

 

Total area of all signs



R-1
 
6 square feet per surface
 
12 square feet


R-2
 
12 square feet per surface
 
24 square feet


R-3
 
12 square feet per surface
 
48 square feet



 



   (B)   The following types of signs are not permitted in residential
zoning districts:



      (1)   Awning signs;



      (2)   Balloon signs;



      (3)   Canopy signs;



      (4)   Shimmering signs;



      (5)   Marquee signs; and



      (6)   Pylon signs.



   (C)   Maximum height: six feet.



   (D)   Setback: ten feet from property line, plus clear sight
triangle.



   (E)   Signs may be illuminated. Illuminated signs shall have a
shielded light source and meet the glare standards stated in § 152.081.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.130A  SIGNS PERMITTED IN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   



 


Lot Size

 

Maximum Sign Area of Single Sign

 

Total Area of All Signs



< 10,000 sf
 

6 square feet per surface

 

12 square feet



10,000-20,000 sf
 

12 square feet per surface

 

24 square feet



>20,000 sf
 

12 square feet per surface

 

48 square feet




 



   (B)   The following types of signs are not permitted in the
Agricultural zoning district:



      (1)   Awning signs;



      (2)   Balloon signs;



      (3)   Canopy signs;



      (4)   Shimmering signs;



      (5)   Marquee signs; and



      (6)   Pylon signs.



   (C)   Maximum height: six feet.



   (D)   Setback: ten feet from property line, plus clear sight
triangle.



   (E)   Signs may be illuminated. Illuminated signs shall have a
shielded light source and meet the glare standards stated in § 152.081.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.131  SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND PUBLIC/
INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   



 


District

 

Maximum Sign Area of Single Sign

 

Total Area of All Signs



C-1
 
150 square feet per surface
 
5% of lot area or 375 sf., whichever is less


C-2
 
60 square feet per surface
 
5% of lot area or 125 sf., whichever is greater


C/I
 
150 square feet per surface
 
5% of lot area or 375 sf., whichever is less


P/I
 
150 square feet per surface
 
5% of lot area or 375 sf., whichever is less



 



   (B)   The following types of signs are not permitted in the C-l,
C-2, C/I, or P/I districts:



      (1)   Roof signs;



      (2)   Off premises signs;



      (3)   Beacons;



      (4)   Spotlights; and



      (5)   Inflatable signs and tethered balloons.



   (C)   Maximum height.



      (1)   C-1,C/I, P/I: 30 feet.



      (2)   C-2: 20 feet.



   (D)   Setback.



      (1)   C-l, C/I, P/I: ten feet from property line, plus clear
sight triangle.



      (2)   C-2: two (2) feet from property line.



   (E)   Signs may be illuminated. Illuminated signs shall have a
shielded light source and meet the glare standards stated in § 152.081.



   (F)   Freestanding signs shall be limited to one per right-of-way
visible from a public street.



   (G)   The ground area around the base of all freestanding signs
shall be landscaped with shrubs and ground cover equal to the area of 50% of
the sign. Landscaping shall consist of shrubs and ground covers that can
withstand the environmental conditions of the site and will provide seasonal
interest.



   (H)   Wall signs shall be considered building signs and may project
up to two feet away from the wall. Projecting, canopy, awning, and marquee
signs shall be considered building signs and may project up to six feet away
from the wall. Signs projecting over the public right of way shall be
approved by the appropriate jurisdiction. Signs projecting over the sidewalk
shall be a minimum of ten feet above the sidewalk.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.131A  MASTER AND COMMON SIGN PLANS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a
permit unless and until a master signage plan or a common signage plan for
the zone lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted to the
Zoning Administrator and approved by the Zoning Administrator as conforming
with this section.



   (B)   Procedures. A master or common signage plan shall be included
in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan, or other
official plan required by the city for the proposed development and shall be
processed simultaneously with such other plan.



   (C)   Amendment. A master or common signage plan may be amended by
filing a new master or common signage plan that conforms with all
requirements of the ordinance then in effect.



   (D)   Existing signs not conforming to common signage plan. If any
new or amended common signage plan is filed for a property on which existing
signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance,
within three years, all signs not conforming to the proposed amended plan or
to the requirements of this ordinance in effect on the date of submission.



   (E)   Master signage plan. For any zone lot on which the owner
proposes to erect one or more signs requiring a permit, unless such zone lot
is included in a common signage plan, the owner shall submit to the Zoning
Administrator a master signage plan containing the following:



      (1)   An accurate plot plan of the zone lot, at such scale as
the Zoning Administrator may reasonably require;



      (2)   Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and
landscaped areas on such zone lot;



      (3)   Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum
area for individual signs, the height of signs and the number of freestanding
signs allowed on the zone lot(s) included in the plan under this subchapter;
and



      (4)   An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed
location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a
permit or not, except that incidental signs need not be shown.



   (F)   Common signage plan.



      (1)   If the owners of two or more contiguous (disregarding
intervening streets and alleys) zone lots or the owner of a single lot with
more than one building (not including any accessory building) file with the
Zoning Administrator for such zone lots a common signage plan conforming with
the provisions of this section, a 25% increase in the maximum total sign area
shall be allowed for each included zone lot. This bonus shall be allocated
within each zone lot as the owner(s) elects.



      (2)   The common signage plan shall contain all of the
information required for a master signage plan and shall also specify
standards for consistency among all signs on the zone lots affected by the
plan with regard to: color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting,
location of each sign on the buildings, material, and sign proportions.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.132  SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS.



   (A)   Sandwich board signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts
within the city, except that in residential districts sandwich board signs
will be permitted only for non-residential uses and uses by conditional use
permit.



   (B)   There shall be only one sandwich board sign allowed for each
entity.



   (C)   Sandwich board signs shall be considered temporary signage.



   (D)   Sandwich board signs shall not exceed eight square feet in
size per surface area.



   (E)   Sandwich board signs may be placed on a public sidewalk or
within the public right-of-way. If placed on a sidewalk, a sandwich board
sign shall not take up more than two feet of sidewalk width and shall not be
placed in the middle of the sidewalk.



   (F)   Sandwich board signs may be removed by the city if they
interfere with any city activities (i.e. snow removal, maintenance of the
surrounding area, and the like).



   (G)   Public sidewalk sandwich board signs shall be displayed only
during the times that the entity is open. No public sidewalk sandwich board
sign shall be displayed overnight or when there has been any snow
accumulation. Sandwich board signs that do not comply with this requirement
may be removed and disposed of by the city.



   (H)   Sandwich board signs shall be weighed down.



   (I)   Under no circumstances shall a sandwich board sign be used
instead of permanent building signage.



   (J)   Sandwich board signs shall be taken down after business hours.



   (K)   Sandwich board signs that do not comply with the regulations
stated above may be removed and disposed of by the city.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



§ 152.133  TEMPORARY AND PORTABLE SIGNS (PRIVATE PROPERTY).



   (A)   Temporary and portable signage on private property is allowed
over and above the typical signage limit allowed on a property for permanent
signage. Temporary and portable signs shall not be used in place of permanent
signage.



   (B)   No more than four temporary and/or portable signs shall be
allowed per lot within the Commercial, Public/Institutional, and Industrial
Districts. No more than three temporary and/or portable frontage signs shall
be allowed. The signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in size per surface
with a maximum of two surfaces.



   (C)   There shall be no more than two temporary and portable signs
not exceeding 12 square feet per surface with a maximum of two surfaces per
lot for residential garage/yard sales.



   (D)   In all districts, no more than two temporary real estate
sale/lease signs, not exceeding 32 square feet, shall be allowed per
lot/entity. Real estate/lease signs shall not be placed in the public
right-of-way.



   (E)   Upon written request to the City Administrator, additional
temporary or portable signs may be allowed in appropriate circumstances. The
number of additional temporary signs shall be subject to City Administrator
approval and the City Administrator may place reasonable restrictions on the
use and placement of such signs.



(Ord. 188, passed 4-11-13)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.150  ZONING OFFICER/ADMINISTRATOR.



   The specific duties of the Zoning Officer include:



   (A)   Providing zoning information upon request.



   (B)   Receiving applications for interim use permits, variances,
amendments, and appeals, referring such applications to the appropriate
official body, notifying effected property owners of required public
hearings, and publishing notice of such hearings.



   (C)   Notifying applicants for interim use permits, variances,
amendments, and appeals of actions taken by the official bodies relative to
their applications.



   (D)   Conducting inspections to determine and assure compliance with
ordinance provisions.



   (E)   Investigating violations, notifying persons accused of
violations and describing the nature of such, and initiating appropriate
actions against violators as provided by law.



   (F)   Maintaining permanent and current records of this chapter and
the Official Zoning Map, including but not limited to interim use permits,
variances, amendments, appeals, and applications.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.151  PLANNING COMMISSION DUTIES IN ZONING ADMINISTRATION.



   Planning Commission duties in zoning administration shall be:



   (A)   To hold public hearings on applications for amendments to this
chapter. The Commission shall not have the authority to make changes or
amendments to this chapter; rather, it shall act in an advisory manner to the
City Council making its recommendation in all cases referred to it.



   (B)   To consider applications for interim use permits provided for
in this chapter and to transmit its recommended action to the City Council
for final action.



   (C)   To review and approve applications for building permits.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 154, passed 5-26-09)



§ 152.152  PERMITS.



   (A)   Building permits. No person shall erect, alter, remodel, wreck
or move any kind of a structure or building or part thereof without first
securing a building permit as provided for by the Minnesota State Building
Code or other applicable code or ordinances.



   (B)   Certificate of occupancy. No new building or addition and no
land whose use has been changed shall be occupied other than for a public
utility use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued stating that the
new occupancy complies with all applicable ordinances.



      (1)   A final certificate of occupancy for new residential
homes will not be issued until the following items are completed (if approved
by the Building Inspector, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be
issued):



         (a)   Upon completion of rough grading, an as-built
certificate of grading survey shall be completed and certified to by a
registered engineer or land surveyor.  An as-built survey and certificate of
grading form shall be submitted to the city for approval/acceptance. 
As-built surveys shall be in conformance with the city approved grading
plan.  As-built surveys shall show all required checklist information
provided on the City of Mayer As-Built Certificate of Grading form.



         (b)   Landscaping requirements (according to § 152.092
or approved landscape plan).



         (c)   A paved/hard surfaced driveway.



   (C)   Exhibits. Each application for a building permit shall be
accompanied by the following exhibits unless waived by the Zoning Officer:



      (1)   New residential construction. Two sets of construction
details and a certificate of survey illustrating structure location, pavement
location, dimensions, setbacks, elevations, lot size, easements and public
drain tile tie-in-location.



      (2)   Site plan review materials, as set forth in § 152.031,
for all building permits other than single-family dwelling unit new
construction and reconstruction.



   (D)   Permit application procedure. The procedure for applying for a
building permit shall be as follows:



      (1)   The property owner or his or her agent shall meet with
the Zoning Officer to explain his or her situation, learn the procedures, and
obtain an application form.



      (2)   The applicant shall file the completed application form
together with the required exhibits with the Zoning Officer.



      (3)   The Zoning Officer determines the permit fee and
collects the fee from the applicant. The permit application for all uses,
except single-family dwelling unit new construction and additions/remodeling,
will then be forwarded to the Planning Commission for review and approval
according to the provisions of this chapter.



   (E)   Expiration of building permit. If the work described in any
building permit has not begun within 180 days from the date of issuance
thereof, the permit shall expire. It shall be canceled by the Zoning Officer
and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-R, passed 6-26-06)



§ 152.153  BOARD OF APPEALS AND ADJUSTMENTS; VARIANCES.



   (A)   Board of Appeals and Adjustments (Board). Pursuant to the
authority of M.S. § 462.354, subd. 2, the City Council of the City of Mayer
shall act as the Board of Appeals and Adjustments for the city and shall have
the powers granted under M.S. §§ 462.357, subd. 6, and 462.359, subd. 4, as
they may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Appeals.



      (1)   Appeals may be taken to the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments by any person who alleges there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official or
department in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. Such appeal shall be
taken within 60 days of the alleged order or decision by filing with the
zoning officer, City Administrator or City Clerk a notice of appeal and
specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative officer shall transmit to
the Board all papers and information constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.



      (2)   Hearings. Public hearings shall be held by the Board on
all appeals taken to it. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to
the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. All
time requirements mandated by state law shall be followed. At the hearing any
party may appear in person, by agent or attorney.



         (a)   The property owner or his or her agent shall meet
with the zoning officer to explain his or her situation, learn the procedures
and obtain an application form.



         (b)   The applicant shall file the completed application
form, together with the required exhibits, and any other information required
by the zoning officer or the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, with the
zoning officer and shall pay the required filing fee. The application shall
include a list obtained from the county of all property owners located within
350 feet of the boundary of the subject property. An application will not be
considered until fully completed.



         (c)   The zoning officer shall transmit the application
and one copy of the exhibits to the Board and to the Planning Commission.



         (d)   The Planning Commission shall consider the
application for variance and make recommendations to the Board of Appeals and
Adjustments.



         (e)   Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the Board shall hold a public hearing on the application in the
manner set forth in division (B)(2) of this section.



         (f)   A violation of any condition set forth in granting
a variance shall be a violation of this section and automatically terminates
the variance.



   (C)   Expiration. Unless the Board of Appeals and Adjustments
specifically approves a different time when action is officially taken on the
request, approvals which have been issued under the provisions of this
section shall expire without further action by the Planning Commission or the
Board, unless the applicant commences the authorized use or improvement
within one year of the date the variance is issued or unless before the
expiration of the one year period, the applicant shall apply for an extension
thereof by completing and submitting a request for extension, including the
renewal fee as established by City Council resolution. The request for
extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or
utilize the approval permitted in the variance. Said extension shall be
presented to the Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the Board
for a decision.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-G, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 102-V,
passed 6-11-07; Am. Ord. 173, passed 10-24-11; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-9-15)



§ 152.154  INTERIM USES.



   (A)   Purpose. In addition to the purposes stated in § 152.002, it
is intended that the interim use permit procedures allow flexibility in the
use of land or structures in the city when such uses are not permanent and
when such uses meet appropriate conditions and performance standards that
protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   (B)   Application, public hearing, and procedure. The application,
public hearing, notice, and procedure requirements for interim use permits
shall be the same as those for amendments, as provided in § 152.155, except
that approval of an interim use by the City Council requires only a simple
majority affirmative vote. If a proposed interim use is not listed as a
permitted interim use in this chapter, a text amendment to this chapter will
be required before an interim use permit may be considered.



   (C)   Termination. All interim use permits shall terminate on the
happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:



      (1)   The termination date stated in the permit.



      (2)   A violation of the conditions under which the permit was
issued.



      (3)   A change in the city’s zoning regulations that renders
the use nonconforming.



   (D)   Standards.



      (1)   The interim use must be allowed in the zoning district
where the property is located.



      (2)   The interim use must meet or exceed the performance
standards set forth in this chapter and other applicable city ordinances.



      (3)   The interim use must comply with the specific standards
for the use identified in this chapter, and must comply with all conditions
of approval, which shall be included in the interim use permit agreement.



   (E)   Conditions. The city may attach conditions to approval of a
permit to mitigate anticipated adverse impacts associated with the use, to
ensure compliance with the standards of approval, to protect the value of
other property, and to achieve the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan.



   (F)   Annual review/revocation. The Planning Commission may require
the annual review of any interim use permit to ensure that its conditions are
being complied with. Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a
interim use permit shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be
cause for the revocation of the interim use permit by the City Council
following a public hearing. The property owner shall be notified in advance
of the City Council’s review of the permit.



   (G)   Expiration. Unless the City Council specifically approves a
different time when action is officially taken on the request, interim use
permits which have been issued under the provisions of this section shall
expire without further action by the Planning Commission or the City Council,
unless the applicant commences the authorized use within one year of the date
the interim use permit is issued or unless before the expiration of the one
year period, the applicant shall apply for an extension thereof by completing
and submitting a request for extension, including the renewal fee as
established by City Council resolution. The request for extension shall state
facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use permitted
in the interim use permit. Said extension shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 205, passed 11-9-15)



§ 152.155  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS (CUP).



   (A)   Intent and purpose. Unless carefully controlled and monitored,
some uses have the potential to have a deleterious effect on adjacent
properties and the city as a whole. They must therefore meet and maintain a
higher standard of quality to ensure land use and environmental
compatibility. Uses possessing unique and potentially detrimental
characteristics may be authorized in certain zoning districts by issuance of
a CUP when certain conditions are met.



   (B)   Exhibits. The following exhibits shall be required for a
conditional use permit:



      (1)   A boundary survey and plot plan showing all site
dimensions and legal description of the property as required for building
permit applications.



      (2)   Elevation drawings indicating the design treatment of
all proposed buildings and structures, and general floor plans of such
buildings.



      (3)   All types of proposed uses.



      (4)   An abstracter’s certificate showing the names and
addresses of all property owners within 350 feet of the outer boundaries of
the property in question.



   (C)   Procedures. After the filing of an application, the Zoning
Officer shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be
posted and published at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
Notice of proposed rezoning shall also be mailed to each property owner
within 350 feet of the proposed zoning district boundary amendments. Upon
hearing the request, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval, denial
or conditional approval of the proposed CUP and shall state the reasons for
its action. The City Council shall consider the recommendation by the
Planning Commission within 30 days and shall approve, deny or modify the
request for the CUP.



   (D)   Standards for granting conditional use permits. A conditional
use permit may be granted by the City Council after demonstration by evidence
that:



      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, comfort or general welfare.



      (2)   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and
enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purpose already
permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the
neighborhood.



      (3)   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede
the normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property
for uses permitted in the district.



      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and necessary
facilities have been or will be provided.



      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to minimize
traffic congestions in the public streets.



      (6)   The conditional use shall meet the specific requirements
set forth in each district, defined in this chapter.



      (7)   The conditional use shall, in all other respects,
conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located.



   (E)   Duration. A conditional use permit shall remain in effect as
long as the agreed upon conditions are observed.



   (F)   Annual review/revocation. The Planning Commission may require
the annual review of any conditional use permit to ensure that its conditions
are being complied with. Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a
conditional use permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall
be cause for the revocation of the conditional use permit by the City Council
following a public hearing. The property owner shall be notified in advance
of the City Council’s review of the permit.



   (G)   Expiration. Unless the City Council specifically approves a
different time when action is officially taken on the request, conditional
use permits which have been issued under the provisions of this section shall
expire without further action by the Planning Commission or the City Council,
unless the applicant commences the authorized use within one year of the date
the conditional use permit is issued or unless before the expiration of the
one year period, the applicant shall apply for an extension thereof by
completing and submitting a request for extension. Including the renewal fee
as established by City Council resolution. The request for extension shall
state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete or utilize the use
permitted in the conditional use permit. Said extension shall be presented to
the Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a
decision.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-G, passed 7-12-04; Am. Ord. 205,
passed 11-9-15)



§ 152.156  AMENDMENT.



   (A)   Amendments to this chapter may be initiated by the Planning
Commission, City Council or by petition of a landowner.



   (B)   Applications provided by the city must be completed in writing
prior to any consideration for an amendment. Fees for zoning amendments are
established by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   The city may require the applicant to provide plans, maps,
surveys, and the like, to ensure proper review and consideration of any
proposed amendment to the written provisions of this chapter or zoning
district boundaries.



   (D)   After the filing of an application, or after initiation by the
City Council, the Zoning Officer shall set a date for a public hearing.
Notice of the hearing for all amendments shall be posted and published at
least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice of proposed rezoning
shall also be mailed to each property owner within 350 feet of the proposed
zoning district boundary amendments.



   (E)   Upon hearing the request, the Planning Commission shall
recommend either approval or denial of the proposed amendment and shall state
the reasons for its action.



   (F)   Within 30 days of the recommendation by the Planning
Commission, the City Council shall consider the recommendation and shall
approve, deny or modify the request to amend this chapter.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.157  FEES.



   (A)   Fees for site plan reviews, variances, permits, and amendments
shall be established from time to time by resolution by the City Council.



   (B)   The City shall be reimbursed for all out-of-pocket expenses
incurred during site plan reviews or issuance of permits.



   (C)   Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been
paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. There
shall be no fee in the case of applications filed in the public interest by
the City Council or by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who
violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements may
upon conviction be punished to the maximum extent allowed by law. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 102, passed 7-9-01; Am. Ord. 102-J, passed 2-28-05; Am. Ord. 188,
passed 4-11-13)



CHAPTER 153:  EXCAVATION



Section



   153.01   Excavation permit required



   153.02   Exceptions



   153.03   Application requirements



   153.04   Minimum requirements



   153.05   Additional requirements



   153.06   Inspections



   153.07   Revocation



   153.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Noise, see §§ 93.50 through 93.57



§ 153.01  EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall move, remove, store, place, or
excavate rock, sand, dirt, gravel, clay or other like material (hereinafter
EXCAVATION or EXCAVATE) within the city unless such person, firm or
corporation shall first have obtained an excavation permit authorizing the
same and complied with all of the terms of this code.



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.02  EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Excavation for the purpose of a foundation, cellar or basement
of some immediately pending superstructure to be erected, built or placed
thereon contemporaneously with, or immediately following such excavation,
removal or storage, provided a building permit has been issued for the
building to be constructed in connection with the excavation:



   (B)   Excavations required by the state, county or city authorities
in connection with the construction or maintenance of roads and highways
within their respective right-of-ways;



   (C)   Excavation consistent with a final plat and grading plan which
has been approved by the city and for which a development agreement has been
executed and financial sureties provided;



   (D)   Excavation by the owner of land for landscaping purposes
within the contiguous boundaries of such owned premises, provided that the
amount of material moved is less than 20 cubic yards;



   (E)   Repair of landscaping, driveways or parking lots.



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05; Am. Ord. 146, passed 6-23-08)



§ 153.03  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Original permit. The applicant’s original excavation permit
shall be issued only after a public hearing by the Planning Commission, and
approval by the Council. Such hearing shall be held only after mailed and
published notice consistent with the requirements of the city’s Zoning
Ordinance, section 102. The original permit shall expire 90 days from the
date of issuance. A permit may be renewed by the Council without public
hearing for an additional 90 day period.



   (B)   Information required. All applicants for excavation permits
shall provide the following information:



      (1)   A correct legal description of the tract, giving
complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified to by
a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall also be located on
the ground marked by substantial monuments of such size and type as approved
by the City Engineer, and be referred and tied to the nearest quarter section
corner and shall be shown. Descriptions, reference ties and elevations of all
benchmarks shall also be included.



      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant
and of the owner of the land.



      (3)   The names and addresses of all adjacent land owners
within a one-half mile radius of the proposed excavation.



      (4)   Copies of any portions of agreements or leases, which
grant to the applicant the right to use the land for excavation.



      (5)   The purpose of the excavation and, if material removed
is to be sold, the proposed site for such sale.



      (6)   The estimated length of time removal operations will be
ongoing.



      (7)   The highways, streets or other public ways within the
city, upon and along which the material removed shall be transported and the
maximum number of truckloads per day which will be transported along those
routes, and the proposed method of street cleaning.



      (8)   The plan of operation, including soil processing, nature
of the processing and equipment, the area, depth and grade of such
processing, the estimated quantity of earthly deposits to be added to or
removed from the premises, location of the plant, source of water, disposal
of water, and re-use of water. In the event that water is used in the
operation of a pit then approval from the State of Minnesota, Department of
Natural Resources, or other appropriate state or federal agencies, if
necessary, shall be obtained as to the type, location and depth of said well
and water use.



      (9)   The development plan of the property where the
excavation is to occur. This plan shall contain site analysis information,
such as trees, depth of topsoil, soil type, adjacent and on-site buildings
and land uses, a map or plat of the proposed pit or excavation, showing the
confines or limits thereof, together with the proposed finished elevations,
based on sea level readings. Elevation and percent slope within 100 feet
beyond the perimeter of the excavation and such other information necessary
to analyze the site shall be provided by the applicant.



      (10)   The applicant shall submit a comprehensive restoration
and land use plan, showing suitable provision for restoration of the
excavated area to a useable condition compatible with the adjacent land and
that it will not become a health or safety hazard or a nuisance. Such plan
should include anticipated final elevations, slopes and a plan for the return
of subsoil and topsoil. Where the Council deems it practical and necessary,
such plan shall include adjoining related areas where excavations have
previously been made and remain under the control of the owner of the land on
which the excavating is to be done or under the control of the person, other
than the owner to whom the permit is to be issued.



   (C)   Fees; insurance; bond.  With each application, the applicant
shall submit the following:



      (1)   The annual fee for the license shall be $200, plus an
escrow deposit in an amount determined by the city to defray expenses
incurred by the city in reviewing and processing the application and
administering the permit, including, without limitation, engineering, legal
and consulting fees.



      (2)   (a)   A letter of credit acceptable to and in an
amount deemed sufficient by the Council and conditioned such that the
permittee will:



            1.   Successfully perform all conditions of this
chapter and any permits issued hereunder;



            2.   Restore the land in conformity with the plan
submitted and approved; and



            3.   Pay for any damage which may occur to
adjacent public roads by reason of the excavating activity being done under
permit.



         (b)   The letter of credit shall forfeit to the city in
full if compliance with the foregoing is not completed within 30 days of
demand by the city for such completion or compliance.



      (3)   The permittee shall provide proof of public liability
insurance assuring against bodily injury and property damage and indemnifying
and holding the city harmless for any such causes of action and costs and
expenses, including attorneys’ fees, incurred therein. This insurance shall
be in the following amounts for public liability, personal injury and
property damage:



 

Injury or death of one person
 

$1,000,000



Injury or death to more than one person in a single occurrence
 

$1,000,000



Property damage
 

$300,000




 



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.04  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   In cases in which the following minimum requirements cannot be met, no
permit shall be issued. For all permits issued, the following are minimum
requirements for the operation of excavation under this chapter and are
deemed to be a condition of the permit:



   (A)   The slopes or any edge contiguous to the excavation shall not
be less than a four feet horizontal to one foot vertical slope, or as
otherwise approved by the operation plan.



   (B)   All trees, stumps and debris must be disposed of within 30
days by removal or burning, if allowed; or within ten days after notification
by the city, whichever is less.



   (C)   The depth of removal of materials in areas programmed for
future public utilities and services in no instance shall be greater than 25
feet below the present center line grade of the road servicing the area, or
as determined by the City Engineer. No excavation shall be allowed below
grade closer than 100 feet to the right-of-way line of any existing street,
road or highway, except that excavating may be conducted within such limits
in order to reduce the elevation thereof, in conformity to the existing
proposed street grades.



   (D)   The operator shall be responsible for the lowering of any well
so as to provide potable water for each individual whose well is affected by
excavation operations. Further, the operation of the pit shall not affect the
safety or quality of any well water within one quarter mile of the
excavation. Proof that the hydraulic or static effect is not determined
detrimental to any such well shall be provided by the permittee or applicant
upon demand by the city.



   (E)   All rocks which are not crashed and which are one foot or
larger in diameter shall be removed from the site or other approved method of
disposal after termination of excavation operations. If crushing of rocks is
proposed, a crashing plan shall be submitted to the city for its review and
approval.



   (F)   Any storm or surface water cast into the excavation shall be
the responsibility of the permittee. No drainage of such water shall be made
by the permittee in such a way as to cause erosion or damage to any adjoining
properties.



   (G)   The operator shall maintain and operate all equipment in such
a manner as to minimize air pollution. Any emission which can cause any
damage to health, animals or vegetation or other forms of property, or which
can cause any excessive soiling at any point, or any emission of any solid or
liquid particles in concentration, exceeding the Minnesota Pollution Control
Agency Air Quality Regulations, are hereby prohibited.



   (H)   Upon termination of the operation of any excavation, the
excavation site shall be regraded or modified according to the plans
submitted with the application.



   (I)   All excavated materials shall be removed from the premises
only upon and along such highways, streets or other public ways as the
Council shall authorize and direct.



   (J)   No noise resulting from the excavation shall exceed the
regulations of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Noise Control
Regulations or the city’s noise ordinance, whichever is more restrictive.



   (K)   Any vibration resulting in any combination of amplitude and
frequencies beyond the safe range of the most current standards of the United
States Bureau of Mines for any structure is hereby prohibited.



   (L)   The slope of banks of the excavation shall be kept in such a
condition so as not to be dangerous because of overhangs, slidings or
cave-ins. Upon notice by the city to the permittee, the permittee shall
correct any such dangerous condition immediately. In all events, all
excavating shall comply with OSHA and other applicable state and federal
standards.



   (M)   The removal of natural vegetation shall be restricted to
prevent erosion into water bodies, to conserve nutrients in the soil, and to
preserve shoreland aesthetics to the maximum degree possible. Removal shall
be restricted within a strip paralleling a lakeshore, river or stream and
shall extend inland a minimum distance of 100 feet from the normal high water
mark, as determined by the point where the natural vegetation changes from
predominately aquatic to predominately terrestrial.



   (N)   Land alteration shall in no way adversely affect adjacent
private or public properties, and may not obstruct the free flow of water in
a natural waterway or public street drain, storm sewer, gutter or ditch.



   (O)   No blasting shall be allowed.



   (P)  The hours of operation of any excavation shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. daily. No excavation, crushing or processing or tracking
shall be conducted on Sundays or legal holidays, with the exception of
Columbus Day and Veteran’s Day.



   (Q)   The Council may, in its discretion, waive or modify the
provisions of this section upon a showing that the requested modification
will not undermine the purposes set forth in this chapter and shall not
jeopardize the public health, welfare and safety or the environment.



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.05  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   The Council may impose additional conditions on the permit and the
operation of any excavation site if it deems it necessary for the protection
of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. These may
include, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:



   (A)   That the permittee properly fence any excavation site, or
portion of any excavation site, which may be a hazard or create a danger to
the public.



   (B)   That the applicant or owner submit a landscape screening plan
and provide such screening consisting of natural shrubbery or other device as
the Council deems appropriate.



   (C)   On completion of the operation, the applicant shall properly
drain and level any excavation and restore the contour of the site to a
condition as indicated on the plan submitted and approved by the Council.



   (D)   The permittee shall remove any extracted material abandoned
upon or along the highways, streets or other public ways in the city, as the
City Engineer shall direct and order.



   (E)   The permittee shall submit to the Council, a detailed map of
the highways, streets, roads and other public ways within the city upon and
along which the material removed shall be transported. The City Engineer
shall inspect such roads proposed to be used by the permittee and shall
recommend to the Council necessary upgrading or repairing of such roads prior
to their use as routes for the hauling of material excavated. The Council may
designate city roads and incorporate the recommendations of the Engineer into
the permit issued. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage to those
roads caused by its operations.



   (F)   The permittee shall submit in writing to the Council, the
estimated quantity of material to be removed, the anticipated route over
which trucks will travel, the beginning and completion of time for operation,
and the area of the pit which will be used for excavation during that
12-month period. It is understood that while the information may not be able
to be submitted with certainty, the permittee must make his or her best
estimate of the removal operation. If the quantity of material to be removed
is for any reason likely to significantly exceed the original estimated
amount, the permittee shall notify the city of such change in estimated
quantity as soon as such information is available to it.



   (G)   In the event that a development plan is submitted which
anticipates a lake about which lots will be platted, the lake must be planned
for at least a 15-foot depth. Any development plan indicating a lake
development shall provide a means for level control or computations which
proves that the lake can contain drainage directly to it by free board
storage utilizing a 100-year storm.



   (H)   Within a period of three months after the termination of
operation of any excavation, or within three months after abandonment of such
operation or within three months after expiration of a permit hereunder, the
permittee, or owner of the premises shall dismantle all buildings and
structures incidental to the excavation permit.



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05)  Penalty, see § 153.99



153.06  INSPECTIONS.



   The city may elect to inspect each excavation site at times determined
appropriate by it. By applying for a permit under this chapter, the permittee
has agreed to permit and cooperate in such inspections. The permittee and/or
owners of any premises in violation of any of the requirements of this
chapter or its permit shall remedy such violations within the time specified
by written notice from the city.



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.07  REVOCATION.



   Excavation permits may be revoked upon violation of any conditions of
the permit provided herein or established by the Council. The revocation
shall be effective immediately upon written notice of the same by the Council
to the permittee. Upon written demand the permittee may have a hearing before
the Council at its next available meeting.



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter and the permits issued hereunder is a
misdemeanor. Every day of violation is a separate violation. In addition to
the criminal penalty provided herein, the city reserves to itself the right
to seek appropriate injunctive or other equitable relief in the case of
violation.



(Ord. 102-N, passed 11-14-05)



CHAPTER 154:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



   154.01   Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose



   154.02   General provisions



   154.03   Establishment of floodplain districts



   154.04   Requirements for all floodplain districts



   154.05   Floodway District (FW)



   154.06   Flood Fringe District (FF)



   154.07   General Floodplain District (GF)



   154.08   Subdivision standards



   154.09   Utilities, railroads, roads, and bridges



   154.10   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles



   154.11   Administration



   154.12   Nonconformities



   154.13   Violations and penalties



   154.14   Amendments



§ 154.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Statutory authorization. The legislature of the State of
Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and Chapter 462 delegated
the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to
minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as follows.



   (B)   Purpose.



      (1)   This chapter regulates development in the flood hazard
areas of the city. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic
inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the
tax base. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health.
safety, and general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.



      (2)   National Flood Insurance Program compliance. This
chapter is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts
59-78. as amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the
National Flood Insurance Program.



      (3)   This chapter is also intended to preserve the natural
characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to
moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.02  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter applies to
all lands within the jurisdiction of the city within the boundaries of the
floodway, flood fringe and general floodplain districts. The boundaries of
these districts are determined by scaling distances on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, or as modified in accordance with § 154.03(B).



      (1)   The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain
Districts are overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning
districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to
any other requirements in this chapter. In case of a conflict, the more
restrictive standards will apply.



      (2)   Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits
illustrated on the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions, the
flood elevations shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory
floodplain limits.



      (3)   Persons contesting the location of the district
boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to
the Board of Appeals and Adjustments and to submit technical evidence.



   (B)   Incorporation of maps by reference.



      (1)   The following FIRMs together with all attached material
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Official
Zoning Map and this chapter. The attached material includes the Flood
Insurance Study for Carver County, Minnesota, and Incorporated Areas, dated
December 21, 2018 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map panels enumerated below,
dated December 21, 2018, all prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. These materials are on file at City Hall:



         (a)   27019C0043D.



         (b)   27019C0044D.



         (c)   27019C0063D.



      (2)   Future city growth areas extend on to the following
FIRMs:



         (a)   27019C0045D.



         (b)   27019C0061D.



         (c)   27019C0160D.



         (d)   27019C0180D.



   (C)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by
this chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or other private agreements. However, where this chapter imposes
greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter prevail. All other
ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of the inconsistency only.



   (D)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted
within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or its officers or
employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



   (E)   Severability. If any section, clause, provision, or portion of
this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the
remainder of this chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in full
force.



   (F)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot
with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.



      BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. See also “Regional Flood.”



      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the regional flood. The
term BASE FLOOD ELEVATION is used in the flood insurance survey.



      BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having
its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless
of the depth of excavation below ground level.



      CONDITIONAL USE. A specific type of structure or land use listed
in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review
procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the
official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:



         (a)   Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning
ordinance (Chapter 152) exist, and



         (b)   The structure and/or land use conform to the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan if one exists and are compatible with the
existing neighborhood.



      CRITICAL FACILITIES. Facilities necessary to a community’s
public health and safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic
or water-reactive materials, and those that house occupants that may be
insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of CRITICAL
FACILITIES include hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, daycare
facilities, nursing homes, fire and police stations, wastewater treatment
facilities, public electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities,
and waste handling and storage facilities.



      DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment
or materials.



      EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT. A method of determining the
location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a
stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.



      FARM FENCE. A fence as defined by M.S. § 344.02, Subd.
1.(a)-(d). An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be a
structure under this chapter. Fences that have the potential to obstruct
flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls, are regulated as
structures under this chapter.



      FLOOD. A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or
in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally
dry areas.



      FLOOD FREQUENCY. The frequency for which it is expected that a
specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.



      FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (1%
annual chance flood) located outside of the floodway. FLOOD FRINGE is
synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance
Study for Carver County, Minnesota.



      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been
made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).



      FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source.



      FLOODPLAIN. The channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a
wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by
the regional flood. FLOODPLAIN areas within the city shall encompass all
areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.



      FLOODPROOFING. A combination of structural provisions, changes,
or adjustments to properties, structures, water and sanitary facilities and
contents of structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or
elimination of flood damages.



      FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a
watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are
reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.



      HISTORIC STRUCTURE. See also “Substantial Improvement.”



      LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely
for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 60.3.



      MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include the term “recreational
vehicle.”



      NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures, including additions and
improvements, and placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.



      OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building,
wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across,
or projecting into any channel, watercourse, lake bed, or regulatory
floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of
water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water.



      ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOODPLAIN (100 YEAR FLOODPLAIN). Lands
inundated by the “Regional Flood” (see definition).



      PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE. All uses or structures that are not
accessory uses or structures.



      REACH. A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal
segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or manmade obstruction.
In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive
bridge crossings would most typically constitute a REACH.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT. Any type of operable and
licensed vehicle as required by the state, either self-powered or drawn by
another vehicle, that is used primarily for purposes of recreation or
transportation of recreational vehicles, equipment, and the like. A vehicle
that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured
at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for
use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use, including but not limited to
campers, motor homes, travel trailers, slide in campers, airplanes, converted
buses, snowmobiles and trailers, camper trailers, motorcycle trailers,
snowmobile trailers, horse trailers, boats/watercraft and trailers, fish
house, all terrain vehicles, and the like. A fish house, boat, snowmobile or
other RECREATIONAL VEHICLE when stored or kept on a trailer shall be
considered as one RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. For the purposes of this chapter, the
term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE is synonymous with the term “travel
trailer/travel vehicle.”



      REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood which is representative of large floods
known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic
of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of
the 1% chance or 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous
with the term “base flood” used in a flood insurance study.



      REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (RFPE). An elevation not
less than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any
increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that
result from designation of a floodway.



      REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. A term used for flood insurance
purposes synonymous with “One Hundred Year Floodplain.”



      START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and
means the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation. addition, placement or other improvement that occurred before
the permit’s expiration date. The actual start is either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling: nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways: nor does it include excavation
for a basement. footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.



      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground or onsite utilities, including, but not limited to,
buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, decks manufactured
homes, recreational vehicles not considered travel ready as detailed in §
154.10(B)(2) and other similar items.



      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Within any consecutive 365-day period,
any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair),
repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before
the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures
that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions, or



         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a historic structure. For the purpose of this chapter, HISTORIC STRUCTURE
is as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.



      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of the City of Mayer
until otherwise designated by the City Council.



   (G)   Annexations. The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by
reference in division (B) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside
of the corporate boundaries of the city at the time of adoption of this
chapter. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city
after the date of adoption of this chapter, the newly annexed floodplain
lands will be subject to the provisions of this chapter immediately upon the
date of annexation.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 150, passed 10-27-08; Am. Ord. 225,
passed 10-8-18; Am. Ord. 228, passed 3-11-19)



§ 154.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Districts.



      (1)   Floodway District. The Floodway District includes those
areas within Zones AE delineated within floodway areas as shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps adopted in § 154.02(B) as well as other delineated
lakes, wetlands and other basins, and are determined to be at or below the
ordinary high water level as defined in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.



      (2)   Flood Fringe District. The Flood Fringe District
includes areas within Zones AE on the Flood Insurance Rate Map adopted in §
154.02(B), but located outside of the floodway. For lakes, wetlands and other
basins within Zones A that do not have a floodway delineated, the Flood
Fringe District also includes those areas below the 1% annual chance
(100-year) flood elevation but above the ordinary high water level as defined
in M.S. § 103G.005, Subd. 14.



      (3)   Reserved for General Floodplain District.



   (B)   Applicability. Where Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts are
delineated on the floodplain maps, the standards in §§ 154.05 or 154.06
will apply, depending on the location of a property. Locations where Floodway
and Flood Fringe Districts are not delineated on the floodplain maps are
considered to fall within the General Floodplain District. Within the General
Floodplain District, the Floodway District standards in § 154.05 apply
unless the floodway boundary is determined, according to the process outlined
in § 154.07(B).



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the Zoning
Administrator to verify if a development meets all applicable standards
outlined in this chapter prior to conducting the following activities:



      (1)   The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or
alteration of any building, structure,



or portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if
such work, separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes
a substantial improvement as defined in this chapter.



      (2)   The construction of a dam, on-site septic system, or any
fence not meeting the definition of farm fence outlined in § 154.02(F).



      (3)   The change or extension of a nonconforming use.



      (4)   The repair of a structure that has been damaged by
flood, fire, tornado, or any other source.



      (5)   The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the
storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain.



      (6)   Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including new
or replacement culverts and bridges), unless a public waters work permit has
been applied for.



      (7)   Any other type of development as defined in this chapter.



   (B)   Minimum development standards. All new construction and
substantial improvements must be:



      (1)   Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to
prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;



      (2)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage;



      (3)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage; and



      (4)   Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
ductwork, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.



   (C)   Flood capacity. Floodplain developments must not adversely
affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any
tributary watercourse or drainage system.



   (D)   The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of
flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or
plant life is prohibited.



   (E)   Critical facilities, as defined in § 154.02(F), are to be
located, so that the lowest floor is not less than two feet above the
regional flood elevation, or the 500-year flood elevation, whichever is
higher.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.05  FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses, subject to the standards
set forth in division (B) below, are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in
the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district:



      (1)   General farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences, outdoor
plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting.



      (2)   Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and
airport landing strips.



      (3)   Open space uses, including but not limited to private
and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges,
picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and
nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting
and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.



      (4)   Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas, and
play areas.



      (5)   Railroads. streets. bridges. utility transmission lines
and pipelines. provided that the Department of Natural Resources’ Area
Hydrologist is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit.



   (B)   Standards for floodway permitted uses.



      (1)   The use must have a low flood damage potential.



      (2)   The use must not involve structures or obstruct flood
flows. The use must not cause any increase in flood damages, nor any increase
in flood elevations in areas where a floodway has been established, as
certified by a registered professional engineer.



      (3)   Any facility that will be used by employees or the
general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides
adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity
such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second)
would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance)
flood.



   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed as
conditional uses following the standards and procedures set forth in §
154.11(D) and further subject to the standards set forth in division (D)
below, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district.



      (1)   Structures accessory to primary uses listed in division
(A)(1) through (3) above and primary uses listed in division (C)(2) and (3)
below.



      (2)   Grading, extraction. fill and storage of soil. sand,
gravel, and other materials.



      (3)   Marinas, boat rentals, permanent docks, piers, wharves.
water control structures, and navigational facilities.



      (4)   Storage yards for equipment. machinery, or materials.



      (5)   Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows.



      (6)   Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops
for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the ten-year frequency
flood event.



   (D)   Standards for floodway conditional uses.



      (1)   A conditional use must not cause any increase in flood
damages, nor any increase in flood elevations in areas where a floodway has
been established, as certified by a registered professional engineer.



      (2)   Fill; storage of materials and equipment.



         (a)   Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials
deposited or stored in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by
vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand
and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site
development plan.



         (b)   Temporary placement of fill. other materials, or
equipment which would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% chance or
regional flood may only be allowed if the city has approved a plan that
assures removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood
warning time available.



      (3)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as
identified in division (C)(1) above, may be permitted, provided that:



         (a)   Structures are not intended for human habitation;



         (b)   Structures will have a low flood damage potential;



         (c)   Structures will be constructed and placed so as to
offer a minimal obstruction to the flow of floodwaters;



         (d)   Structures must be elevated on fill or
structurally dry floodproofed and watertight to the regulatory flood
protection elevation. Certifications consistent with § 154.11(B)(2) shall be
required.



         (e)   As an alternative, an accessory structure may be
floodproofed in a way to accommodate internal flooding. To allow for the
equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there shall be a minimum of two
openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all
openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The openings shall
have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square
foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, have a net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding,
and shall allow automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without human
intervention. A floodproofing certification consistent with § 154.11(B)(2)
shall be required.



      (4)   Structural works for flood control that will change the
course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters are
subject to the provisions of M.S. § 103G.245.



      (5)   A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway
must not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The technical
analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a
stream.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.06  FLOOD FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).



   (A)   Permitted uses. Permitted uses are those uses of land or
structures allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the
standards in division (B) below.



   (B)   Standards for flood fringe permitted uses.



      (1)   All structures, including accessory structures, must be
elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for
structures must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood
protection elevation and the fill must extend at the same elevation at least
15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure. Elevations must be
certified by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or other
qualified person designated by the community.



      (2)   Accessory structures. As an alternative to the fill
requirements of division (B)(1) above,  structures accessory to the uses
identified in division (A) above may be designed to accommodate the
inundation of floodwaters, meeting the following provisions, as appropriate:



         (a)   The accessory structure constitutes a minimal
investment and satisfy the development requirements in § 154.04(B).



         (b)   Any enclosed accessory structure shall not exceed
576 square feet in size, and only be used for parking and storage, Any such
structure shall be designed and certified by a registered professional
engineer, or be designed in accordance with the following floodproofing
standards: to allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there shall
be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the
bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The
openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding, have a net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding, and shall allow automatic entry and exit of floodwaters without
human intervention.



      (3)   The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on
a parcel must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically
intended to elevate a structure in accordance with division (B)(1) above, 
or if allowed as a conditional use under division (C)(3) below.



      (4)   All service utilities, including ductwork, must be
elevated or water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters.



      (5)   All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must
be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other
acceptable method.



      (6)   All new principal structures must have vehicular access
at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood
protection elevation, or must have a flood warning/emergency evacuation plan
acceptable to the city.



      (7)   Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and
parking lots may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood
protection elevation. However, any facilities used by employees or the
general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides
adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity
such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second)
would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance)
flood.



      (8)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet
the standards of § 154.10.



   (C)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed as
conditional uses following the standards and procedures set forth in §
154.11(D) and further subject to the standards set forth in division (D)
below, if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district(s).



      (1)   The placement of floodproofed nonresidential basements
below the regulatory flood protection elevation. Residential basements, are
not allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (2)   The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards
of fill when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance
with division (D)(1) below.



   (D)   Standards for flood fringe conditional uses.



      (1)   The standards for permitted uses in the flood fringe,
listed in division (B)(4) through (8) above, apply to all conditional uses.



      (2)   All areas of nonresidential structures, including
basements, to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must
be structurally dry floodproofed, which requires making the structure
watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water
and with structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. A floodproofing certification
consistent with § 154.11(B)(2) shall be required.



      (3)   The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or
other similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a
structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an
approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.



         (a)   The plan must clearly specify methods to be used
to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional
(1% chance) flood event.



         (b)   The plan must be prepared and certified by a
registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to
the city.



         (c)   The plan may incorporate alternative procedures
for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning
time exists.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.07  GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (GF).



   (Reserved.)



§ 154.08  SUBDIVISION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Subdivisions. No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable
for reasons of flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage
treatment facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks
or campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this chapter.



      (1)   All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to
contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation.



      (2)   All subdivisions must have road access both to the
subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below
the regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency
plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional
(1% chance) flood has been approved by the city. The plan must be prepared by
a registered engineer or other qualified individual, and must demonstrate
that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.



      (3)   For all subdivisions in the Floodplain, the Floodway and
Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation
and the required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all
required subdivision drawings and platting documents.



      (4)   (Reserved for General Floodplain District (GF).)



      (5)   Subdivision proposals must be reviewed to assure that:



         (a)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage within the floodprone area,



         (b)   All public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage, and



         (c)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure
of flood hazard.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18; Am. Ord. 228, passed
3-11-19)



§ 154.09  UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS, AND BRIDGES.



   (A)   Public utilities. All public utilities and facilities such as
gas, electrical sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the
floodplain must be floodproofed in accordance with the State Building Code or
elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation.



   (B)   Public transportation facilities. Railroad tracks, roads, and
bridges to be located within the floodplain must comply with §§ 154.05 and
154.06. These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory
flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these facilities
would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such
facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or
auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where
failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the
public health or safety.



   (C)   On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems. Where
public utilities are not provided:



      (1)   On-site water supply systems must be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and are
subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules 4725.4350, as amended; and



      (2)   New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be
subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are
subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules 7080.2270, as amended.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.10  MANUFACTURED HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes and manufactured home
parks are subject to applicable standards for each floodplain district. In
addition:



      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated
in compliance with § 154.06 and must be securely anchored to a system that
resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



      (2)   New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing
manufactured home parks must meet the appropriate standards for subdivisions
in § 154.08. New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured
home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in §
154.08(A)(2).



   (B)   Recreational vehicles. New recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or
campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district. Recreational vehicles
placed in existing recreational vehicle parks, campgrounds or lots of record
in the floodplain must either:



      (1)   Meet the requirements for manufactured homes in division
(A) above, or



      (2)   Be travel ready, meeting the following criteria:



         (a)   The vehicle must have a current license required
for highway use.



         (b)   The vehicle must be highway ready. meaning on
wheels or the internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational
vehicle parks.



         (c)   No permanent structural type additions may be
attached to the vehicle.



         (d)   Accessory structures may be permitted in the Flood
Fringe District, provided that they constitute a minimal investment, do not
hinder the removal of the vehicle should flooding occur, and meet the
standards outlined in §§ 154.04(B) and 154.06(B)(2).



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.11  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Duties. A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by
the Mayer City Council, must administer and enforce this chapter.



   (B)   Permit application requirements.



      (1)   Application for permit. Permit applications must be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator



on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit application must
include the following as applicable:



         (a)   A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions,
existing or proposed buildings, structures, and significant natural features
having an influence on the permit.



         (b)   Location of fill or storage of materials in
relation to the stream channel.



         (c)   Copies of any required municipal, county. state or
federal permits or approvals.



         (d)   Other relevant information requested by the Zoning
Administrator as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.



      (2)   Certification. The applicant is required to submit
certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or
registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were
accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Floodproofing
measures must be certified by a registered professional engineer or
registered architect as being in compliance with applicable floodproofing
standards in the State Building Code. Accessory structures designed in
accordance with § 154.06(B)(2) are exempt from certification, provided
sufficient assurances are documented. Any development in established
floodways must not cause any increase in flood elevations or damages, as
certified by a registered professional engineer.



      (3)   Certificate of zoning compliance for a new, altered, or
nonconforming use. No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in
any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the
Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to
the requirements of this chapter.



      (4)   Recordkeeping of certifications and as-built
documentation. The Zoning Administrator must maintain records in perpetuity
documenting:



         (a)   All certifications referenced in division (B)(2)
above as applicable.



         (b)   Elevations complying with § 154.06(B)(1). The
Zoning Administrator must also maintain a record of the elevation to which
structures and alterations to structures are constructed or floodproofed.



      (5)   Notifications for watercourse alterations. Before
authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning
Administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied
for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to M.S. § 103G.245, this will
suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted
to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA).



      (6)   Notification to FEMA when physical changes increase or
decrease base flood elevations. As soon as is practicable, but not later than
six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the
Zoning Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the
changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data.



   (C)   Variances.



      (1)   Variance applications. An application for a variance to
the provisions of this chapter will be processed and reviewed in accordance
with applicable state statutes and § 152.153 of the zoning ordinance for the
city.



      (2)   Adherence to state floodplain management standards. A
variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a
lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection
elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those
required by state law.



      (3)   Additional variance criteria. The following additional
variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be
satisfied:



         (a)   Variances must not be issued by a community within
any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.



         (b)   Variances may only be issued by a community upon
the following:



            1.   A showing of good and sufficient cause,



            2.   A determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and



            3.   A determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



         (c)   Variances may only be issued upon a determination
that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to
afford relief.



      (4)   Flood insurance notice. The Zoning Administrator must
notify the applicant for a variance that:



         (a)   The issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage; and



         (b)   Such construction below the base or regional flood
level increases risks to life and property. Such notification must be
maintained with a record of all variance actions.



      (5)   General considerations. The community may consider the
following factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances
and conditional uses in floodplains:



         (a)   The potential danger to life and property due to
increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;



         (b)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands or downstream to the injury of others;



         (c)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems.
if any. and the ability of these systems to minimize the potential for
disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;



         (d)   The susceptibility of any proposed use and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



         (e)   The importance of the services to be provided by
the proposed use to the community;



         (f)   The requirements of the facility for a waterfront
location;



         (g)   The availability of viable alternative locations
for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding;



         (h)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;



         (i)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan and flood plain management program for the area;



         (j)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (k)   The expected heights. velocity. duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.



      (6)   Submittal of hearing notices to the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices
for proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least
ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail
or U.S. mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



      (7)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all
decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of
such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail to the
respective DNR area hydrologist.



      (8)   Recordkeeping. The Zoning Administrator must maintain a
record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance,
and must report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the
Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   (D)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Administrative review. An application for a conditional
use permit under the provisions of this chapter will be processed and
reviewed in accordance with § 152.155 of the zoning ordinance/code.



      (2)   Factors used in decision-making. In passing upon
conditional use applications, the City Council must consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this chapter, and those factors
identified in division (C)(5) above.



      (3)   Conditions attached to conditional use permits. In
addition to the standards identified in §§ 154.05(D) and 154.06(D), the
City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use
permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and
operation.



         (b)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and
deed restrictions.



         (c)   Requirements for construction of channel
modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective
measures.



      (4)   Submittal of hearing notices to the Department of
Natural Resources (DNR). The Zoning Administrator must submit hearing notices
for proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide
at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by
electronic mail or U.S. mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



      (5)   Submittal of final decisions to the DNR. A copy of all
decisions granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten
days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. mail
to the respective DNR area hydrologist.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.12  NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Continuance of nonconformities. A use, structure, or occupancy
of land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be
continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as
defined in § 154.02(F), are subject to the provisions of division (A)(1)
through (6) below.



      (1)   A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be
expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood
damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided
in division (A)(2) below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or
occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.



      (2)   Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood
damage potential must be protected to the regulatory flood protection
elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing
techniques (i.e., FP1 thru FP4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in
the State Building Code, except as further restricted in division (A)(4)
below.



      (3)   If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming
structure, is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the
premises must conform to this chapter, as described in § 152.020.



      (4)   If any structure experiences a substantial improvement
as defined in this chapter, then the entire structure must meet the standards
of §§ 154.05 or 154.06 of this chapter for new structures, depending upon
whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District,
respectively. If the current proposal, including maintenance and repair
during the previous 365 days, plus the costs of any previous alterations and
additions since the first Flood Insurance Rate Map exceeds 50% of the market
value of any nonconforming structure, the entire structure must meet the
standards of §§ 154.05 or 154.06 of this chapter.



      (5)   If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as
defined in this chapter, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. The applicable provisions for
establishing new uses or new structures in §§ 154.05 or 154.06 will apply
depending upon whether the use or structure is in the floodway or flood
fringe, respectively.



      (6)   If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a
repetitive loss, as defined in § 154.02(F), it must not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.13  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Violation constitutes a misdemeanor. Violation of the
provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection
with grants of variances or conditional uses) constitute a misdemeanor and
will be punishable as defined by law.



   (B)   Other lawful action. Nothing in this chapter restricts the
city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond
to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each
additional day that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this
chapter and will be prosecuted accordingly.



   (C)   Enforcement. Violations of the provisions of this chapter will
be investigated and resolved in accordance with the provisions of §§
152.150 and 152.153 of the zoning ordinance for the city. In responding to a
suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and the Board of
Appeals and Adjustments may utilize the full array of enforcement actions
available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines,
injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a
request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance
availability to the guilty party. The city  must act in good faith to
enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the
extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood
Insurance Program.



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



§ 154.14  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Floodplain designation – restrictions on removal. The
floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed from
floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or
that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory
flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain.
Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) if it is determined that, through other measures, lands are
adequately protected for the intended use.



   (B)   Amendments require DNR approval. All amendments to this
chapter must be submitted to and approved by the Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) prior to adoption.



   (C)   Map revisions require ordinance amendments. The floodplain
district regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in §
154.02(B).



(Ord. 103, passed 10-8-01; Am. Ord. 225, passed 10-8-18)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ANNEXATIONS



      II.   FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



      III.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



TABLE I:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




65
 
4-8-85
 
Extending city's corporate limits; annexing the east half of the northwest
quarter of Section 1, Township 116 North, Range 26 West


68
 
9-14-87
 
Annexing part of the northeast quarter of Section 1, Township 116, Range 26


75
 
6-12-89
 
Annexing part of the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 117, Range 25


106
 
6-9-03
 
Annexing part of the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 31,
Township 117, Range 25


108
 
11-10-03
 
Annexing the north 10 acres of the west half of the southwest quarter of
Section 6, Township 116, Range 25


109
 
2-23-04
 
Annexing Lots 5 and 6, Block 3, Navaho Heights, and that part of 6th Street
SE (formerly known as Colfax Avenue) and the alley adjoining and adjacent to
Lots 5 and 6, Block 3


110
 
9-13-04
 
Annexing part of the southwest quarter of Section 31, Township 117, Range 25


120
 
10-24-05
 
Annexing part of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 116, Range 25,
lying westerly and northerly of the southeasterly right-of-way line of State
Highway No. 25 and part of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 116
North, Range 25 West, lying easterly of the southeasterly line of State
Highway No. 25


126
 
2-27-06
 
Annexing part of the northeast and northwest quarters of Section 6, Township
116, Range 25, and part of the northeast and northwest quarters of Section 5,
Township 116, Range 25


131
 
11-27-06
 
Annexing part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 6,
Township 116, Range 25


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




69
 
12-14-87
 
Granting an electricity distribution franchise to Northern States Power
Company


70
 
2-8-88
 
Granting a nonexclusive gas energy distribution franchise to Minnegasco, Inc.


72
 
6-24-88
 
Granting a 15-year cable communications franchise to AHT Incorporated


122
 
11-14-05
 
Granting a renewed cable system franchise to North American Communications
Corp.


140
 
9-24-07
 
Granting a 20-year franchise for furnishing of electric energy to Northern
States Power Company


152
 
11-24-08
 
Granting a nonexclusive gas energy franchise to Centerpoint Energy Resources
Corp.


224
 
10-8-18
 
Granting a 15-year cable system franchise to Jaguar Communications


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




102-D
 
7-28-03
 
Rezoning the property located in the southwest quarter, being the north
corner or Section 6, Township 116, Range 25 from (A) Agricultural to (C-1)
General Commerce


102-F
 
6-14-04
 
Rezoning the property located in the south half of the southwest quarter of
Section 31, Township 117, Range 25 from (A) Agricultural to (PRD) Planned
Residential Development


102-H
 
6-28-04
 
Rezoning the property located in the east half of the northwest quarter of
Section 1, Township 116 North of Range 26 West from (R-1) Low-Density
Residential and (R-3) (Multiple-Family Residential) to (PRD) Planned
Residential Development


102-L
 
2-28-05
 
Rezoning the property known as Lot 4, Block 2 of Ohm’s Addition from (R-1)
Low-Density Residential to (R-2) Medium- Density Residential


102-M
 
7-25-05
 
Zoning the property known as Lot 1, Block 1, and Outlot A, Hidden Creek West
(R-1) Low-Density Residential


102-P
 
2-13-06
 
Rezoning the following property from (A) Agricultural to (C-1) General
Commercial:


 
 
 
 
Part of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 116 North, Range 25 West;


 
 
 
 
Part of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 116 North, Range 25
West, except railroad right-of-way and the platted portion thereof;


 
 
 
 
Part of the northwest quarter of Section 6, Township 116 North, Range 25
West, lying west of State Highway No. 25


 
 
 
 
Rezoning the property known as Outlot A, Outlot B, Outlot M, and Outlot N,
Fieldstone, from (A) Agricultural to (P/I) Public/Institutional


 
 
 
 
Rezoning the property known as lying northeasterly, easterly and northerly of
the easterly right-of-way line of Fieldstone Parkway and other described
property from (A) Agricultural to (PRD) Planned Residential Development


 
 
 
 
Rezoning the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township 117, Range 25, lying
southerly on the south right-of-way line of Minnesota State Highway No. 7
from Carver County (A) Agricultural to City of Mayer (A) Agricultural


156
 
6-8-09
 
Rezoning Lot 1, Block 2, Sell Commercial Industrial Park from (C-1) General
Commercial District to (P/I) Public/ Institutional District


194
 
10-13-14
 
Rezoning the following parcels: 104, 108, 112, 116, 308, 312, 316, 320, 408,
412, 416, and 420 Bluejay Avenue; 117 1st St. NW; 120 2nd St. NW; 121 3rd St.
NW; and 121 4th St. NW from Central Business (C-2) to Medium Density
Residential (R-2). Rezoning 212 1st St. NE from Central Business (C-2) to Low
Density Residential (R-1)


203
 
10-12-15
 
Rezoning Outlot F, Hidden Creek 5th Addition from Low-Density Residential
(R-1) to Planned Residential Development (PRD)


211
 
9-12-16
 
Rezoning Lot 1, Block 2, Sell Commercial Industrial Park from
Public/Institutional (P/I) to Commercial Industrial (C/I)


214
 
2-13-17
 
Rezoning Lots 1 through 10, Block 1, Lots 1 through 13, Block 2, and Lots 1
through 5, Block 3, Coldwater Crossing 7th Addition from Low-Density
Residential (R-1) to Planned Residential Development (PRD)


216
 
4-24-17
 
Rezoning the following property from Planned Residential Development District
(PRD) to Low-Density Residential District (R-1):

   Hidden Creek 6th Addition: Lots 1-17, Block 1; Lots 1-8, Block 2; Lots
1-5, Block 3; Outlots A, B, C & D

   Hidden Creek 7th Addition: Lots 1-17, Block 1; Lots 1-21, Block 2;
Outlots A, B & C

   Coldwater Crossing 7th Addition: Lots 1-10, Block 1; Lots 1-13, Block
2; Lots 1-5, Block 3, Outlots A & B

   Fieldstone: Lots 1-6, Block 1; Lots 1-7, Block 2; Lots 1-7, Block 3;
Lots 1-10, Block 4; Lots 1-14, Block 5; Lots 1-6, Block 6; Lots 1-9, Block 7,
Outlots C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, O, P & Q

   Fieldstone 2nd Addition: Lots 1-3, Block 1; Lots 1-6, Block 2; Lots
1-6, Block 3; Lots 1-4, Block 4; Lots 1-6, Block 5, Outlots A, B, C, D, E, F,
G, H, I, J & K

   PID #500311110, 500311100, and 500320300

Rezoning the following property from Planned Residential Development District
(PUD) to Medium Density Residential District (R-2):

   Sunset Meadows:
   Lots 1-2, Block 1
   Lots 1-2, Block 2
   Lots 1-2, Block 3
   Lots 1-2, Block 4
   Lots 1-2, Block 5
   Lots 1-2, Block 6
   Lots 1-2, Block 7
   Lots 1-2, Block 8
   Lots 1-2, Block 9
   Lots 1-2, Block 10
   Lots 1-2, Block 11
   Lots 1-2, Block 12
   Lots 1-2, Block 13
   Lots 1-2, Block 14
   Lots 1-2, Block 15
   Lots 1-2, Block 16
   Lots 1-2, Block 17
   Lots 1-2, Block 18
   Lots 1-2, Block 19
   Lots 1-2, Block 20
   Lots 1-2, Block 21
   Lots 1-2, Block 22
   Lots 1-2, Block 23
   Lots 1-2, Block 24
   Outlots A, B, C & D


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Minnesota Statutes





References to Minnesota Rules





References to 1982 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA STATUTES



 

M.S. Section
 
Code Section




12.25
 
34.01, 34.05


12.31
 
34.07


14.57 - 14.70
 
111.25, 111.99


16B.59 - 16B.75
 
150.01, 150.02


16B.62, Subd. 1
 
150.03, 150.04


16B.70
 
150.04


18.46(13)
 
93.02


60A.07, Subd. 4
 
111.14


60A.206
 
111.14


84.81 - 84.89
 
72.01


88.02 - 88.22
 
93.03


88.75
 
93.03


88.76
 
93.03


Ch. 103F
 
154.01


103G.005, Subd. 14   
 
154.03


103G.245
 
154.05, 154.11


116.06(8)
 
93.03


116.07
 
90.25


161.242
 
90.16


168.10
 
90.16


Ch. 168B
 
90.15


Ch. 169
 
70.03, 72.01


169.01
 
90.16


169.011
 
152.003


169.041
 
90.16, 90.18


169.68
 
93.51


169.69
 
70.04


169.693
 
70.04


171.01
 
70.03


171.02
 
70.03


171.24
 
70.03


211B.045
 
152.124


216B.097
 
51.22


237.162
 
94.29


237.163
 
94.29


243.166
 
130.03


243.167
 
130.03


244.052
 
130.03


272.67
 
35.01


299F.72
 
130.01


300.06
 
94.23


326.03
 
152.099


Ch. 340A
 
111.01, 111.02, 111.08, 111.11, 111.25, 111.99


340A.301, Subd. 6(d) and 7(b)
 
111.10


240A.301, Subd. 7
 
111.10


340A.404, Subd. 1(b)
 
111.10


340A.404, Subd. 4a
 
111.10


340A.404, Subd. 4b
 
111.10


340A.404, Subd. 5
 
111.10


340A.408
 
111.11, 111.14


340A.408, Subd. 2b
 
111.10


340A.408, Subd. 3
 
111.10


340A.408, Subd. 5
 
111.11


340A.413, Subd. 3
 
111.08


340A.414
 
111.24


340A.414, Subd. 6
 
111.10


340A.504
 
111.22


340A.504, Subd. 3
 
111.10


340A.504, Subd. 3c
 
111.10


340A.509
 
111.02


340A.707
 
111.07


340A.801
 
111.14


344.02, Subd. 1(a)-(d)
 
154.02


347.51, Subd. 8
 
92.11


347.565
 
92.11


349.11 - 349.22
 
112.10, 112.11, 112.14


349.213
 
112.15


Ch. 412
 
30.01


412.221(32)
 
130.03


412.581
 
32.01


415.11
 
31.04


429.01
 
93.01


429.101
 
93.02, 93.21


444.075
 
55.02, 55.07, 56.02, 56.07


Ch. 462
 
152.003, 154.01


462.354, Subd. 2
 
152.153


462.357
 
152.004


462.357, Subd. 6
 
152.153


462.359, Subd. 4
 
152.153


462.3593
 
152.024


462.3593 Subd. 9
 
152.024


463.15 - 463.26
 
93.01


463.17
 
93.20


471.195
 
90.01


514.67
 
93.01


609.321
 
114.16


609.322
 
114.16


609.323
 
114.16


609.324
 
114.16


609.341, Subd. 11(b)
 
114.22


609.342
 
114.16


609.343
 
114.16


609.344
 
114.16


609.345
 
114.16


609.365
 
114.16


609.74
 
93.15


617.23
 
114.16


617.241
 
114.16


617.241, Subd. 1(a)
 
152.129


617.246
 
114.16


617.247
 
114.16


617.293
 
114.16


617.294
 
114.16


624.713
 
130.01


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO MINNESOTA RULES



 

Minn. Rule
 
Code Section




Ch. 1300
 
150.03


Ch. 1340
 
152.064


4725.4350
 
154.09


6120.2500 - 6120.3900
 
152.064


6120.3300
 
152.064


6120.5000 - 6120.6200
 
152.064


7030.1000 - 7030.1050
 
70.04


Ch. 7035
 
90.15


7080.2270
 
154.09


Ch. 7819
 
94.21


7819.100
 
94.25


7819.0100 Subps. 1 - 23
 
94.21


7819.1000 Subp. 3
 
94.22


7819.1100
 
94.26, 94.29


7819.1250
 
94.38


7819.1300
 
94.30


7819.3000
 
94.26


7819.3100
 
94.35


7819.3200
 
94.37


7819.4000
 
94.34


7819.4100
 
94.34


7819.5000
 
94.35


7819.5100
 
94.35


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1982 CODE



 

1982 Code Section
 
2001 Code Section




2.111
 
30.01


2.112
 
32.01


2.113
 
32.01


2.121
 
30.02


2.211
 
31.15


2.212
 
31.16


2.213
 
31.17


2.214
 
31.18


2.215
 
31.19


2.221
 
32.03


2.222
 
32.03


2.242
 
33.15


2.243
 
33.16


2.244
 
33.17


2.245
 
33.18


2.246
 
33.19


2.311
 
31.01


2.312
 
31.02


2.313
 
31.03


2.323
 
31.04


2.411
 
33.10


2.421
 
33.15


2.441
 
33.40


2.442
 
33.41


2.443
 
33.41


2.444
 
33.41


2.445
 
33.41


2.446
 
33.41


2.447
 
33.41


2.448
 
33.41


2.449
 
33.41


2.450
 
33.41


2.451
 
33.42


2.452
 
33.42


2.454
 
33.42


2.455
 
33.41


2.456
 
33.43


2.457
 
33.43


2.458
 
33.43


2.459
 
33.43


2.481
 
33.60


2.491
 
33.01


3.111
 
51.01


3.112
 
51.02


3.113
 
51.03


3.114
 
51.04


3.115
 
51.05


3.116
 
51.05


3.121
 
51.06


3.122
 
51.06


3.123
 
51.06


3.131
 
51.20


3.132
 
51.21


3.133
 
51.22


3.134
 
51.23


3.135
 
51.24


3.141
 
51.25


3.142
 
51.26


3.143
 
51.26


3.144
 
51.26


3.151
 
51.40


3.153
 
51.41


3.154
 
51.42


3.156
 
51.43


3.161
 
51.44


3.162
 
51.44


3.163
 
51.44


3.164
 
51.44


3.168
 
51.44


3.170
 
51.44


3.211
 
52.01


3.212
 
52.02


3.213
 
52.03


3.214
 
52.04


3.215
 
52.05


3.216
 
52.06


3.221
 
52.07


3.222
 
52.07


3.223
 
52.07


3.224
 
52.07


3.225
 
52.07


3.226
 
52.07


3.231
 
52.09


3.232
 
52.09


3.233
 
52.09


3.311
 
53.01


3.312
 
53.02


3.313
 
53.02


3.314
 
53.02


3.315
 
53.02


3.316
 
53.02


3.317
 
53.03


3.318
 
53.04


3.319
 
53.05


3.331
 
53.06


3.332
 
53.06


3.351
 
53.07


3.352
 
53.07


3.353
 
53.07


3.354
 
53.07


3.355
 
53.07


3.356
 
53.07


3.357
 
53.07


3.358
 
53.07


3.371
 
53.08


3.372
 
53.08


3.373
 
53.08


3.374
 
53.08


3.375
 
53.08


3.376
 
53.08


3.381
 
53.09


3.382
 
53.09


4.211
 
94.01


4.212
 
94.01


4.213
 
94.01


5.111
 
70.01


5.112
 
70.02


5.121
 
71.07


5.122
 
71.08


5.123
 
71.09


6.111
 
130.02


6.112
 
130.02


6.113
 
130.02


7.111
 
110.01


7.112
 
110.02


7.113
 
110.03


7.114
 
110.03


7.115
 
110.04


7.116
 
110.04


7.117
 
110.05


7.118
 
110.06


7.119
 
110.06


7.120
 
110.06


7.121
 
110.06


7.122
 
110.06


7.123
 
110.06


7.124
 
110.06


7.125
 
110.06


7.126
 
110.06


7.127
 
110.07


7.128
 
110.07


8.211
 
50.01


8.212
 
50.02


8.213
 
50.03


8.214
 
50.04


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




60
 
7-8-82
 
91.01 - 91.07


62A
 
10-21-82
 
35.02 - 35.04


63
 
11-14-83
 
112.01


64
 
1-14-85
 
71.01 - 71.06, 71.10


81
 
7-12-93
 
113.01 - 113.10


84
 
1-10-94
 
93.03


86
 
6-13-94
 
53.02


90
 
11-10-97
 
53.02


91
 
5-11-98
 
30.01


94
 
12-13-99
 
31.02, 32.01 -32.03, 51.06, 51.20 - 51.22, 51.24, 51.42 - 51.44, 110.02,
110.03, 110.05, 110.06, 112.01, 113.03 - 113.05, 113.10


102
 
7-9-01
 
152.001 - 152.009, 152.020 - 152.031, 152.050, 152.052 - 152.056, 152.058 -
152.064,152.080-152.101, 152.150 - 152.157, 152.999


102-A
 
6-24-02
 
152.062, 152.063, 152.090


102-C
 
6-23-03
 
152.054, 152.062, 152.101


102-D
 
7-28-03
 
T.S.O. III


102-E
 
6-14-04
 
152.030, 152.062, 152.092


102-F
 
6-14-04
 
T.S.O. III


102-G
 
7-12-04
 
152.060, 152.090, 152.091, 152.093, 152.153, 152.155


102-H
 
6-28-04
 
T.S.O. III


102-J
 
2-28-05
 
152.003, 152.058, 152.059, 152.999


102-K
 
2-14-05
 
152.092


102-L
 
2-28-05
 
T.S.O. III


102-M
 
7-25-05
 
T.S.O. III


102-N
 
11-14-05
 
153.01 - 153.07, 153.99


102-O
 
11-14-05
 
152.003, 152.020, 152.059


102-P
 
2-13-06
 
T.S.O. III


102-R
 
6-26-06
 
152.005, 152.026, 152.030, 152.062, 152.152


102-T
 
1-8-07
 
152.053


102-U
 
3-12-07
 
152.093


102-V
 
6-11-07
 
152.003, 152.153


102-Y
 
5-12-08
 
152.026, 152.056, 152.061, 152.062, 152.090


102-Z
 
4-13-09
 
152.026, 152.056, 152.062, 152.090


103
 
10-8-01
 
154.01 - 154.06, 154.08 - 154.14


104
 
3-18-02
 
112.10 - 112.15


105
 
12-9-02
 
54.01, 54.02


106
 
6-9-03
 
T.S.O. I


108
 
11-10-03
 
T.S.O. I


109
 
2-23-04
 
T.S.O. I


110
 
9-13-04
 
T.S.O. I


111
 
12-13-04
 
31.01


112
 
1-24-05
 
33.50 - 33.53


113
 
2-28-05
 
55.01 - 55.07


114
 
2-28-05
 
114.01 - 114.05, 114.15 - 114.24, 114.35 - 114.39, 114.99


115
 
3-24-05
 
91.05


116
 
4-25-05
 
93.50 - 93.52, 93.54 - 93.57, 93.99


117
 
5-23-05
 
36.01 - 36.04


118
 
9-12-05
 
32.01


119
 
9-12-05
 
56.01 - 56.07


120
 
10-24-05
 
T.S.O. I


122
 
11-14-05
 
T.S.O. II


123
 
11-14-05
 
51.44


126
 
2-27-06
 
T.S.O. I


127
 
12-17-05
 
36.01 - 36.04


128
 
4-24-06
 
92.07


129
 
8-14-06
 
93.18


130
 
8-14-06
 
90.01


131
 
11-27-06
 
T.S.O. I


132
 
12-11-06
 
36.01 - 36.04


133
 
3-12-07
 
52.08


135
 
7-9-07
 
92.02


136
 
6-25-07
 
92.05


137
 
7-23-07
 
35.01 - 35.09


138
 
8-13-07
 
150.01 - 150.05, 150.99


139
 
8-27-07
 
32.04


140
 
9-24-07
 
T.S.O. II


141
 
11-26-07
 
94.22


142
 
12-10-07
 
36.02


144
 
5-12-08
 
151.01


145
 
5-12-08
 
151.01


146
 
6-23-08
 
153.02


147
 
8-11-08
 
95.01 - 95.04, 95.99


148
 
9-22-08
 
113.02, 113.07


150
 
10-27-08
 
154.02


151
 
11-10-08
 
73.01


152
 
11-24-08
 
T.S.O. II


153
 
12-8-08
 
36.02


154
 
5-26-09
 
152.151


155
 
6-22-09
 
152.061


156
 
6-8-09
 
T.S.O. III


157
 
7-13-09
 
152.026


158
 
7-27-09
 
152.059A


159
 
7-27-09
 
152.031


160
 
9-14-09
 
50.05


162
 
1-11-10
 
36.02


163
 
4-12-10
 
152.003, 152.030, 152.060


164
 
5-24-10
 
33.51


166
 
5-28-10
 
113.04


168
 
7-26-10
 
90.20


169
 
9-27-10
 
72.01 - 72.11


170
 
10-11-10
 
152.051


171
 
1-10-11
 
36.02


172
 
7-25-11
 
111.01 - 111.25, 111.99


173
 
10-24-11
 
152.153


174
 
10-24-11
 
150.06


175
 
11-28-11
 
92.02


176
 
1-9-12
 
36.02


177
 
5-23-12
 
111.03


179
 
5-14-12
 
93.03


180
 
5-29-12
 
52.10


181
 
6-14-12
 
152.021


182
 
6-14-12
 
152.062


183
 
6-25-12
 
152.094


185
 
9-10-12
 
152.053


186
 
10-8-12
 
152.059


188
 
4-11-13
 
152.120 - 152.133, 152.999


189
 
12-9-13
 
51.44


190
 
1-13-14
 
36.01 - 36.04


191
 
2-24-14
 
92.30 - 92.37


193
 
8-11-14
 
152.003, 152.093


194
 
10-13-14
 
T.S.O. III


195
 
1–27-14
 
92.11


196
 
12-8-14
 
152.062


197
 
1-12-15
 
93.51, 93.52


198
 
1-26-15
 
36.01 - 36.04


199
 
4-13-15
 
152.030, 152.093


200
 
6-8-15
 
152.129


201
 
8-24-15
 
152.003, 152.053 - 152.056, 152.058-152.061, 152.091, 152.102


202
 
8-24-15
 
92.01, 92.18


203
 
10-12-15
 
T.S.O. III


204
 
11-9-15
 
152.062


205
 
11-9-15
 
152.031, 152.153, 152.154, 152.155


207
 
4-11-16
 
152.091, 152.092


208
 
5-9-16
 
152.062


209
 
8-22-16
 
152.024


210
 
9-12-16
 
130.03


211
 
9-12-16
 
T.S.O. III


213
 
1-9-17
 
36.01 - 36.04


214
 
2-13-17
 
T.S.O. III


216
 
4-24-17
 
T.S.O. III


217
 
1-8-18
 
36.01 - 36.04


218
 
3-12-18
 
152.058, 152.060


219
 
4-23-18
 
92.02


220
 
4-23-18
 
114.40


221
 
6-11-18
 
152.003, 152.026


223
 
8-27-18
 
152.050, 152.065


224
 
10-8-18
 
T.S.O. II


225
 
10-8-18
 
152.003, 152.064, 152.102, 154.01 - 154.06, 154.08 - 154.14


228
 
3-11-19
 
152.003, 154.02, 154.08


• SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE •
ORDINANCE NO. 121
CITY OF MA YER
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CITY OF MAYER ORDINANCE NO. 79
THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MAYER DOES ORDAIN:
AS ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE SUBDIVISION AND PLATTING
OF LANDS, DEFINING CERTAIN TERMS, PROVIDING FOR THE PREPARATION OF PLATS AND THE
INSTALLATION OF STREETS AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS, ESTABLISHING PROCEDURES FOR
THE APPROVAL AND RECORDING OF PLATS, PROVIDING FOR AMENDMENTS OF THIS
ORDINANCE AND PRESCRIBING PENAL TIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
SECTION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Subd. 1. Title.
This Ordinance shall be known as the "SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MA YER"
and will be referred to as "this Ordinance."
Subd. 2. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority contained in Minnesota Statutes 462.3 58, This Ordinance is adopted for the
following purposes:
A. To provide for the orderly, economic, and safe development of land and public services and
facilities.
B. To promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of the City.
C. To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform procedures.
Subd. 3. Scope.
The provisions of this Ordinance relate to any division of a tract of land into two (2) or more parcels
by platting, re-platting, conveyance, registered land survey, or other means and to the combination
of any two or more such adjoining parcels.
Subd. 4. Jurisdiction.
These regulations governing plats and the subdivision of land shall apply to the area within the
corporation limits of the City of Mayer. By right of Minnesota Statute 462.3 58 the City can extend
its Subdivision Rights two miles beyond its boundaries.
Subd. 5. Compliance.
After the adoption of this Ordinance; no lot in a subdivision shall be sold, no permit shall be issued
to alter or erect any building upon land in a subdivision unless a subdivision plat has been approved
and recorded unless exempted under SECTION 1, Subd. 9 and 13, and until the improvements
required by the.City Council relative to subdivision have been constructed or arranged for as
provided herein. No improvements that are proposed to become public or are part of an approved
preliminary plat may be made except by the City within right-of-ways or easements in approved
plats, or pursuant to Development Agreements which have been approved by the City.
Subd. 6. Required Approvals of Subdivision Plats. . ..
Before any plat shall have validity, it shall have been approved by the Planning Commission and
the City Council and recorded in the Carver County Recorder's Office.
Subd. 7. Conflict.
It is not intended by this Ordinance to annul or interfere with any official regulations or ordinances of
the City provided however, that when there is a difference between minimum standards or
dimensions herein and those contained on other official regulations or ordinances of the City, the
highest standards shall apply.
Page 1 of22
Subd. 8. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be
invalid, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions thereof.
Subd. 9. Exceptions.
When requesting a subdivision, if either of the two (2) following conditions exists, the City Clerk
shall bring the request to the attention of the Planning Commission, whereupon, they shall review
said request and may recommend exemption of the subdivision from complying with any procedural
requirements of this Ordinance deemed inappropriate for adequate review of subdivision request.
A. In any case in which compliance with SECTION 1, Subd. 1 O of this Ordinance will create
an unnecessary hardship and failure to comply does not interfere with the intent of this
Ordinance, provided that such conveyance does not necessitate the dedication of a public
right-of-way and the newly created parcel will not cause the other remaining portion of the
property to be in violation of this Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Where written justification is submitted by an applicant, which clearly indicates that the
intent of this Ordinance can be satisfied without enforcing all of the procedural
requirements of this Ordinance.
Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning commission, the City Council by
resolution may exempt the conveyance and the conveyance may then be filed or recorded.
Subd. 1 O. Conveyance by Metes and Bounds.
No conveyance of one or more parcels in which the land is described by metes and bounds or by
reference to an unapproved registered land survey made after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall be filed or recorded except in certain cases of minor subdivisions as described in Subd. 13 of
this section, and those conveyances exempted under Subd. 14 of this section.
Subd. 11. Subdivision Without Central Water and Sewer.
All proposed subdivisions must have City Water and Sewer in order to subdivide.
Subd. 12. Minor Subdivisions.
In the case of a subdivision resulting in three (3) or less lots, situated in a neighborhood where
conditions are well defined, and no further re-subdivision is expected, the governing body may
exempt the subdivider from complying with some of the requirements of these regulations, after
submission of a survey by a registered land survey of the proposed subdivision and the newly
created property lines will not cause any resulting lot to be in violation of these regulations or the
zoning codes.
In the case of a request to subdivide a lot which is a part of a recorded plat or to create not more
than three (3) new lots, and the newly created property lines will not cause any resulting lot to be in
violation of these regulations or the Zoning Code, the division may be approved by the governing
body, after submission of a surveyor by a registered land surveyor showing the original lot and the
proposed subdivision. There shall be only minor subdivision with regard to the original tract in any
twelve (12) month period. The governing body shall have the authority to deny minor subdivisions if
it appears that the intent of these regulations or the zoning code may be violated. Each parcel must
have frontage on a public road.
Subd. 13. Resubdivision.
In the case of a request to divide a lot other than an outlot, which is a part of a recorded plat where
the subdivision is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot, or to create two (2) lots
where the newly created property line will not cause the remaining portion of any lot to be in
violation with this ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance, the subdivision may be approved by the City
Council after submission of a Certified Survey or a Registered Land Survey, as applicable by a
registered land surveyor showing the original lot and the proposed subdivision.
Page 2 of22
Subd. 14 •. Exemptions.
The following conveyances shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance and shall not
constitute a subdivision provided, however, that all such conveyances shall be subject to City
regulations, including this Ordinance, which do not interfere with the recording of the deed:
A. The parcel was a separate lot of record prior to the effective date of this Ordinance
B. The parcel was the subject of a written agreement to convey entered into prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance.
C. The parcel is a single parcel of land of not less than five (5) acres and having a width of
not less than three hundred (300) feet and its conveyance does not result in the division of
the parcel into two (2) or more lots or parcels, any one which is less than five (5) acres in
area or three (300) feet in w!dth and all parcels have frontage on a public right-of-way.
D. The parcel relates to a division of a lot which is part of a recorded plat where the division
is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot or to create two (2) lots, and the
newly created lot will not cause the other remaining portion of the lot to be In violation of
this Ordinance or Zoning Ordinance.
E. Cemetery lots.
F. Parcels resulting from court orders, or the adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a
common boundary as the result of a correctional survey of a previously recorded parcel, or
an instrument of conveyance to correct a faulty description in previously recorded
instrument of conveyance.
G. Lot line adjustments.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
Subd. 1. Rules.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain words used herein are defined. The word "shall" is
mandatory. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and the singular number shall
include the plural, and the plural the singular. The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
Subd. 2. Definitions .
• Abuts.~ Is next to.
- Alley ... A public vehicular way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
property and which is not intended for general traffic circulation.
- Block.-An area of land within a subdivision which is entirely bounded by streets or by street, rail
right-of-way, waterway or exterior boundary of the subdivision.
- Boulevard.-The portion of the street right-of-way between the curb line and the lot line.
- Building.-Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
- Building Setback.-The minimum distance between the building or structure, excluding entry
steps, provided they extend no more than half way into the required setback area, and including all
decks and attached structures and the lot line.
- City Clerk.-The appointed executive of the City, or his or her designed.
- City Council.-The governing body of the City of Mayer.
- Comprehensive Plan. -The comprehensive plan prepared and adopted by the city indicating the
general locations recommended for major land uses, streets, parks, public buildings, and other
public improvements.
- County Board. -The governing body of Carver County.
Page 3 of22
- Crosswalk or Pedestrian Way.- The publicly owned right-of-way which crosses a block and
furnishes pedestrian access to adjacent streets or properties.
- Design Standards.- The standards for design of the subdivision and preparation of plats as
provided herein.
- Easement.- A grant by a property owner for the use of an area of land by the public or other
entities or individuals for specific purposes including, but not limited to, construction, location of
utilities, drainage ways and roadways.
- Easement, Drainage. -An easement for the purpose of ponding or draining water.
- Easement, Pedestrian. -An easement for the purpose of providing pedestrian access to a place.
- Easement, Utility. -An easement for the placement of utilities.
- Engineer. -The City or County Engineer or a duly authorized consulting engineer.
- Final Plat. -A drawing or map of a subdivision meeting all of the requirements of the City, this
Ordinance, and in such form as required by the County for purposes of recording.
- Flood. -A temporary rise in stream flow or stage that results in inundation of the areas adjacent to
the channel.
- Flood Fringe. -That portion of the flood plain outside the floodway. Flood Fringe is synonymous
with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
- Flood Plain. -The area adjoining the watercourse which has been or hereafter may be covered by
the regional (100 year) flood.
- Floodway. -The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which
are reasonably required to carry and discharge the regional flood.
- Grade, Percentage of. -The rise or fall of a street in feet and tenths of a foot or each one hundred
(100) feet or horizontal distance measured at the center line of the Street.
- Lot. -The smallest unit of a subdivision individually numbered or designated on the plat for
purposes Of descriptions, recording, conveyance, development or taxation conforming to the zoning
and other requirements of the City.
- Lot (of Record). -A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise legally described, as of the
effective date of this Ordinance legally described, as of the effective date of this Ordinance and
recorded as such in the County Recorder's Office or approved by the City as a lot subsequent to
such date, and which is occupied by or intended for occupant by one (1) principle building or
principle use together with any accessory buildings or such open spaces as required by this
Ordinance and having its principle frontage on a street, or a proposed street approved by the City.
- Lot, Corner Lot. -A lot with a street in front and along one of the sides.
- Lot Depth. -The mean horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and the opposite
rear line of the lot measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.
- Lot, Double Frontage. -A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
• Lot, Landlocked. -A lot without access to a street.
- Lot, Lake shore.-A lot having frontage on a lake shore or other body of water.
- Lot Width. -The mean horizontal distance between the side property lines of a lot as measured at
the minimum setback line.
Page4 of22
- Monuments. -A metal marker set to· mark specific points on a piece of property.
- Owner. -A Person(s}, partnership(s), association(s), firm(s), Corporation(s), or combinations
thereof, having proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided.
- Parks and Playgrounds. -Public land and open spaces dedicated or reserved for recreational
purposes.
- Pedestrian Way. -Public land and open spaces dedicated or reserved for recreational purposes.
- Planning Commission. -The Planning Commission of the City of Mayer.
-Plat. -A map or drawing indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land, intended to be filed for
record.
- Preliminary Plat. -The preliminary plat map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of
the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission and the City for their consideration as
to its' compliance with the City's ordinances, policies and these regulations, along with required
supporting data.
- Protective Covenants. -Contracts made between private parties as to protecting and preserving
the physical and economic integrity of any given area.
- Reserve Strip. - A purported road way, or strip of land reserved for the use of a limited number of
persons or purposes as distinguished from a publicly dedicated road.
- Right-of-Way. -Land dedicated and publicly owned for use as a street, alley, or crosswalk.
- Screen Plantings. -Vegetation planted to screen one use from another one.
- Service Lane. -A frontage road or marginal access street parallel with and adjacent to high
volume arterial streets and highways, which provides access to abutting properties and protects
through traffic.
- Sidewalk. " A paved pedestrian pathway separated from the roadway by distance or grade.
- Street. *A public right.of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting
properties, whether designated as a street, highway thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue or
boulevard;
- Street, Arterial or Major. "A street of considerable continuity, which is used primarily for heavy
through traffic between major traffic generation areas.
- Street, Collector. -A feeder street which provides connection primarily between arterial streets or
arterial streets and minor streets. Collector streets include the principal entrance streets of a
residential development and the principal streets for circulation within such development.
- Street, Commercial or Industrial. -A street designed to accommodate commercial or industrial
traffic needs.
- Street, Cul-de*sac. -A comparatively short minor street having one (1) end open to traffic and the
other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
- Street Extension. "A platted or planned extension of an existing street.
- Street, Marginal Access. ·A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to a highway or an
arterial street, and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
Parking shall be prohibited on these streets.
- Street, Minor or Local. -A street which serves primarily as access to abutting properties, and is
not intended to carry through traffic.
.· Page 5 of22
- Street, Partial. -A street or right-of-way that only partially meets width requirements. Also referred
to as a half street.
- Street, Private. -A street owned by a private individual or individuals and not maintained by the
City.
- Street, Right-of-Way. -A tract of land platted or dedicated for use as a street. Normally includes
both the paved portion of the right-of-way and an additional portion on either side.
- Street Tree. -A tree planted close to or within the street right-of-way.
- Street Width. -The street right-of-way width, measured at right angle to the center line of the
street.
- Subdivider. -Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or legal
entity having sufficient ownership interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commerce and
maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this Ordinance.
- Subdivision. -The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots; tracts or
parcels for the purpose of transferring ownership or building development, or if a new street is
involved, any division or development of a parcel of land. The term shall include re-'subdivision of
land.
- Tangent. -A straight line that is perpendicular to the radius of a curve where it intersects a curve.
- Thoroughfare. -A highway or expressway, designed for and carrying mainly through traffic, with
limited access.
- Vertical Curve. -The surface curvature on a street center line located between lines of different
percentage of grade.
SECTION 3, APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION
Subd. 1. Application Form.
To initiate a Subdivision Property, the subdivider shall complete an application form
provided by the City and shall include all required information specified in the application
instructions. An incomplete or inaccurate form need not be accepted by the City.
Subd. 2. Signature(s) Required.
The application form must be signed by the subdivider prior to submission to the City. Any
application form not properly signed may be rejected at any time it is determined that the required
signatures are not affixed.
Subd. 3. Proof of Ownership.
At the time of filing the application form, or at such other time as the City may permit, the subdivider
shall file Proof of Ownership is a form acceptable to the City. The City may require Proof of
Ownership including a current Abstract of Title or a Registered Property Certificate along with all
applicable unrecorded documents affecting title, and an Opinion of Title by the subdivider's
attorney. Failure to file the required Proof of Ownership shall be a basis for the City to deny the
application or to discontinue processing the application until such Proof of Ownership is submitted.
Subd. 4. Application Fee.
The subdivider shall pay to the City at the time of filing the application form, the appropriate
application fee for each type of subdivision which shall be established from time-to-time by
Resolution of the City Council. An application which is not accompanied by the required application
fee is deemed to be Incomplete.
The subdivider shall pay to the City at the time of filing the application form, the appropriate
application fee for each type of subdivision shall be established from time-to-time by Resolution of
the City Council. An application form need not be accepted If the application fee is not paid.
Subd. 5. Cost Recovery.
It is the intent of the City to recover all expenses incurred in the review and approval process. The
subdivider shall deposit with the City a sum of money equal to the amount required to defray
Page 6 of22
expenses of the City incurred in the review and approval process, including, without limitation,
engineering, legal and consulting fees. In the event the original amount deposited is insufficient to
cover expenses, the subdivider shall be notified and shall deposit such additional sum as the City
deems reasonably necessary to cover its expenses. In the event the actual cost of the review is
less than the estimate, the City shall refund to the subdivider the difference between the actual cost
and the amount of money actually deposited by the subdivider. In no case shall the application fee,
or any part of it be refunded. Failure to make required deposits shall be grounds for denial of the
requested plat.
Subd. 6. Preliminary Plat Procedure.
For those subdivisions requiring a plat as specified herein, the procedure specified in this section
shall be followed:
A. Filing the Preliminary Plat.
The subdivider shall file:
1. Fifteen (15) copies of the applications and preliminary plat with the City to
complete the application.
2. One (1) copy of the application and preliminary plat with the Minnesota
Department of Transportation for review as required by State Law if the proposed
subdivision abuts any State of Federal Truck Highway.
3. One (1) copy of the application and preliminary plat with the State
Commissioner of Natural Resources for review as required If the proposed
subdivision includes a protected wetland that is subject to regulation as shoreland
pursuant to the amended from time.to-time regulating the use of shoreland.
4. One (1) copy of the application and preliminary plat with the applicable
watershed district as required by State Law.
5. Copies with all utility companies that may be affected.
Failure to file any of the copies as required by this SECTION may constitute a basis for
rejection of the application by the City.
B. Review of the Preliminary Plat.
The City, after receipt of the application, Application fee, Proof of Ownership, and the
requisite number of copies, shall distribute copies of the application and preliminary plat for
review to City Officials, Staff Members and the County Zoning Administrator, County
· Surveyor, and if abutting State Highways, the Minnesota Department of Transportation.
C. Reports and Recommendations.
The City shall prepare a report on plat applications received.
D. Public Hearing.
The City on behalf of the Planning Commission, shall set a date for a public hearing. Notice
of the same shall be provided in accordance with Minn. Stat. §462.358. Notice of hearing
shall be given in accordance with State Law. The failure to give mailed notice to individual
property owners, or defects in the notice, shall not invalidate the proceedings;
E. The Planning Commission
The planning Commission shall consider the preliminary plat and hold a public hearing at
its next available meeting.
F. Approval Factors.
In reviewing the preliminary plat, the City shall not approve the application unless the
following standards are met:
1. Consistency with the design standards and other requirements of this Ordinance.
2. Consistency with the City's Comprehensive Plan or other development plans.
3. Consistency with the Zoning Ordinance.
Page7 of22
4. The physical characteristics of the site, including but not limited to topography erosion,
and flooding potential, and soil limitations, are suitable for the type of development
or use contemplated.
5. The proposed Subdivision shall not have an adverse fiscal or environmental Impact
upon the City or its residents.
6. The Subdivision will promote the orderly use and development of public open space or
contribute the same by cash in lieu of land contribution.
7. The proposed Subdivision will not have an adverse Impact on environmental resources
as defined in Minn. Stat. Chapter 1168.
8. The proposed Subdivision will not be premature due to lack of adequate infrastructure
to support the proposed Subdivision, including, but not limited to, roadways, utilities,
parks, schools, and other public facilities.
9. The proposed Subdivision will not result in traffic safety issues or cause traffic
congestion.
10. The proposed Subdivision will not have an adverse impact on the public health,
safety and welfare of the City and its residents.
G. City Authority.
The Planning Commission and City Staff shall have the authority to request additional
information from the applicant concerning the preliminary plat or to retain expert testimony
at the expense of the applicant concerning said information to be declared necessary to
establish compliance with all pertinent sections of this Ordinance.
H. Recommendations.
Within sixty (60) days from the date of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
make a finding of fact and recommendation such actions or conditions relating to the
preliminary plat to the City Council.
I. Planning Commission Action
Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, or until sixty
(60) days after the public hearing at which the preliminary plat was considered, the City
Council shall place the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular
meeting. Such reports and recommendations shall be entered in and made a part of the
permanent written record of the City Council meeting.
J. Council Action.
Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the Planning Commission, or the lapse
of sixty (60) days without a report and recommendation, the Council shall consider the
application for preliminary plat approval based on the approval factors listed in
subparagraph (F) above. The City Council's decision on the preliminary plat shall be made
by a majority vote of the City Council.
K. After Preliminary Plat Approval.
Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the subdivider shall submit the
final plat to the Planning Commission within one (1) year after said approval, or approval of
the preliminary plat shall be considered void. Prior to the expiration of the preliminary plat
approval, the Planning Commission may extend the approval for an additional year. The
extension shall be in writing specifically designating the expiration date. The extension shall
not be subject to an additional fee, and only one (1) extension may be granted per
preliminary plat.
Page 8 of22
L. Amending the Preliminary Plat.
A Preliminary Plat may be amended in accordance with the same standards and
procedures that apply to approval of the Preliminary Plats, except the public hearing and
fee may be waived by the City Council in its discretion, if they find the requested
amendment to be of a small and insignificant nature.
M. Phased Development.
In the case of a subdivision to be developed in stages, the subdivider may be granted
permission to prepare a preliminary plat for only that portion of the property which he
proposes to develop at that time, provided such portion conforms with all the requirements
of these regulations. The subdivider may be required, as a condition of approval, to submit
an estimated time schedule for further staging of the development and its platting.
N. Compliance with Law.
All plats shall comply with the provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and the requirements
of the Ordinance.
O. Improvements.
Required improvements shall conform to approved engineering standards established by
the City Engineering or any applicable State, County, regulatory agency, and be in
compliance with these regulations. No required improvements may be made by the
subdivider until such time as the Final Plat has been approved and a Development
Agreement has been approved and executed by the City Council.
Subd. 7. Final Plat.
A. Filing the Final Plat. The subdivider shall file:
1. Fifteen (15) copies of the applications and final plat with the City to complete the
application.
2. One (1) copy of the application and final plat with the Minnesota Department of
Transportation for review as required by State Law if the proposed subdivision abuts
any State or Federal Truck Highway.
3. One (1) copy of the application and final plat with the State Commissioner of Natural
Resources for review as required if the proposed subdivision Includes a protected
wetland that is subject to regulation as shoreland pursuant to the amended from time~
to~time regulating the use of shoreland.
4. One (1) copy of the application and final plat with the applicable watershed district as
required by State Law.
5. Copies with all utility companies that may be affected.
Failure to file any of the copies as required by this section may constitute a basis for
rejection of the application by the City.
B. Reports and Recommendations.
1. Fifteen (15) copies of the application and final plat with the City to complete the
application and receipt of the application, Application fee, Proof of ownership, and
the requisite number of copies, shall on a timely basis, distribute copies of the
application and final plat for review, comment, and recommendation as follows:
The City shall advise the Planning Commission of any reports or comments that have been
received about the final plat.
C. The City shall refer said application and final plat to the Planning Commission for
consideration at least seven (7) days before the next regular meeting.
Page 9 of22
O The Planning Commission shall consider the final plat at its next available
meeting.
The Planning Commission shall consider the final plat and hold a public hearing at its net
regular meeting unless the filing date fails within twenty (20) working days of said meeting,
in which case the final plat would be placed on the agenda and considered at the regular
meeting following the next regular meeting. The City Clerk shall refer said application,
along with all related information to the Planning Commission for consideration. The
applicant or a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order
to answer questions concerning the final plat.
E. Recommendations.
The Planning Commission shall review the final plat to assure consistency with the
approved preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation for
approval or disapproval with conditions and reasons thereof to the City Council. In case the
plat is disapproved, the subdivider shall be notified in writing of the reason of such
disapproval and what recommendations are necessary to meet the approval of the
Commission.
F. Council Action.
The final plat, together with the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be
submitted to the City Council at its available meeting.
SECTION 4. PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLAT DATA REQUIREMENTS
Subd. 1. Preliminary Plat.
The owner or subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat, containing the following
information:
A. Identification and Description.
1. Proposed name of subdivision, not similar to any existing subdivision.
2. Date and North Point.
3. Scale of Plat, not less than one (1) inch to two hundred (200) feet. The plat shall
utilize a bar scale. (Standard Engineer Scale).
4. Indication of any proposed covenants.
5. Location of map indicating location of proposed subdivision in relationship to
general known area.
6. Names and addresses of the subdivider and surveyor making plat and property
owners of record within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of the proposed
subdivision.
7. Legal description of proposed subdivision.
8. An Abstract of Title or a Title Insurance Policy with the City as the Named
Insured in an amount to be determined by the City.
B. Existing Conditions and Proposed Design Features.
1. Boundary line of proposed subdivision to such a degree of accuracy that no
major changes are necessary in preparing the plat.
2. Zoning of land within and abutting the subdivision within three hundred (300)
feet.
3. Layout dimensions and acreage of proposed lots and blocks.
Page 10of22
4. Name, location and rightwof"way width of existing or proposed streets, highways,
alleys, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways.
5. High water mark of all lakes, rivers, streams and wetlands.
6. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed public sewer and water
systems.
7. Existing and proposed storm 'Nater drainage system inslblding drainage
easements and drawing or water movements. Data stwuld-inelblde size, grades,
satsh basin losations, manholes1 hydrants, street pavement wtdth-ami-type. ( See
ordinance 144)
8. Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land within three
hundred and fifty (350) feet, identifying by name and ownership.
9. Proposed zoning changes, if necessary.
1 O. Minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks as required by the Zoning
Ordinance.
11. Location, dimensions, sizes of areas, other than streets, alleys, pedestrian
ways, and utility easements, proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public uses.
12. Existing topography, including contour lines at two (2) foot intervals. Water
courses, wetlands, rock outcrops, power transmission poles and lines, and other
significant features shall also be shown. United State Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.)
Data may be used for all topographic mapping where feasible.
C. Supplementary Information
1. Nor required improvements may be made by the subdivider until such time as
the Final Plat has been approved and a Development Agreement has been
approved and executed by the City Council.
Subd. 2. Final Plat.
The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with provisions of Minnesota State Statutes and shall
include as a minimum the following information:
A. Name of subdivision.
B. Scale, north arrow, and date of plat.
C. All plats shall be or either two (2) standard sizes measuring 20 by 20 or 30 by 40 inches
from outer edge to outer edge. A border line shall be placed one~half (1/2) inch inside the
outer edges of the plat on the top, bottom, and right hand side of the plat, and two (2)
inches inside the outer edge of the left hand side of the plat.
D. Durable iron monuments shall be set at angle and.curve points on the outside boundary
lines of the plat, at all block corners, and at all intermediate points on the block lines
indicating changes of direction in the lines. The outside boundary lines of the plat shall be
correctly designated showing bearings on all straight lines, angles at all angle points, and
central angle and radii and are length for all curves. All distances shall be shown between
monuments as measured to the nearest hundredths of a foot. If a curved line constitutes
the line of more than one lot in any lot In any block, the central angle for that part of each lot
on the curved line shall be shown. The outside boundary lines shall close by latitude and
departure with an error not to exceed one (1) foot in 7,500 feet.
E. In any instance where a river, stream, creek, lake, or pond constitutes a boundary line
within bearings or angles and distances between all angle points and their relationship to a
water line, and all distances measured on the survey line between lot lines shall be shown.
The survey line shall be shown as a dashed line.
Page 11 of22
F. Locations, dimensions, and ·name or number of all existing or proposed lots, blocks,
streets, highways, alleys, parks, and public lands.
G. All rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, swamps, and wetlands shall be correctly
located and designated.
H. Name and boundary lines of any adjoining platted lands.
I. Location and width of all easements to be dedicated.
K. A written instrument of dedication signed and acknowledged by the owner of the land
including a full and accurate description of the land platted and set forth what part of the
land is dedicated and also to whom, and for what purpose these parts are dedicated.
L. A written surveyor's certificate certifying that the plat is a correct representation of the
survey, that all distances are correctly shown on the plat, that all monuments have been
correctly placed in the ground as shown, and that all outside boundary lines are correctly
designated on the plat. If there are no wetlands, streets or highways to be designated, he
shall so state. The certificate shall be sworn to before any officer authorized to administer
an oath.
M. Delinquent tax certification as follows:
No delinquent taxes and transfer entered this ____ day of ,20
N. Certification of City approval as follows:
Approved by the City of Mayer, Minnesota this day of ____ ,20 .
Signed:
Mayor
Attested:
City Clerk
0. Any additional certification as required by Minnesota State Statutes.
SECTION 5. DESIGN STANDARDS
Subd.1.
The proposed subdivision shall conform to the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance. The
design features are minimum requirements. The city may impose additional or more stringent
requirements concerning lot size, streets and overall design as deemed appropriate considering the
property being subdivided. ·
Subd. 2. Streets and Alleys.
A. Streets right-of-way widths shall be consistent with the City of Mayer Standard Detail
Plates, adopted by the City.
B. Street right-of-way widths shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan and official
map, and shall conform to county and state standards for truck highways. If no such plans
or standards are applicable, right-of-way widths shall not be less than the following:
Right of Way Pavement
· Width Width
Street Classifications (feet) (feet)
Minor Arterial 100 36 to 44
Collector 80 36
Local Street (rural residential) 60 24
Local Street (urban residential) 60 28 to 32
Local Street (commercial/industry) 60 36
Cul-de-sac, turnaround radius (urban/residential) 60 36
Cul-de-sac, turnaround radius (rural residential) 60 42
Cul-de-sac, turnaround radius (commercial/industry) 60 48
Page 12 of22
C. Insofar as practical, streets shall intersect at right angles. In no case shall the angle
formed by the intersection of two (2) streets be less than eighty (80) degrees. Intersections
having more than four (4) corners are prohibited.
D. A tangent of at least three hundred (300) feet shall be Introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
E. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at one (1) point by more than ten
(10) degrees they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to ensure a sight
distance within the right-of.way of not less than five hundred (500) feet for arterial, three
hundred (300) feet for collectors, and one hundred (100) feet for all other streets.
F. Proper design shall consider required turning radius of vehicles for access points or
entrances to and from a highway using standards adopted by the state department of
transportation.
G. All centerline grades shall be at least five-tenths percent and shall not exceed five (5)
percent, for arterial and seven (7) percent for all other streets and alleys. Whenever
possible, grades within thirty (30) feet of intersections or railroad crossings shall not exceed
three (3) percent.
H. Different connecting street grades shall be connected with vertical curves. Minimum
length, in feet, of the vertical curves shall be twenty (20) times the algebraic difference in
the percentage of grade of the two (2) adjacent slopes.
I. Local streets shall have a centerline offset of not less than three hundred (300) feet.
Offset intersection s shall be avoided.
J. The alignment of local streets shall discourage through traffic.
K. The maximum length of a street terminating in a cul-de-sac shall be (500) five hundred
feet.
L. Where the proposed subdivision is adjacent to a limited access highway, arterial or
collector street, there shall be no directvehicular or pedestrian access from individual lots
to such highways or streets. To the extent feasible access to arterial streets shall be at
intervals of not less than one-fourth mile and through existing and established crossroads.
Access along collector streets will be restricted and controlled on the final plat.
M. Half streets shall be prohibited.
N. Up to four (4) lots may be served by a private driveway If the city finds the following
conditions to exist:
1. The prevailing development pattern makes it infeasible or inappropriate to
construct a public street. In making this determination the city may consider the
location of existing property lines and homes, local or geographic conditions and
the existence of wetlands.
2. After reviewing the surrounding area it is concluded that an extension of the
public street system is not required to serve other parcels in the area, improve
access, or to provide a street system consistent with the comprehensive plan.
3. The use of a private driveway will permit enhanced protection of wetlands and
mature trees.
O. If the use of the private driveway is to be allowed, they shall meet all standards for the
Minnesota Uniform Fire Code and shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Common section of private driveways serving two (2) or more homes must be built to
a seven-ton design, paved to a width of twenty (20) feet, utilize a maximum grade of
ten (1 O) percent, and provide a turnaround area acceptable to the fire marshal based
Page 13 of22
upon guidelines provided by applicable fire codes. Plans for the driveway shall be
submitted to the City Engineer. Upon completion of the driveway, the applicant shall be
required to submit a set of "as-built" plans signed by a registered civil engineer.
2. Private driveways must be maintained in good condition and plowed within seventytwo
(72) hours of a snowfall greater than two (2) inches. Covenants concerning
maintenance shall be filed against all benefiting properties. Parking on the driveway or
otherwise blocking all or part of the driveway shall be prohibited.
3. Private driveways that are not usable by emergency vehicles because of
obstructions, snow accumulation, or poor maintenance are a public safety hazard. the
city may remedy such conditions and assess the cost back to the property pursuant to
Minnesota Statutes SECTION 429.101, Subd. 1 (C).
4. The driveway must be provided with drainage Improvements determined to be
necessary by the city engineer.
5. Street addresses or city -approved street name sign, if required, must be posted at
the point where the private driveway intersects the public right-of-way.
6. The driveway shall be designed to minimize impacts upon adjoining parcels. The city
may require revised alignment and landscaping to minimize impact.
7. The driveway must be located within a strip property at least thirty (30) feet wide
extending out to the public right-of-way or covered by a thirty-foot wide easement that
is permanently recorded over all benefited and impacted parcels.
8. Private reserve strips controlling public access to streets shall be prohibited.
Subd. 3. Easements.
A. All easements shall be dedicated by appropriate language on the final plat in accordance
with this section.
B. Easements at least ten (10) feet wide along all street right-of-way lines, five (5) feet
along both sides of rear and side lot lines, shall be provided for utilities where necessary. If
appropriate, easements of lesser or greater width may be required by the city. All utility
easements shall have continuity of alignment from block to block.
C. Easements shall be provided along each side of the centerline of any water course or
drainage channel, to a width sufficient to provide proper maintenance and protection and to
provide for storm water run-off from a one hundred-year storm of twenty-four (24) hours
duration. Where necessary, drainage easements corresponding to lot lines shall be
provided, such easements for drainage purposes shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in
width.
Subd. 4. Blocks.
The length and width of blocks shall be sufficient to provide convenient and safe access,
circulation, control, and street design. Blocks shall not be longer than (1,200) feet, or
shorter than One thousand two hundred or shorter than three hundred (300) feet except
where topography of surrounding development limits ability to strictly comply or as
specifically approved by the city council to foster innovative design consistent with sound
_ planning principles.
Subd. 5. Lots.
A. AU lots shall abut for their full required minimum frontage on a publicly dedicated street
as required by the zoning ordinance or on a private drive. Minimum frontage shall be 50
percent of the required lot width under the Zoning Ordinance
B. Side lines of lots shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or
substantially radial to curved street lines.
c. Lots shall be graded to drain away from building locations.
Page 14of22
-i
i
D. Lots shall be placed to preserve natural amenities, such as vegetation, wetlands, steep
slopes, water courses and historic areas.
E. Lot remnants, spite strips, reserve strips, and unusable outlots or parcels are prohibited.
F. Streets for the proposed subdivision shall extend to the boundaries of the plat as to
provide access to adjoining parcels.
G. Double frontage lots with frontage of two (2) parallel streets or reverse frontage shall
have an additional depth of at least ten (10) feet to accommodate vegetative screening
along the back lot line. Whenever possible, structures on double frontage lots should face
the front of existing structures across the street. If it cannot be achieved, then such lots
shall have an additional depth of ten (10) feet to accommodate vegetation screening along
the back lot line.
H. Lot layouts should take into consideration the potential use of solar design features.
Subd. 6. Soil Erosion and Steep Slopes,
A. The development shall conform to the topography and soils to create the least potential
for soil erosion.
B. The smallest practical increment of land shall be exposed at any one (1) time during
development.
C. Detailed requirements for each plat shall be set forth in the development agreement.
D. Erosion and sediment control plans shall be submitted, approved and implemented prior
te the first stage of development and construction. The Minnesota Censtruction Site
Erosion and Sediment Control Planning 1--landbook is the official guide for the City of Mayer.
The Developer must comply 'Nith all state and ce1:1nty requirements for erosion control,
ineluding any required NPDES Permits in cempliance with Ca1ver County regulations. The
subdivision must include plans which will minimize soil erosien. (The requirements of the
City of Mayer Storm Water Management Plan (Section 5. C) shall be adhered to. )
(Ordinance 144)
Subd. 7. Drainage.
The natural drainage system shall be used to the maximum extent feasible for the storage and flow
of runoff. The following requirements shall also apply: The requirements ofthe City of Mayer
Storm Water Management Plan (Section 5.A) shall be adhered to. (Ordinance 144)
A. Proposed drainage facilities shall have adequate capacity to accommodate potential
runoff from their entire upstream drainage area, whether within or without the subdivision.
The effect of the subdivision on existing downstream drainage areas outside the
subdivision shall be considered in evaluating the adequacy of the storm water management
plan.
B. The drainage system shall be constructed and operational as part of the first stage of
development and construction.
C. Detailed requirements for each plat shall be set forth in the development contract.
Subd. 8. Wetlands, Shoreland and Flood Plain Areas.
Conservation and Preservation of the Natural Environment.
The subdivision shall be designed in accordance with all applicable shoreland and floodplain
regulations and all wetland activities shall conform to the Wetland Conservation Act and the
Citv of Mayer's Storm Water Management Plan (Section 5.D) . All subdivisions are required to
retain and maintain the features of the natural environment as much as possible through such
measures as the preservation of native trees. shrubs, and grasses: existing undisturbed land
forms: and wetlands. lakes. rivers, and natural ponding areas.
Page 15 of22
A. The City shall require measures to preserve or to mitigate impacts upon sensitive
natural features and water quality, and to the compliance, where applicable, with the
requirements of shoreland and floodplain areas. The City shall consider the degree to
which a maximum reasonable effort has been demonstrated to preserve and conserve
the natural features. including mitigation measures. and the degree to which minimum
adverse impact upon the natural environment will be realized as a result of the
proposed development.
(Ordinances 144 and 145)
Subd. 9. Other Information.
Current applicable design standards shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. Other information as required from time to time by the City will be submitted by the
applicant.
SECTION 6. PUBLIC USE DEDICATION OR CONTRIBUTION
(Section 6 is all new language to bring the City into compliance with current state law.
Ordinance 145).
SECTION 6. PUBLIC USE DEDICATION OR CONTRIBUTION
1. In accordance with the provisions of Section 462.358 of the Minnesota Statutes, or amendments
thereto, the subdivider shall dedicate, to the public, lands for highway rights-of-way, street rights-ofway,
utility easements, wetland easements, and similar lands required for perpetual and public
improvements.
2. The City of Mayer finds it in the public interest and necessary to provide future parks, trails, and
other public open and recreational spaces for the citizens of Mayer. As such, for every new
subdivision of land involving three or more lots which are to be developed for residential purposes,
the City Council, with the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall require a payment or
dedication to the City of any one of the following, the details of which shall be reviewed on an annual
basis at the beginning of each calendar year:
A. A reasonable portion of a land dedication for conservation purposes or for public use as
parks, recreational facilities, playgrounds, trails, wetlands, or open space, up to 0.016
acres per resident expected in the proposed development, using the most recent average
household size as determined by the Minnesota State Demographer's Office and the U.S.
Census Bureau.
B. A payment of up to $400 per expected resident in the proposed subdivision, using the most
recent average household size as determined by the Minnesota State Demographer's Office
and the U.S. Census Bureau.
C. A combination of land dedication and cash payment to the City for parks and open space
purposes that reflects the values contained herein and in the City's Comprehensive Land
Use Plan.
3. The amount of land and/or payment shall be set by the City Council, from the recommendation of
the Planning Commission, after taking into consideration the open space, park, recreational, or
common areas facilities which the applicant proposes to reserve for public use within the
subdivision. If the area of the proposed subdivision contains land that has been officially designated
as park or open space in the City's Comprehensive Plan, the subdivider shall dedicate the
designated land for those purposes. In all cases, the following factors shall be taken into
consideration when reviewing potential lands for park dedication:
A. The suitability of the land for its intended purpose.
B. The future needs of the community regarding parks, trails, and open spaces.
C. The amount of any fees imposed, consistent with the requirements and limitations
contained in this Section.
D. Whether the land is adjacent to or near other public recreation lands.
E. Whether there is an opportunity to extend an existing or proposed trail or to enlarge an
existing or proposed park or recreational facility.
F. Whether the land dedication would protect environmentally or historically significant or
sensitive sites.
G. Whether the land dedication provides a unique public benefit or contains unique natural
features.
4. Where private open space for park or recreation purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision and
such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision or
owners of the development, the Planning Commission may consider granting a credit for park
Page 16 of22
dedication. A oredit of up to 2.5% of the buildable area of the proposed open space may be given
provided that the followingqonditions are met:
A. The land area designated as open space and used in the calculation of the 2.5o/o-credit
shall not include any area that is otherwise considered unbuildable, including, but not
limited to, wetlands, steep slopes exceeding 12%, and the area within setbacks from
property lines, required buffer zones, bh.1ffs, and the ordinary high water mark, among
others.
B. The land area designated as open space within the development is not occupied by nonrecreational
buildings, such as maintenance or caretaking buildings, and is available for
use to all residents of the proposed subdivision.
C. The use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by
recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property
within the development and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of
the City of Mayer.
D. The area required to obtain increased densities shall not be included in the computation of
such private open space.
5. Funds received by the City, in lieu of land dedication, shall be placed in a special fund in accordance
with Section 462.358 Subdivision 2b, of the Minnesota Statutes.
6. All land dedication pursuant to this Ordinance shall be conveyed to the City through a means
approved by the City Attorney.
Subd. 1. General.
A. Authofity.
P1:1rsuant to Minnesota Statute 462.358, as amended, the City Council shall require
suboivider requesting plattin9 OF replatting of land OF a f)lanned. unit development within-tile
jurisdictional boundaries of this OFdinance to contribute a peroent of the-fi.Aal gross area of
the subdivision to be dedicated to the public for public uses as parks, playgrom1ds, public
open space, or storm water holding areas OF ponds; or that the subdivider eontribute an
equivalent amount in cash based upon the fair market value of the unaeFdeveloped land as
determined by the· County Assessor at the time of final plat approval; or any combination
thereof. The form of contribution (cash, land, or and combination) shall be determined
basea upon the following conditions outlined belo•.v.
S..Residential Subdi\'isions.
except as otherwise provided in SECTION 6, Subd. 5, in residential subelivisions, the
weaMder shall pay to the G ity of Mayer a sum eq1::1al to ten peroent (10%) of the fair
market value, as determined by the County Assessor at tl:le tirrie of final plat approval, of
the undeveloped land proposed to be subdivided. Any sums so paid sl:lall be deposited Into a
separate City fund to be usea only for p1::1rposes outlined in SEC+ION 6, Subd. IA.
C. Commeroial, Industrial or other Nonresidential Subdi'lisions.
In nonresidential subaivisions, tl:le City may aecide not to require the subGiviaer to
contribute land, cash or any combination thereof. In tl:lose instances, f:tov.•ever, where the
City aeems it in the public interest to require a oontrib1::1tion, the subdivider shall dedicate
five (§) percent of the undevelopea land proposed to be subdivided for purposes outlined in
SECTION 6, Suea. IA; or an equivalent amount in casl:I; or any combination thereof. Such
contribution shall be based upon a finding of fact as outlined in SECTION 6, subd. ID.
Subd. 2.Special Fund. . ·
All money collected from cash contributions shall be placed in a special fund from which only tl:lose
public uses outlined in SECTION 6, Subd, IA, may be realized-,.
Subd. 3. Delayed Contribution.
Upon petitian by the subdivider, tl:le City Council may approve a delay in tl:le actual contribution of
the casl:I req1::1ired in lieu of lana until such time as dev-e!Gpment-Goours on tl:le property being
subdivided provided that a proper legal agreement is executed guaranteeing such contribution.
Delayea contribution payment shall incluae eight percent interest (8%) per year. ·
S\Wd, 4. Land Dedication..
In such oases where the subdivider is required to dedicate land aFea, the City Couneil shall have
the right to determine the geographic location and configuration of said deaication.
Subd. 6, Exception.
The subdivider, rather than making a cash payment in lieu of land dedication, shall dedicate land-fof
park purposes if the area in which said land is locatea !:las officially been designated as park.Gf
Gf)e&-Space in the City land use plan. In sueh case, the value of land contributed shall not be-!ess
Page 17 of22
Ulan ten peroent (10%) of the fair market value of the undeveloped land proposed to be subdivided
as determineG-by--the County ,A,ssessor at the time of final plat approval.
Subd. G. State Law Requirements.
ffi-suoh oases were the subdivider is required to dedioate land to comply with State Law
requirements the subffivider shall do so. Any land dedioated in such oases shall not oount towards
meeting the City's dedloation requirements.
SECTION 7. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Subd. 1. General.
The following improvements shall be compiled with and provided in accordance with City standards
and approval and as provided within the plat agreement as indicated in SECTION 7, Subd. 3 of this
Ordinance.
Subd. 2. Improvements.
All improvements identified below and as included within the subdivision agreement shall be
installed at the expense of the subdivider through either a Development Agreement, or Agreement
for the City to install and specially assess the Property, at the discretion of the City, according to
standards and specifications approved by the City Council:
A. The full width of all street right-of-ways and utility easements as approved on the final
plat will be finished at rough grade, I.e., no more than six (6) inches from the finished grade.
B. Sanitary sewer, water and drainage facilities, and electric, telephone and gas service
lines shall be installed as required in the subdivision agreement. VVhere City 'Nater: and
sewer faoilities are not available tor extension into the subdivision, the Counoil may permit
the use of individual water and sewer systems in aooordance 'Nith appropriate state and city
Hw.•s, ordinances, and regulations.
All new subdivisions shall be required to connect to the public sewer and water system.
c. All road pavement, shoulders, drainage improvements and structures, curbs,
turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to all construction standards and specifications
adopted by the Planning Commission, City Engineer or City Council, and shall be
incorporated into construction plans required to be submitted by the developer for plat
approval.
D. Street signs and street lights will be installed as required by the subdivision agreement.
E. As required by the City, street trees and boulevard sodding shall be planted and
sidewalks shall be installed.
F. Other miscellaneous facilities as may be required by the City shall be installed.
Where feasible, all utility service lines shall be placed underground within easements or dedicated
right-of-ways. All drainage and other utility installations which traverse privately owned property
shall be protected by proper easements and/or legal agreements.
Subd. 3. Subdivision Agreement.
Prior to the approval of the final plat by the City Council, the owner or subdivider of the land
covered by the plat shall execute and submit to the Council an agreement, acceptable to the
Council binding on his or theirs heirs, personal representatives and assigns, which includes, but is
not limited to, the following:
A. A listing or schedule of when and what improvements shall be required as recommended by the
Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.
B. A provision containing all conditions, if any, imposed by the City Council upon approval of the
Final Plat.
C. A provision requiring financial sureties to be provided by the City for the installation and/or
financing of improvements required In the Subdivision.
D. A provision requiring the payment of all City fees, consulting fees, and expenses, including
without limitation, outside legal fees, engineering and planning fees.
Page 18 of22
E. Other obligations of the subdivider with respect to the development of the Property contained in
this or other City Ordinances.
F. Provisions assuring timely payment of all fees, including all park dedication and other fees
required by this Ordinance and other regulations of the City.
G. Said agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney prior to review and
approval by the City Council.
New Section 7 Subd. 3.5
a. A Developer Agreement shall be required for any project which involves redevelopment in the Central
Business District (C-2) and/or requires the construction of public improvements, including without
limitation roads, municipal sewer services, municipal water services, and lighting.
b. Prior to approval of and issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall provide for the construction
of the required improvements at the applicant's expense and shall enter into a Developer Agreement
with the City, providing a letter of credit to the City in an amount equal to at least 125% of the of the
estimated cost of the uncompleted improvements. The security shall be released by the City upon the
satisfactory completion of the required improvements.
c. All costs of the City Engineer, City Attorney, City Planner, financial experts, consultants, City staff and
other professional costs borne by the City in writing and/or executing the Developer Agreement,
estimates of costs, inspectors, financial arrangements, assessments, and pursuing legal remedies in
the event of default by the applicant, shall be borne by the applicant or applicant's successors.
d. The Developer Agreement shall be -reviewed by the City Attorney and approved by the City Council.
e.
Subd. 4. Financing Required Improvements.
Prior to the final plat approval and included within the subdivision agreement, the owner or
subdivider shall submit the City Council for approval an alternative to be utilized in the financing of
the required Improvements. Such alternative shall be limited to a combination of the following:
A. Cash deposit, cash escrow agreement, or performance bond, with sureties satisfactory
to the City submitted to the City Clerk for a City determined percentage of the estimated
cost of such improvements.
B. An agreement binding on his or their heirs including a provision that no private
construction will be made, nor no building permit shall be filed for such construction, nor
any property sold or conveyed until all improvements required have been completed in a
manner approved and inspected by the City.
D. Improvements within the subdivision which have been completed prior to final plat approval
shall be accepted as equivalent improvements In compliance with the requirements of
SECTION 7 of this Ordinance, but only if the improvements conform to applicable State
and City standards.
Improvement costs shall include all construction costs incurred in making such improvements, all
expense incurred by the City for engineering, planning and legal fees, and all other expenses in
connection with the making of such improvements.
SECTION 8. VARIANCES AND AMENDMENTS
Subd. 1. Procedure.
A. Application Form.
To request a variance, the requestor shall complete an application form provided by the
City and shall include all required information specified in the application instructions. An
Incomplete or inaccurate application form need not be accepted by the City.
B. Public Hearing.
The City, on behalf of the Planning Commission, shall set a date for a public hearing.
Notice of such hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality at
least ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting. In the requests for variances, such
notice shall also be mailed not less than ten (10) days to all property owners of record
Page 19 of22
within three hundred and fifty (350) feet of the property to which the request relates, and if
the variances related to land located in a Shoreland or Flood Plain District, said notice shall
also be mailed to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources at least ten
(10) days prior to such hearings. A copy of the notice and a certified list of the property
owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be supplied by the applicant or at
their expense and made a part of the official record. The failure to give mailed notice to
individual property owners, or defects in the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings,
provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this subdivision has been made.
c. The City shall refer said application, along with a staff report and other related
information, to the Planning Commission for consideration.
D. The Planning Commission shall consider the request and hold a public hearing at its
next regular meeting unless the filing date falls within twenty (20) days of said meeting, in
which case the request would be placed on the agenda and considered at the regular
meeting following the next regular meeting. The City shall refer said application, along with
all related information to the City Planning Commission for consideration. The applicant or
a representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission in order to answer
questions concerning the proposed amendment or conditional use.
E. Approval Factors.
In request for variances, the Planning Commission may recommend a variance from the
provisions of this Ordinance when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict
compliance. In recommending any variance, the Commission shall prescribe only
conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its
recommendations, the Planning Commission shall take into account the nature of the
proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, and the number of persons
to reside or work in the proposed subdivision, upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. A
variance shall only be recommended when the Planning Comr:nlssion finds:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such
that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the
applicant of the reasonable use of their land.
2. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated.
3. That the variance is to correct inequities resulting form an extreme physical
hardship such as topography, soils, wetlands, etc.
F. Recommendations.
Within sixty (60) days from the date of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
make a recommendation, and in requests for variances shall also make a finding of fact to
the City Council.
G. Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, or until sixty (60) days
after the public hearing at which the request was considered, the City Council shall place
the report and recommendation on the agenda for the next regular meeting. Such reports
and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of the permanent written record of
the City Council meeting.
H. Council Action.
Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall
either:
1. Approve or disapprove the request as recommended by the Planning
Commission, or
2. Approve or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission with
modifications, alterations, or differing conditions. Such modifications, alterations, or
differing conditions shall be in writing and made of the Council's record, or
3. Refer the recommendation back to the Planning Commission with future
consideration. This procedure shall be followed only one time on a singular action.
Page20 of22
Approval of a request shall require passage l)y two-thirds (2/3) vote of the full City Council.
The City Clerk shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the Council's action.
The variance decisions of the City Council shall be final, subject to the judicial review.
I. DNR Requirements.
Variance decisions affecting all or part of any land locatecl within the "5" Shoreland
District or "FP" Flood Plain District shall be mailed to the Commissioner of the
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of the decision.
Subd. 2. Lapse of Variance.
Whenever within one (1) year after granting a variance the work as permitted by the variance shall
not have been completed, then such variance shall become null ancl void unless a petition for
extension of time in which to complete the terms has been granted by the City Council. Such
extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the City Clerk at least thirty (30) days before
the expiration of the original variance. There shall be no charge for the filing of such petition. The
request for extension shall state facts showing a good faith attempt to complete the work permitted
by the variance. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a
recommendation and to the City Council for a decision, and shall be made only one time for
singular action.
SECTION 9. FEES
Subd. 1. To defray the administrative costs of processing requests for applications under this
Ordinance a base fee shall be paid by all applicants, in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by
resolution periodically by the City Council.
Subd. 2. In order to defray the additional cost of processing amendments for development, all
applicants shall pay the total cost of staff and/or consulting time exclusively in producing materials
for the applicants request, and all materials for said request.
1. "Materials" shall include, but not be limited to, maps, graphs, charts, drawings, etc., and
all printing or reproduction of them.
2. "Staff and/or Consulting Time" shall include any time spent in either researching for or
actual production of materials.
3. The hourly rate for "staff and/or consulting time" shall be established and made available
to the applicant by the City Clerk prior to production of any materials and the applicant shall
be given a reasonable estimate of project time and/or materials costs.
Subd. 3. Fees shall be payable at the time applications are filed with the City Clerk and are not
refundable unless application is withdrawn prior to referral to the Planning Commission and prior to
any publication required by the application. A deposit to cover staff or consulting time and special
materials will be estimated and required by the City Clerk at the time the base fee is paid.
Subd. 4. Fee schedule for subdivision applications shall be set and adopted by resolution by the
City Council.
SECTION 10. ENFORCEMENT, PENALTY, NOTIFICATION, AND DISCLOSURE
Subd. 1. Enforcement.
Unless approved as a final plat as provided herein, no subdivision shall be entitled to record in the
County Recorder's Office or have validity; and the City Clerk shall not issue building permits for any
structure on a lot in any proposed subdivision. The City shall not permit any public improvements to
be installed unless the final plat is approved and recorded.
Subd. 2. Penalty.
Any firm, person or corporation who violates any of the provisions of these regulations, or who sells,
leases or offers for sale or lease any lot, block or tract of land herewith regulated before all the
requirements of this Ordinance have been compiled with shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each
day that the violation is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.
Page 21 of22
Subd. 3. Notification.
A certified copy of every ordinance, resolution, amendment or regulation adopted under this
Ordinance shall be filed with the Carver County Recorder's Office. Copies of resolutions governing
subdivision plats within the City, but contiguous to another city shall be filed with the governing
body of the contiguous city.
SECTION 12. EFFECTIVE DATE
Subd. 1. This Ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days from the date of its publication in the Carver
County News.
ADOPTED this_ day of~· 2005, by the Mayer City Council.
Page 22 of22
 
 
 
 




 


