Chapter Number 10, General Provisions
CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section

            10.01   Title of code

            10.02   Rules of interpretation

            10.03   Application to future ordinances

            10.04   Captions

            10.05   Definitions

            10.06   Severability

            10.07   Reference to other sections

            10.08   Reference to offices

            10.09   Errors and omissions

            10.10   Official time

            10.11   Reasonable time

            10.12   Ordinances repealed

            10.13   Ordinances unaffected

            10.14   Effective date of ordinances

            10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance

            10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code

            10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities

            10.18   Copies of code

            10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules by reference

            10.20   Enforcement

 

            10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties

            10.99   General penalty

                                                Appendix        I:          Resolution to adopt a schedule of offenses and voluntary administrative penalties

            Appendix        II:        Notice of code violation

            Appendix        III:       City of Mountain Iron Administrative Offenses

 

10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
 

            (A)      All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the City, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the “City code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified ordinances” or “code” may be substituted.  Code title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.

 

            (B)       All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to the components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.”  Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§ 10.01.”  Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.

 

10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
 

            (A)      Generally.  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.

 

            (B)       Specific rules of interpretation.  The construction of all ordinances of this City shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:

 

                        (1)       AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if written “and/or,” whenever the context requires.

 

                        (2)       Acts by assistants.  When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.

 

                        (3)       Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.

 

                        (4)       General term.  A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.

 

10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
 

            All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code unless otherwise specifically provided.

 

10.04 CAPTIONS.
 

            Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.

 

10.05 DEFINITIONS.
 

            (A)      General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.

 

            (B)       Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

 

                        CITY.  The area within the corporate boundaries of the City as presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation or other legal actions at a future time.  The term CITY when used in this code may also be used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.

 

                        CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This City code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.

 

                        COUNTY.   The county or counties in which the City is located.

 

                        MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.

 

                        MONTH.  A calendar month.

 

                        OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.  All terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an individual authorized by state law.

 

                        OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer, office, employee, commission, or department of this City unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

 

                        PERSON.  Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons, firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.

 

                        PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.

 

                        SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.

 

                        SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot write.

 

                        STATE.  The State of Minnesota.

 

                        SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.

 

                        WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.

 

                        YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.

 

10.06 SEVERABILITY.
 

            If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.

 

10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
 

            Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.

 

10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
 

            Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this City exercising the powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.

 

10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
 

            If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.

 

10.10 OFFICIAL TIME.
 

            The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws, shall be the official time within this City for the transaction of all City business.

 

10.11 REASONABLE TIME.
 

            (A)      In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of the act or the giving of the notice.

 

            (B)       The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.  If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.

 

10.12 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
 

            This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.

 

10.13 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
 

            All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.

 

10.14 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
 

            All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided.

 

10.15 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
 

            (A)      Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.

 

            (B)       No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.

 

            (C)       When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.

 

10.16 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
 

            (A)      If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.

 

            (B)       Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.

 

10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
 

            All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.

 

10.18 COPIES OF CODE.
 

            The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City Administrator for public inspection.  The Administrator shall provide a copy for sale for a reasonable charge.

 

10.19 ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES BY REFERENCE.
 

            It is the intention of the City Council that, when adopting this Minnesota Basic Code, all future amendments to any state or federal rules and statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in the code to the contrary.

 

10.20 ENFORCEMENT.
 

            (A)      Any Licensed Peace Officer of the City’s Police Department, or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to enforce any provision of this code.

 

            (B)       As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from time to time, the City Administrator shall have the authority to administer and enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain individuals designated within the code have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All and any person or persons designated by the Administrator may issue a citation in lieu of arrest or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.

 

            (C)       The City Administrator and any City official or employee designated by this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.

 

            (D)      If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the City Administrator, Peace Officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be probable cause to issue the warrant.  Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.

 

            (E)       Every licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of property within the City shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the City Administrator or any other authorized City officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of the people are being complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all permits, licenses or City service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the termination, and the licensee, owner, resident or other person in control of the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Administrator to object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the Administrator’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special meeting.

 

            (F)       Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

 

10.98 SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.
 

            (A)      Purpose.  Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this section are intended to provide the public and the City with an informal, cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of certain City code provisions.  The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative offenses.  At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as is provided for hereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the procedures, in which event the City may bring criminal charges in accordance with law.  Likewise, the City at its discretion may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance.  In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the monetary penalty, which may be imposed, the City will seek to collect the costs of the administrative offense procedure as part of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty of the criminal violation.

 

            (B)       Administrative offense defined.  An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of the portions of the City code presented in exhibit A and is subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties as set forth in division (I).

 

            (C)       Any officer of the Mountain Iron Sheriff’s Department or authorized City employee shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator.  The notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of violation, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty.

 

            (D)      Payment.  Once the notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation, or may request in writing, as is provided for hereafter.  The payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.

 

            (E)       Hearing.  Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this section may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a hearing by a hearing officer who shall forthwith conduct an informal hearing to determine if a violation has occurred.  The hearing officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the penalty.  If the violation is sustained by the hearing officer, the violator shall pay the penalty within seven days.

 

            (F)       Hearing Officer.  A City employee or employees designated in writing by the Mayor and approved by the City Council shall be designated individually or collectively as Hearing Officer.  The Hearing Officer shall serve until such point the Mayor and City Council appoint a new Hearing Officer.  The Hearing Officer is authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating to administrative offenses provided for in this section.

 

            (G)      Failure to pay.  In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes.  If a penalty is paid and an individual is found not to have committed the administrative offense by the Hearing Officer, no such charge may be brought by the City for the same violation.

 

            (H)      Disposition of penalties.  All penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to the City and deposited in the City’s General Fund.

 

            (I)        Offenses and penalties.  Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses and penalties for such offenses may be established by resolution of the City Council from time to time.  Copies of such resolution shall be maintained in the office of the City Administrator.

 

            (J)        Subsequent offenses.  In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative offense within a 12-month period of paying an administrative penalty for the same or substantially similar offense, the subsequent administrative penalty shall be increased by 25% above the initial administrative penalty, except as otherwise provided by resolution.

(Ord. 03-03, passed 11-3-2003)

 

 

10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
 

            (A)      Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.

 

            (B)       Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code, including Minnesota Statutes specifically adopted by reference, which is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than $300.

 

            (C)       In either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs of prosecution may be added.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.

 

            (D)      The failure of any officer or employee of the City to perform any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.

 

            (E)       In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or in § 10.98, if any person, firm or corporation fails to comply with any provision of this code, the Council or any City official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.

 

APPENDIX I

 

RESOLUTION TO ADOPT A SCHEDULE OF OFFENSES AND VOLUNTARY ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES

 

            WHEREAS, the City Council has adopted the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code § 10.98, establishing a procedure for requesting the voluntary payment of administrative penalties for certain violations of the code; and

 

            WHEREAS, the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code § 10.98 authorize the City Council, by a resolution adopted by a majority of its members, to identify administrative offenses and establish penalties for these offenses;

 

            NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved by the City Council as follows:

 

            Offense                                  Code Section               Amount of Administrative Penalty

            All offenses for which an                                                                   $75.00

            administrative penalty may be

            established under this code,

            other than those specified

            below:

 

            EFFECTIVE DATE: The effective date of the resolution is the date of its passage by a majority of the members of the City Council. Passage of this resolution implements the provisions of City Code § 10.98.

 

APPENDIX II

 

NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION

 

To:      (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)

 

From:  (Name and title of City official giving the notice)

 

Re:      Alleged violation of Section of the City Code, relating to (give title of section)

 

Date:   (Date of notice)

 

            I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §                  of the City Code relating to                                                                                                                                      .

 

            The City Council has by resolution established an administrative penalty in the amount of $        for this violation.

 

            Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not pay it the City may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.

 

            Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay the administrative penalty.

 

            As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by                         (establish date), then the payment of the administrative penalty will be waived.

 

            Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the City reserves the right to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.

 

            Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment.  Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the Council.

 

            If you pay the administrative penalty, the City will not initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the Council, or any City official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain, correct or abate the violation.

 

            Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash or money order to the City Treasurer.

 

Signed:                                                              

            (Name and Title of Person Giving Notice)

 

APPENDIX III

 

CITY OF MOUNTAIN IRON ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES

 

 

(A)      Tobacco Violations, Chapter 115

 

(B)       Nuisance Violations, Chapter 96

 

(C)       Land Use Violations, Chapter 154

 

(D)      Garbage Violations, Chapter 50

Chapter Number 30, City Officials
CHAPTER 30:  CITY OFFICIALS

Section

            General Provisions

            30.01   City employment

            30.02   Employees of good moral character

            30.03   Casual employment or day labor

            30.04   City Council Salaries

            City Administrator

            30.20   Office created

            30.21   Appointment

            30.22   Duties

            30.23   Bond

            Zoning Administrator

            30.35   Creation

            30.36   Appointment

            30.37   Removal

            30.38   Liability

            Building Official

            30.50   Office created

            30.51   Appointment

            30.52   Removal

            30.53   Vacancy

            30.54   Liability

            30.55   Authority

            30.56   Salary

            30.57   Duties

GENERAL PROVISIONS

30.01 CITY EMPLOYMENT.
            Employment with the City is herewith classified either as appointive or casual. Appointive employment shall include all employment on a monthly and half-monthly rate or basis while casual employment shall include all day labor or labor given on a day basis.

(Prior Code, § 4.01)

30.02 EMPLOYEES OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER.
            No person shall receive any appointive employment unless the person shall be a person of good moral character. The City Administrator shall solicit applications for all appointive employment positions.

(Prior Code, § 4.02)

30.03 CASUAL EMPLOYMENT OR DAY LABOR.
            (A)      Casual employment or day labor shall be given and distributed by the City Council as such Council deems expedient and to any persons selected for such employment by such Council.

(Prior Code, § 4.03)

            (B)       Casual labor shall be paid at the legal minimum wage unless otherwise expressly approved by the Council.

(Prior Code, § 4.04)

30.04 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
            (A)      The salary of the Mayor of the City of Mountain Iron shall be the sum of $3,600.00 per year.

(B)       The salary of each Councilmember of the City of Mountain Iron shall be the sum of $2,700.00 per year.

(Ord. 01-05, passed 1-18-2005)

CITY ADMINISTRATOR

30.20 OFFICE CREATED.
            The office of the City Administrator is created in the City of Mountain Iron.

(Prior Code, § 1.01)

30.21 APPOINTMENT.
            The Administrator shall be appointed by the City Council on the basis of his or her education, training, experience and administrative qualifications. The Administrator shall be appointed for an indefinite period of time and shall be paid for his or her services at such a salary as the Council from time to time may determine. The Administrator may be removed by the Council at any time; provided, however, that if the Administrator has served the City for a period of one year, he or she may demand written charges and a public hearing on the charges before the Council, prior to the date his or her removal is to take effect. Pending such hearing and removal, the Council may suspend him or her from his or her office. The Council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the Administrator during his or her absence or disability. If the Administrator is removed by the Council after one year of service, he or she will receive a separation allowance in an amount equal to one month’s salary.

(Prior Code, § 1.02)

30.22 DUTIES.
            The City Administrator shall:

            (A)      Supervise the management and operation of the Department of Administration;

            (B)       Coordinate the administration of all City departments and divisions;

            (C)       Make ministerial decision affecting such departments, recommending procedures to the Council for adoption and make recommendations to the Council regarding the employment and/or dismissal of personnel;

            (D)      Develop and issue all administrative rules, regulations and procedures necessary to ensure the proper functioning of and coordination with all departments. Such rules, regulations and procedures shall be consistent with Minnesota Statutes, City ordinances and Council policy. Said rules, regulations and procedures shall be effective upon issuance and shall continue to be in effect until rescinded by the Administrator or by express action by the Council;

            (E)       Submit to the Council, at least 30 days prior to call by the County Auditor, a single, consolidated budget document which shall include statements relating to projected revenue and proposed sources of revenue and all proposed expenditures to be made and obligations to be incurred by the City in the forthcoming year;

            (F)       Be personnel officer for the City and shall be responsible for the implementation of the City Personnel Policy;

            (G)      Advise the Council on all matters pertaining to or affecting the operation of the City government and/or the City proper;

            (H)      Be responsible for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the City and whenever necessary shall make recommendations for changes, amendments or repeal of existing ordinances;

            (I)        Be directly responsible to the Council for the faithful and satisfactory performance of his or her duties. He or she shall attend all Council meetings, provided, however, that he or she shall not have the right to vote. He or she shall, likewise, perform such additional duties and attend such committee and commission meetings as the Council may direct;

            (J)        Represent the City at all official or semi-official functions as may be directed by the Council;

            (K)      Make all purchases and acquisitions to be made in the name of the City in accordance with the purchasing policy established by the City Council;

            (L)       Limit spending to budgeted items and it shall be remembered that the appropriation of money is not a directive or a permit to spend, unless the item is needed, the price is reasonable and revenues are available to finance the purchase. Should actual revenues decline below estimate levels, expenditures shall be reduced accordingly through the application of budgetary controls;

            (M)      Keep the Council advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City and shall advise and recommend to the Council on the investment of idle funds;

            (N)      Be responsible for the application of approved financial accounting procedures and methods employed within the Department of Administration and shall recommend accounting procedures to be adopted by all departments;

            (O)      Maintain all City accounts and develop all reports required by law or requested by the Council in accordance with the generally accounting procedures and in accordance with classifications prescribed by the State Auditor’s Office, wherever practicable;

            (P)       Performance of all other duties as required by state statutes, City ordinances or as the Council may so direct;

            (Q)      Be designated as the Clerk-Treasurer and shall assume all duties commensurate therewith as provided by Minnesota Statutes creating and defining and Optional “A” type of government.

(Prior Code, § 1.03)

30.23 BOND.
            The Administrator shall be bonded at City expense, through a position bond, which will indemnify the City in an amount to be determined by resolution of the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 1.04)

ZONING ADMINISTRATOR

30.35 CREATION.
            There is created the office of Zoning Administrator.

(Prior Code, § 2.01)

30.36 APPOINTMENT.
            The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the City Council at such a salary as the Council may from time to time determine, and he or she shall possess the following minimum qualifications:

            (A)      Be a high school graduate;

            (B)       Posses knowledge of zoning requirements, enforcement and be able to interpret land use plat plans and specifications;

            (C)       Be able to communicate both orally and in writing;

            (D)      Be able to read and interpret property descriptions;

            (E)       Be able to investigate zoning appeals or violations;

            (F)       Be able to maintain effective communications and working relationships between various governmental agencies and with the general public.

(Prior Code, § 2.02)

30.37 REMOVAL.
            The Zoning Administrator shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given him or her to be heard on specific charges. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the authority of the State Building Inspector to dismiss or suspend the Zoning Administrator as provided for by law. During temporary absence or disability, the City Council shall designate an Acting Zoning Administrator.

(Prior Code, § 2.03)

30.38 LIABILITY.
            The Zoning Administrator acting in good faith and without malice for the City in the discharge of his or her duties shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable and is relieved for all personal liability for any damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the Zoning Administrator or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him or her in good faith and without malice for the City in the discharge of his or her duties, shall be defended by the Legal Department of the City until final determination of the proceedings.

(Prior Code, § 2.04)

 BUILDING OFFICIAL

30.50 OFFICE CREATED.
            There is created the office of Building Official that will be one and the same as the office of Building Inspector as referred to in Title XV of this code.

(Prior Code, § 3.01)

30.51 APPOINTMENT.
            The Building Official shall be appointed by the City Council and must possess the following minimum qualifications:

            (A)      Be a high school graduate plus a graduate of a trade school in the construction trades field or have at least four years experience in the building trades;

            (B)       Possess knowledge of design, construction standards, materials, methods and zoning requirements and enforcement, be able to interpret blueprints and plans and specifications;

            (C)       Be able to communicate orally and in writing;

            (D)      Be able to attain Certified Building Official status under state regulations within one year of appointment;

            (E)       Be able to investigate appeals or violations;

            (F)       Be able to maintain effective communications and working relationships between various governmental agencies and with the general public.

(Prior Code, § 3.02)

30.52 REMOVAL.
            The Building Official shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given him or her to be heard on specific charges. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the authority of State Building Inspector to dismiss or suspend the Building Official as provided for by law. During temporary absence or disability, the City Council shall designate an Acting Building Official.

(Prior Code, § 3.03)

30.53 VACANCY.
            In the event that a certified building official vacates his or her position, the City Council shall appoint a certified building official to fill the vacancy as soon as possible. If the City Council fails to appoint a certified building official within 90 days of the occurrence of the vacancy, the State Building Inspector may make such appointment or provide state employees to serve said function as provided by law.

(Prior Code, § 3.04)

30.54 LIABILITY.
            The Building Official acting in good faith and without malice for the City in the discharge of his or her duties shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable and is relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the Building Official or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him or her in good faith and without malice for the City in the discharge of his or her duties, shall be defended by the Legal Department of the City until final determination of the proceedings.

(Prior Code, § 3.05)

30.55 AUTHORITY.
            The Building Official in the discharge of his or her official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour during the construction. If permission to enter is denied by the occupant, the Building Official shall contact the City Attorney in order to obtain a court order to enter the building.

(Prior Code, § 3.06)

30.56 SALARY.
            The Building Official shall be paid a salary as the City Council may from time to time determine.

(Prior Code, § 3.07)

30.57 DUTIES.
            The Building Official shall:

            (A)      Report to the City Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council;

          (B)       Conduct inspections that will insure that all buildings constructed in the City are built consistent with the Minnesota State Building Code and that all construction is carried out for safety, comfort and convenience of occupants;

            (C)       Conduct building inspections on all types of building structures to assure that structures are built consistent with official building codes, take immediate action to correct violations, advise contractors and architects on most appropriate method to correct deficiencies and review corrective action taken by the contractors to insure that violations have been corrected in the time frame established;

            (D)      Review plans and specifications for new structures to be aware of unique construction practices or materials that need special attention and annotate corrections on plans in accordance with City and state standards;

            (E)       Review permit and permit applications to insure that they reflect work to be done and take action to correct permits and modify fees where the work being done is not consistent with that defined in such permit or in the codes;

           (F)       Review new or substitute materials used in building construction and make recommendations for their acceptance or rejection;

            (G)      Maintain an effective working relationship with contractors to insure a positive response and desire for conformance with codes;

            (H)      Keep abreast of new equipment, materials and construction practices, as well as new and changes in existing codes to insure thorough understanding of building industry and effective and fair administration of codes;

            (I)        Issue tags where violations persist in construction or advise the City Administrator and City Attorney of violations;

            (J)        Advise other departments or personnel on the desirability of condemning structures;

            (K)      Make and keep records of all permits and report same to the City Administrator, Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.

(Prior Code, § 3.08)

Chapter Number 31, Departments, Boards, Commissions and Authorities
CHAPTER 31:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES

Section

Fire Department

            31.001 Established

            31.002 Election

            31.003 Duties of Fire Marshal

            31.004 Duties of Chief

            31.005 Records

            31.006 Practice drills

            31.007 Assistant Chief

            31.008 Firefighters

            31.009 Loss of membership

            31.010 Compensation

            31.011 Minimum pay

            31.012 Present members

            31.013 Relief association

            31.014 Interference with Department

Utility Advisory Board

            31.040 Short title

            31.041 Definitions

            31.042 Establishment

            31.043 Terms of office

            31.044 Qualifications

            31.045 Removal of members

            31.046 Meetings, officers

            31.047 Commission staff

            31.048 Rules and procedures

            31.049 Absence of members

            31.050 Powers and duties

            31.051 Annual report

Planning and Zoning Commission

            31.065 Creation

            31.066 Powers

            31.067 Map

Biosolids Disposal Authority

            31.080 Tri-Cities Biosolids Disposal Authority

            31.081 Establishment

            31.082 Term of office

            31.083 Officers

            31.084 Duties and powers

            31.085 Contributions to capital and operation cost

            31.086 Budget

            31.087 Finances

            31.088 Reports

            31.089 Termination

Biosolids Disposal Site Authority

            31.100 Authority created

            31.101 Term of office

            31.102 Officers

            31.103 Duties and powers

            31.104 Contributions to capital and operation cost

            31.105 Budget

            31.106 Finances

            31.107 Reports

            31.108 Termination

            31.109 Establishment

Recreation Board

            31.120 Board established

            31.121 Members

            31.122 Officers; quorum

            31.123 Powers

            31.124 Annual report

FIRE DEPARTMENT

31.001 ESTABLISHED.
            There is established in this City a Volunteer Fire Department consisting of a Chief, an Assistant Chief, a Fire Marshal and not less than 15 nor more than 25 firefighters.

(Prior Code, § 43.01)

31.002 ELECTION.
            The Chief of the Fire Department, the Assistant Chief, the Secretary and the Fire Marshal shall be appointed annually by the Council, which body shall, in making such appointments, take into consideration recommendations of the members of the departments. Each officer shall hold office for one year and until his or her successor has been duly appointed, except that he or she may be removed by the Council for cause and after a public hearing. Firefighters and probationary firefighters shall be appointed by the members of the Department subject to confirmation by the Council. Firefighters shall continue as members of the Department during good behavior and may be removed by the Council only for cause and after a public hearing.

(Prior Code, § 43.02)

31.003 DUTIES OF FIRE MARSHAL.
            The office of Fire Marshal may be held by the Chief or by the Assistant Chief, if the Council so decides. The Fire Marshal shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinances aimed at fire prevention. He or she shall have full authority to inspect all premises and to cause the removal or abatement of any fire hazards.

(Prior Code, § 43.03)

31.004 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
            The Chief shall have control over all of the fire fighting apparatus and shall be solely responsible for its care and condition. He or she shall make a report semi-annually to the Council at its meetings in March and September as to the condition of the equipment and needs of the Fire Department. He or she may submit additional reports and recommendations at any meeting of the Council, and he or she shall report each suspension by him or her of a member of the Fire Department at the first meeting of the Council following such suspension. He or she shall be responsible for the proper training and discipline of the members of the Fire Department and may suspend any member for refusal or neglect to obey orders pending final action by the Council on his or her discharge or retention.

(Prior Code, § 43.04)

31.005 RECORDS.
            The Secretary shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires, such record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which occupied, value of building and contents, members of the Department responding to the alarm and such other information as he or she may deem advisable or as may be required from time to time by the Council or State Insurance Department.

(Prior Code, § 43.05)

31.006 PRACTICE DRILLS.
            It shall be the duty of the Chief, when the weather permits, to hold a monthly practice drill of at least one hour’s duration for the Fire Department and to give the firefighter instruction in approved methods of fire fighting and fire prevention.

(Prior Code, § 43.06)

31.007 ASSISTANT CHIEF.
            In the absence or disability of the Chief, the Assistant Chief shall perform all the functions and exercise all of the authority of the Chief.

(Prior Code, § 43.07)

31.008 FIREFIGHTERS.
            At the time of entering the Department, firefighters shall be not less than 18 and able-bodied. They shall become members of the Fire Department on election or examination as required by the Constitution and by-laws of the Department. The Department may require that each candidate, before he or she becomes a firefighter, must satisfy certain minimum requirements of height, weight, education and any other qualifications which may be specified by the Department and that he or she must pass a satisfactory mental and physical examination.

(Prior Code, § 43.08)

31.009 LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.
            Firefighters absent from three consecutive drills or calls, unless excused by the Chief, shall forfeit membership in the Department.

(Prior Code, § 43.09)

31.010 COMPENSATION.
            The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall determine by resolution, and a record book of the amounts of compensation for each position shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator of and for the City.

(Prior Code, § 43.10)

31.011 MINIMUM PAY.
            In computing compensation for fires, one hour shall be considered as the minimum to be paid to any firefighter.

(Prior Code, § 43.11)

31.012 PRESENT MEMBERS.
            Persons, who are members of the Fire Department at the time of the adoption of this section, shall not be required to serve a probationary period before receiving firefighter’s rating.

(Prior Code, § 43.12)

31.013 RELIEF ASSOCIATION.
            The members and officers of the Fire Department shall organize themselves into a Firefighter’s Relief Association.

(Prior Code, § 43.13)

31.014 INTERFERENCE WITH DEPARTMENT.
            It shall be unlawful for any person to give or make, or cause to be given or made, an alarm of fire without probable cause, or to neglect or refuse to obey any reasonable order of the Chief at a fire or to interfere with the Fire Department in the discharge of its duties; any person convicted of violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 43.14)  Penalty, see § 10.99

 UTILITY ADVISORY BOARD

31.040 SHORT TITLE.
            This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Mountain Iron Utility Advisory Board Chapter.”

(Prior Code, § 38.01)

31.041 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            BOARD. The Utility Advisory Board of the City as created by this subchapter.

            CHAIRPERSON. The Chairperson of the Utility Advisory Board as provided hereunder.

            SECRETARY. The Secretary of the Utility Advisory Board as provided hereunder.

            VICE-CHAIRPERSON. The Vice Chairperson of the Utility Advisory Board as provided hereunder.

(Prior Code, § 38.02)

31.042 ESTABLISHMENT.
            A Utility Advisory Board is established to be advisory to the City Council and which Utility Advisory Board shall have the powers and duties hereinafter set forth.

(Prior Code, § 38.03)

31.043 TERMS OF OFFICE.
            Members of the Board shall be appointed upon majority consent of the Council for staggered terms of three years. Upon expiration of said initial terms, future appointees shall serve five year terms expiring in January of the appropriate year, provided, however, that members shall continue their terms until new appointments or reappointments are made by the City Council. The City Council shall make appointments to the Board at its second official meeting in January of each year or as soon thereafter as it desires. Vacancies during the term shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired portion of the term.

(Prior Code, § 38.04)

31.044 QUALIFICATIONS.
            Members of the Board shall be residents of the City while serving on the Board and shall represent as broad a range as possible of the different geographical areas of the City.

(Prior Code, § 38.05)

31.045 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
            The Council by a four-fifths vote of its members shall have the authority to remove any member of the Board from office whenever, in its discretion, the best interest of the City shall be served thereby.

(Prior Code, § 38.06)

31.046 MEETINGS, OFFICERS.
            The Board will name its own officers to serve at its pleasure from the membership of the Commission.

            (A)      Regular meetings. The Board shall meet publicly in regular session at least once each month at a time and place selected by a majority of its members.

            (B)       Special meetings. The Chairperson or any two members of the Board shall have the authority to call a special meeting of the Board. Written notice of special meetings shall be given to all members at least 24 hours prior to the time of the meeting unless the time and place for the special meeting is set at a regular meeting.

(Prior Code, § 38.07)

31.047 COMMISSION STAFF.
            The Board shall receive the staff services of the City Administrator and Public Works Director as approved by the City Council within the means provided by any appropriations made therefore by the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 38.08)

31.048 RULES AND PROCEDURES.
            The Board shall adopt a set of rules to govern its own meetings and procedures. The rules may be amended from time to time, but only upon notice to all members that the said proposed amendments shall be acted upon at a specified meeting. A majority vote of the Board shall be required for the approval of the proposed amendment.

(Prior Code, § 38.09)

31.049 ABSENCE OF MEMBERS.
            Absence from three consecutive regular meetings without the formal consent of the Board shall be deemed to constitute a resignation of a member, and the vacancy thus created shall be filled thereafter by appointment of the City Council for the remainder of the term of the member so deemed to have resigned.

(Prior Code, § 38.10)

31.050 POWERS AND DUTIES.
            The Board shall have the following powers and duties:

            (A)      To confer with and advise the Council on all matters concerning the management and operation of the water, wastewater and electric plants as the City may own or acquire;

            (B)       To advise the Council on setting charges against each class of consumer, public or private, of water, wastewater or electricity service as will meet all costs of production and transmission of such utilities consumed by such class of consumer as will in the judgment of the Board yield appropriate sums for depreciation and reserve accounts and for the retirement of any bonded indebtedness incurred by the City for capital expenditures of the departments.

(Prior Code, § 38.11)

31.051 ANNUAL REPORT.
            The Board shall make a report to the City Council of its activities in December of each year.

(Prior Code, § 38.12)

PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION

31.065 CREATION.
            The Planning and Zoning Commission is created to be known as the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. The Commission shall consist of seven members, and each member shall be appointed for a term of three years. The City Administrator, Zoning Administrator and City Attorney shall be ex-officio members without the right to vote.

(Prior Code, § 20.01)

 31.066 POWERS.

            The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City shall, with the consent and approval of the City Council, carry on City planning activities and adopt a plan for the future physical development of the City and shall perform such other duties as may from time to time be delegated to them by other ordinances of the City.

(Prior Code, § 20.02)

31.067 MAP.
            The Planning and Zoning Commission may provide for the future layout of streets outside of platted territory and extending across unplatted territory within the corporate limits of the City and may provide for the future widening or improvement of any existing streets or highways and may in cooperation with the consulting City Engineer prepare a map of the City to be known as the Official Map of the City, which map shall indicate thereupon the proposed future extension of widening of existing streets on the municipality. Before the map shall be adopted by the City Council as the official map, a public hearing shall be held after ten days notice thereof has been given in a legal newspaper.

(Prior Code, § 20.03)

BIOSOLIDS DISPOSAL AUTHORITY

31.080 TRI-CITIES BIOSOLIDS DISPOSAL AUTHORITY.
            There is created, pursuant to provisions of M.S. § 471.59, as it may be amended from time to time,  a joint biosolids disposal authority to be known as the Tri-Cities Biosolids Disposal Authority. The Authority shall be composed of one member representing each of the participating municipalities, which member shall be appointed by a majority vote of the governing body. The members of the Authority will serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified.

(Prior Code, § 33.01)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.081 ESTABLISHMENT.
            The Tri-Cities Biosolids Disposal Authority has been established pursuant to the following ordinances:

            (A)      City of Eveleth – Ordinance 168, amended by Ordinance 176;

            (B)       City of Gilbert – Ordinance 1-81, amended by Ordinance 1-83;

            (C)       City of Mountain Iron – Ordinance 33.

(Prior Code, § 33.02)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.082 TERM OF OFFICE.
            The members of the first Authority shall be appointed by the governing body of each municipality for a term expiring as that municipality shall so direct. Each community, wherein a vacancy exists, shall appoint one member to fulfill such vacancy. Each municipality shall appoint an alternate member who may attend all meetings of the Authority and participate in all discussions and vote only in the absence of the regular member from his or her municipality.

(Prior Code, § 33.03)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.083 OFFICERS.
            The Joint Authority shall elect one of its members to be Chairperson of the Authority, one member to be Vice-Chairperson and shall appoint a Secretary-Treasurer who may, but need not be, a member of the Authority. Each such appointee shall hold office for the term of one year and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.

(Prior Code, § 33.04)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.084 DUTIES AND POWERS.
            (A)      The Authority shall have full authority and responsibility for the establishment, maintenance and regulation and operation of a biosolids truck or trucks. In carrying out such authority, it shall have all the powers and authority vested in the municipalities under the laws of the State of Minnesota relating to the establishment, operation and regulation of a biosolids disposal system. The Authority may contract with the East Mesaba Sanitary Disposal Authority to handle the administration of funds for the operation of the biosolids truck used by the Cities of Eveleth, Mountain Iron and Gilbert.

            (B)       Without limiting its general powers vested in it by law, the Authority shall have the following powers:

                        (1)       To acquire by purchase, lease, gift or otherwise property for and to establish, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, operate and regulate the operation of a biosolids truck or trucks;

                        (2)       To gather information on the problem of biosolids removal insofar as the members are concerned and on the best means of meeting said problem and to disseminate such information;

                        (3)       To employ qualified engineers or other experts to prepare and submit studies and reports on said problem and propose solutions thereof;

                        (4)       To employ legal counsel, administrative and clerical personnel as necessary;

                        (5)       To secure appraisals of real property;

                        (6)       To expend monies and incur liabilities for such purpose;

                        (7)       To define its procedure, including the appointment of committees of less than all the members;

                        (8)       To submit findings and recommendations to the member municipalities;

                        (9)       To award contracts for the performance of any of the authorized services of the Authority;

                        (10)     To adopt such rules and regulations for the operation of the biosolids disposal system as they shall, in their discretion, deem necessary and advisable and to establish a penalty for violation thereof.

(Prior Code, § 33.05)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.085 CONTRIBUTIONS TO CAPITAL AND OPERATION COST.
            Costs incurred in the establishment, operation and maintenance of said biosolids disposal system shall be divided among the participating municipalities based upon the number of loads of biosolids hauled from each community. For purposes of defraying the expense of the Authority for the first fiscal year following establishment, the participating municipalities shall pay to the Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority a predetermined fixed sum per capita. Such payment shall be made in quarterly installments. Title to any lands or equipment acquired by the Authority shall be taken in the name of the Authority in trust for the participating municipalities. Ownership of such purchases shall be divided among the participating municipalities in relation to their various populations.

(Prior Code, § 33.06)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.086 BUDGET.
            (A)      On or before July 1 of each year, the Authority shall prepare a budget for financing the operations of the Authority for the ensuing fiscal year. A copy of the budget shall, not later than July l, be furnished to the governing boards of the participating municipalities. Such budget shall include an estimation of all income and their sources, as well as an itemized budget of estimated expenditures. Final decision of the respective governing bodies as to requested contributions shall be reported to the Authority which shall adjust its budget, if necessary, so that its budget may at all times be balanced. Money not expended in the budget may be carried over to the following year.

            (B)       The Authority shall not have the power to levy taxes or borrow money and it shall not approve any claim or incur any obligation for expenditures unless there is unencumbered cash in the appropriate fund to the credit of the Authority with which to pay the same.

(Prior Code, § 33.07)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.087 FINANCES.
            All receipts of money shall be deposited in the bank or banks selected by the Authority or the bank or banks selected by the agent chosen by the Authority to administer the funds of the Authority. No disbursement shall be made except by check in such manner as the Authority may determine, nor unless a verified claim for services and commodities actually rendered or delivered be submitted to and approved for payment by the Authority or the agent selected by the Authority. An audit of the funds of the Authority shall be made annually. Such audits may be made independently or in conjunction of any audit that may be made of the funds of any of the participating municipalities. An employee of the Authority who handles cash in the process of collection shall, if the Authority so requires, furnish a surety bond in such amount as may be determined by the Authority. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of the Authority funds.

(Prior Code, § 33.08)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.088 REPORTS.
            The Authority, as soon as possible, at the end of each fiscal year, shall prepare and present to each municipal board a comprehensive report of its activities and finances. The Authority shall also prepare and present federal and state officials with such reports as may be required by law, regulation or contract.

(Prior Code, § 33.09)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.089 TERMINATION.
            This chapter, when adopted by the various participating municipalities, shall constitute a contract between the municipalities. It shall be in full force and effect for one year thereafter, provided, however, that the provisions thereof, except as to the duration of the contract, may be amended by mutual agreement of the municipalities. Thereafter it shall be continued in force from year to year. By written notice mailed or delivered to the Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority, at any time following the initial one-year period, any member may discontinue membership or extend membership in the Authority at the end of the fiscal year in which such notice is given. If upon termination of one or more of the municipalities, the expenses of and liabilities of the Authority exceed the sum of the amounts paid by such members, the member so terminating their membership shall pay to the Authority their pro-rate thereof. This agreement shall continue from year to year so long as at least two members continue to participate. If one of the last two remaining municipalities desires to terminate the Authority, it shall notify the other municipality to that effect and the Authority shall proceed immediately to dispose of all of the property which it may have acquired. Upon such termination, if the expenses and liabilities of the association exceed the proceeds received from such sale, the loss shall be divided between these two municipalities on the same basis as the contributions to capital and operation cost stated in § 31.085. If upon termination the assets of the Authority exceed its liabilities, the net proceeds from the sale thereof shall be divided between these two municipalities on the same basis as the contributions to capital and operation cost stated in § 31.085.

(Prior Code, § 33.10)  (Ord. 02-97, passed 12-15-1997)

BIOSOLIDS DISPOSAL SITE AUTHORITY

31.100 AUTHORITY CREATED.
            There is created, pursuant to provisions of M.S. § 471.58, as it may be amended from time to time, and Acts amendatory thereof, a joint sanitary disposal authority to be known as the Biosolids Disposal Site Authority. The Authority shall be composed of one member representing each of the participating municipalities, which member shall be appointed by a majority vote of the governing body. The members of the Authority shall serve without compensation except for the Secretary-Treasurer.

(Prior Code, § 39.01)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.101 TERM OF OFFICE.
            (A)      The members of the first Authority shall be appointed as follows:

                        (1)       One member shall be appointed by the governing body of the City of Mountain Iron for a term expiring on the first Monday in January, 1991;

                        (2)       One member shall be appointed by the governing body of the City of Eveleth for a term expiring on the first Monday in January, 1992;

                        (3)       One member shall be appointed by the governing body of the City of Gilbert for a term expiring on the first Monday in January, 1993;

                        (4)       One member shall be appointed by the governing body of the City of Virginia for a term expiring on the first Monday in January, 1994.

            (B)       Thereafter, each community wherein a vacancy exists shall appoint one member for a term of four years. All members shall serve until their successor are appointed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy, the municipality wherein such vacancy occurs shall appoint a replacement who shall serve for the balance of the term of the replaced member.

            (C)       Each municipality may appoint an alternate member who may attend all meetings of the Authority. He or she may participate in all discussions and may vote only in the absence of the regular member from his or her municipality.

            (D)      All members currently on the East Mesaba Sanitary Disposal Authority shall be members of the Biosolids Disposal Site Authority until the Council of the community appoints a new member.

(Prior Code, § 39.02)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.102 OFFICERS.
            The Joint Authority shall elect one of its members to be Chairperson of the Authority, one member to be Vice Chairperson and shall appoint a Secretary-Treasurer who may, but need not be, a member of the Authority. Each such appointee shall hold office for the term of one year and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.

(Prior Code, § 39.03)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.103 DUTIES AND POWERS.
            (A)      The Authority shall have full authority and responsibility for the establishment, maintenance and regulation of the Biosolids Disposal Site Authority. In carrying out such authority, it shall have all of the powers and authority vested in the municipalities under the laws of the State of Minnesota relating to the establishment, operation and regulation of a sanitary disposal system.

            (B)       Without limiting its general powers vested in it by law, it shall have the following powers:

                        (1)       To acquire, by purchase, lease, gift or otherwise property for and to establish, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, operate and regulate a biosolids site and to accomplish these purposes to apply for and receive federal and state grants;

                        (2)       To gather information on the problem of collection and disposal of biosolids insofar as the members are concerned and on the best means of meeting said problem and to disseminate such information;

                        (3)       To employ qualified engineers or other experts to prepare and submit studies and reports on said problem and proposed solutions thereof;

                        (4)       To employ legal counsel and administrative and clerical personnel as necessary;

                        (5)       To secure appraisals of real property;

                        (6)       To expend monies and incur liabilities for such purposes;

                        (7)       To define its procedure, including the appointment of committees of less than all the members;

                        (8)       To submit findings and recommendations to the member municipalities;

                        (9)       To award contracts upon proper bid for the performance of any of the authorized services of the Authority;

                        (10)     To adopt such rules and regulations for the operation of the biosolids disposal site as they shall, in their discretion, deem necessary and advisable and to establish a penalty for violation thereof;

                        (11)     To establish the procedures for new communities to joint the Authority.

(Prior Code, § 39.04)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.104 CONTRIBUTIONS TO CAPITAL AND OPERATION COST.
            Costs incurred in the establishment, operation and maintenance of said biosolids disposal site shall be divided among the participating municipalities on a per capita basis. The first fiscal year shall be financed by the transfer of funds from the East Mesaba Sanitary Disposal Authority. These are the unspent funds that were appropriated to the East Mesaba Sanitary Disposal Authority by the Cities of Eveleth, Gilbert, Mountain Iron and Virginia for the purpose of operating the biosolids disposal site. Title to any lands acquired by the Biosolids Authority shall be transferred to the name of the Authority in trust for the participating municipalities. Ownership of such purchases shall be divided among the participating municipalities in relation to their various populations.

(Prior Code, § 39.05)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.105 BUDGET.
            (A)      On or before June 1 of each year, the Authority shall prepare a budget for financing the operations of the Authority for the ensuing calendar year. A copy of the budget shall, not later than September 1, be furnished to the governing boards of the participating municipalities. Such budget shall include an estimation of all income and their sources, as well as an itemized budget of estimated expenditures. Final decision of the respective governing bodies, as to requested contributions, shall be reported to the Authority which shall adjust its budget, if necessary, so that its budget may at all times be balanced. Money not expended in the budget may be carried over to the following year.

            (B)       The Authority shall not have the power to levy taxes or borrow money and it shall not approve any claim or incur any obligation for expenditures unless there is unencumbered cash in the appropriate fund to credit the Authority with which to pay the same.

(Prior Code, § 39.06)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.106 FINANCES.
            All receipts of money shall be deposited in the bank or banks selected by the Authority and credited to the account of the Biosolids Site Disposal Authority. No disbursement shall be made except by check in such manner as the authority may determine, nor unless a verified claim for services and commodities actually rendered or delivered be submitted to and approved for payment by the Authority and authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson and Secretary-Treasurer. An audit of the funds of the Authority shall be made annually. Such audits may be made independently or in conjunction with any audit which may be made of the funds of any of the participating municipalities. An employee of the Authority who handles cash in the process of collection shall, if the Authority so requires, furnish a surety bond in such amount as may be determined by the Authority. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of Authority funds.

(Prior Code, § 39.07)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.107 REPORTS.
            The Authority, as soon as possible, at the end of each calendar year, shall prepare and present to each municipal council a comprehensive report of its activities and finances. The Authority shall also prepare and present federal and state officials with such reports as may be required by law, regulation or contract.

(Prior Code, § 39.08)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.108 TERMINATION.
            This subchapter, when adopted by the City Council of the City of Mountain Iron, and when concurrent ordinances are adopted by other participating municipalities, shall constitute a contract between the municipalities. It shall be in full force and effect for five years thereafter; provided, however, that the provisions thereof, except as to the duration of the contract, may be amended by mutual agreement of said municipalities. Thereafter, it shall continue in force from year to year. By written notice mailed or delivered to the Secretary-Treasurer of the Authority, at any time following the initial five-year period, any member may discontinue membership in the association at the end of the year in which such notice is given. If upon such termination by one or more of the municipalities, the expenses of and liabilities of the Authority exceed the sum of the amounts paid by such members, the member so terminating their membership shall pay to the Authority their pro-rata share thereof. This agreement shall continue from year to year so long as at least two members continue to participate. If one of the last two remaining municipalities desires to terminate the Authority, it shall notify the other municipality to that effect and the Authority shall proceed immediately to dispose of all the property which it may have acquired. Upon such termination, if the expenses and liabilities of the Association exceed the proceeds received from such sale, the last two remaining municipalities shall share the deficit on a per capita basis. If upon such termination the assets of the Association exceed its liabilities, the net proceeds from the sale thereof shall be divided between these two municipalities on the same per capita basis. Anyone who ceases to participate in the Authority shall be responsible for their share of closure costs.

(Prior Code, § 39.09)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

31.109 ESTABLISHMENT.
            Biosolids Disposal Site Authority has been established pursuant to the following ordinances:

            (A)      City of Virginia – Ordinance 103A;

            (B)       City of Eveleth – Ordinance 196;

            (C)       City of Gilbert – Ordinance 1-90;

            (D)      City of Mountain Iron – Ordinance 39.

(Prior Code, § 39.11)  (Ord. 03-97, passed 12-15-1997)

PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD

31.120 BOARD ESTABLISHED.
            There is established in the City a Parks and Recreation Board.

(Prior Code, § 40.01)

31.121 MEMBERS.
            The Board shall consist of seven members, and each member shall be appointed for a term of three years.  When the Board is first created, the Council shall appoint two members for the term of one year, two for the term of two years and three for the term of three years. Each year thereafter, the Council shall appoint members of the Board, whose term of office shall be for three years.  Members of the Board shall hold their offices until their successors are appointed.  In case of a vacancy, such vacancy shall be fined by appointment for the unexpired term by the Council.

(Prior Code, § 40.02)

31.122 OFFICERS; QUORUM.
            A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.  The Board shall elect necessary officers at the beginning of each fiscal year and shall adopt rules and regulations as it may deem proper for the conduct of its work and functions.  (Prior Code, § 40.03)

31.123 POWERS.
            The Board shall have the following powers and duties:

            (A)      To confer with and advise the Council on all matters concerning Parkas and Recreation;

31.124 ANNUAL REPORT.
            (A)      The Recreation Board shall annually prepare and submit a report in writing to the Council. 

            (B)       Such report shall be submitted on or before October 1 of each year and such report shall contain:

                        (1)       A description of the program activities for the past year;

                        (2)       A plan for a comprehensive program of public recreation activities for the ensuing year together with an estimate of cost for the operation of such program.  Such estimate of cost for the operation of such program shall also include an estimate of the amount and purpose of expenditures contemplated.

(Prior Code, § 40.05)

Chapter Number 32, Elections
CHAPTER 32:  ELECTIONS

32.01 VOTING.
            (A)      M.S. Chapter 201, known as the Registration of Voters Act, as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted as the registration of voters section of the City. Every provision contained in such chapter is adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as fully as if set forth herein. 

(Prior Code, § 7.01)

            (B)       No person shall be permitted to vote at any election in the City unless he or she is registered as provided in M.S. Chapter 201, as it may be amended from time to time. 

(Prior Code, § 7.02)

32.02 ABSENTEE BALLOT BOARD
(A)      Absentee Ballot Board Established.  There is hereby established an Absentee Ballot Board pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Section 203B.121 for the purpose of processing absentee ballots cast by Mountain Iron Citizens.  The Board shall consist of a sufficient number of election judges appointed as provided in Minnesota Statutes Sections 204B.19 to 204B.22. (01-12, October 1, 2012)

(B)       Duties of the Absentee Ballot Board.  The Absentee Ballot Board Election Judges shall meet and take receipt of all returned absentee ballot envelopes from the City Clerk at the Mountain Iron City Hall.  Two or more election judges shall examine and process said absentee ballots pursuant to Minnesota Statutes Chapter 203B. (01-12, October 1, 2012)

Chapter Number 33, Emergency Management
CHAPTER 33:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

Section

            33.01   Policy and purpose

            33.02   Definitions

            33.03   Establishment of an Emergency Management Agency

            33.04   Department not to participate in certain activities

            33.05   Powers and duties of Director

            33.06   Control center

            33.07   Coordination of goods and services

            33.08   Local emergencies

            33.09   Emergency regulations

            33.10   Emergency powers of City

            33.11   Termination of emergency regulations

            33.12   Director’s responsibilities during emergencies

            33.13   Cooperation with federal and state authority

            33.14   Emergency management a governmental function

            33.98   Violations

33.01 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
            To insure that the City is prepared for such disasters as enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or from fire, flood, earthquake, drought, tornado, storm or other natural causes and to generally provide for the common defense and the protection of the public welfare, peace, health and safety, the City Council establishes the Department of Emergency Management for the following general purposes:

            (A)      To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during public emergencies;

            (B)       To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between the City and other political subdivisions of the state and of other states in carrying out emergency services;

            (C)       To coordinate the emergency services with comparable functions of the federal government, of other states and localities and private agencies of every type to the end that effective preparations may be made and the maximum use may be made of the work force of the City, state and nation.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.02 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. An organization created by this chapter.

            DISASTER. A situation that creates an immediate and serious impairment to the health and safety of any person or a situation that has resulted or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property and for which traditional sources of relief and assistance within the effected area are unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.

            EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action to prevent a disaster from developing or occurring.

            EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions.

            IMMINENCE. Clear and present danger to life and/or property rights as a result of an emergency or disaster.

            ORGANIZATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Equipment and supplies essential for emergency management in excess of equipment and supplies provided for normal operation of the state or a political subdivision to the acquisition of which the federal government will contribute.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF AN EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY.
            There is created a Department of Emergency Management that shall be under the supervision and control of the Director of Emergency Management. The Mayor shall appoint the Director for an indefinite term and the Director may be removed by the Mayor at any time with or without cause. The Director may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the City Council and shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of duty. The Director shall have responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the Department of Emergency Management, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor. The Department of Emergency Management shall perform both civil defense functions and emergency management functions both within and without the City as may be required by the Minnesota Civil Defense Act of 1951, as amended; Pub. L. 920, 21st Congress, as amended; or by this chapter.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.04 DEPARTMENT NOT TO PARTICIPATE IN CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.
            The Emergency Management Department shall not participate in any form of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes, nor shall it be employed in any legitimate labor dispute.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
            (A)      The Director with the consent of the Mayor and/or the City Administrator shall represent the City on any federal, state, regional or local organization for emergency management.

            (B)       The Director shall perform the following duties and exercise the following powers.

                        (1)       The Director shall prepare an Emergency Management Plan for the delivery of emergency services for the City and shall present such plan to the City Council for its action. The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The plan shall be coordinated with such similar plans of the federal government and the State of Minnesota.

                        (2)       The Director shall develop mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions for reciprocal emergency services and shall present such agreements to the Council for its action. Such arrangements shall be consistent with the duties of the Emergency Management Department to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of such mutual aid arrangements.

                        (3)       The Director may recommend the procurement of supplies and equipment for the preparation of training programs and public information programs and shall conduct practice, drills and other training exercises that may be necessary to fully train and equip emergency management personnel for their duties in time of need.

                        (4)       The Director may survey the training and education of the work force of the City, the industries and resources and facilities of the City in order to ascertain their capability to function in time of emergency.

                        (5)       The Director shall cooperate with federal, state and local officials in matters pertaining to the training, equipping and functioning of efforts and emergency of every kind.

                        (6)       The Director may prepare a budget for the acquisition of organizational equipment which meets standards set by the State of Minnesota and, subject to the approval of the City Council, take the necessary administrative steps to procure such equipment and any state, federal or local financial assistance available in connection therewith.

                        (7)       The Director shall formulate and to the extent required shall execute plans for the control of traffic in time of or for the delivery of emergency services.

                        (8)       The Director shall report to the City Council annually and as otherwise required by the Council on the operation of the Emergency Management Department.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.06 CONTROL CENTER.
            Consistent with the Emergency Management Plan the Director shall provide and equip in the City a control center and, if necessary, an auxiliary control center to be used during an emergency as headquarters for the direction and coordination of emergency services. The Director shall arrange for installation at the control center of communication systems with heads of emergency services, the station and operating units of municipal services and other agencies concerned with emergency services and for communications with other communities and control centers within the surrounding area and with the federal and state agencies concerned.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.07 COORDINATION OF GOODS AND SERVICES.
            In carrying out the duties hereunder, the Director shall use the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices, personnel and agencies of the City to the maximum extent practicable and all City employees are directed to cooperate with the Director in carrying out emergency management functions.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.08 LOCAL EMERGENCIES.
            The Mayor upon making a finding that a clear and present danger to life and/or property exists as a result of an emergency or disaster or the imminent approach thereof may declare a local emergency. When necessitated by the declaration of a local emergency, the Mayor may, by proclamation, promulgate regulations which are consistent with applicable federal and state laws or regulations relating to protection against hostile attack, the sounding or publication of appropriate warnings, the conduct of persons and the use of private property during emergencies, the safeguarding of essential public services and all other matters necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare during and in the aftermath of such local emergency.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.09 EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
            Every proclamation of emergency regulations shall be in writing and signed by the Mayor, shall be dated and shall describe the nature of the local emergency to which it pertains. Any ordinance, rule or regulation inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Mayor shall be suspended during the period of time and to the extent that such conflict exists. A copy thereof shall be kept on file by the City Administrator and shall be available for public inspection at all reasonable times. A copy of the regulations shall be posted at the City Hall or such other headquarters location as may be designated. All changes in such regulations shall be promulgated in like manner.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.10 EMERGENCY POWERS OF CITY.
            During an emergency the City is empowered through its Council to enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such disaster by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. The City may exercise such powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, incurring obligations, employment of temporary workers, rental of equipment, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.11 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.
            Emergency regulations promulgated by the Mayor may be terminated by the City Council at any time. If not sooner terminated, each such regulation shall expire at the end of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the local emergency, whichever occurs first.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.12 DIRECTOR’S RESPONSIBILITIES DURING EMERGENCIES.
            (A)      The Director shall, in cooperation with existing City departments, organize, recruit and train City personnel and local volunteers to carry out emergency management plans of the City and the state.  Volunteers shall be assigned to and shall be under the command of the Director. The Director may dismiss with or without cause any volunteer at any time and require said volunteer to surrender any equipment, identification or other semblance of authority furnished by the City.

            (B)       The Director shall carry out all orders, rules and regulations issued by the Governor or by the Mayor pertaining to emergency management.

            (C)       The Director shall provide and equip emergency headquarters, hospitals, conveyances and other facilities as are necessary to carry out the Emergency Management Plan.

            (D)      The Director shall direct and control the general operations of all emergency services in conformity with state and local plans, regulations and instructions; emergency management volunteers shall be called into service only in case of an emergency for which regularly employed municipal personnel are inadequate or for the necessary training and preparation for such emergencies. All volunteers shall serve without compensation.

            (E)       Each emergency management volunteer shall be provided with a means of identification as may be required by the Director, in keeping with the form and style of such identification required by the state or local government. No person other than an authorized volunteer shall use such identification or otherwise impersonate an authorized volunteer. No volunteer shall exercise authority over any person or property without identification and authorization.

            (F)       No emergency management volunteer shall carry any firearm while on duty except on written order of the Director.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.13 COOPERATION WITH FEDERAL AND STATE AUTHORITY.
            Every officer and agency of the City shall cooperate with the federal and state authority and with authorized agencies engaged in emergency management to the fullest extent possible consistent with the performance of their duties. The provisions of this chapter and of all regulations made hereunder shall be subject to all applicable and controlling provisions of federal and state laws and regulations and orders issued hereunder and shall be deemed to be suspended and inoperative so far as they may be in conflict therewith.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.14 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
            All functions authorized and carried out hereunder and all other activities relating to emergency management are declared to be governmental functions. Except in cases of willful conduct, the City, its officers, agents and employees while engaged in authorized emergency management activities shall not be liable for an injury or death of any person or damage to property as a result of such activity. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or she would otherwise be entitled under this chapter or under the worker’s compensation law, any pension law, any loan or benefit or compensation resulting from an Act of Congress, State of Minnesota or other governmental agency.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)

33.98 VIOLATIONS.
            Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or a regulation adopted hereunder relating to acts, omissions or conduct other than official acts of City officers, employees or volunteers is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Ord. 04-00, passed 12-18-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99

Chapter Number 34, Background Checks
CHAPTER 34:  BACKGROUND CHECKS

34.01 Applicants for City Employment
The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of employment background checks for the positions described in Section 34.02. (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

34.02 CRIMINAL HISTORY EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.
(A)      The Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history background investigation on all regular part-time or full-time employees of the City of Mountain Iron and other positions that work with children or vulnerable adults within the city, unless the city’s hiring authority concludes that a background investigation is not needed. (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

 (B)       In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen employment applicants, the Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.  Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee.  A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office to the hiring authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff involved in the hiring process.  (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

(C)       Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for employment on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.  If the City rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

(1)       The grounds and reasons for the denial.

(2)       The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.06.

(3)       The earliest date the applicant may reapply for employment.

(4)       That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.

34.03 Applicants for City Licenses
The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations that will allow law enforcement access to Minnesota’s Computerized Criminal History information for specified non-criminal purposes of licensing background checks. (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

34.04 CRIMINAL HISTORY LICENSE BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS
(A)      The Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office is hereby required, as the exclusive entity within the City, to do a criminal history background investigation on the applicants for the licenses granted under Chapters 112, 113, 114 and 115 of the Mountain Iron City Code. (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

(B)       In conducting the criminal history background investigation in order to screen license applicants, the Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office is authorized to access data maintained in the Minnesota Bureau of Criminal Apprehensions Computerized Criminal History information system in accordance with BCA policy.  Any data that is accessed and acquired shall be maintained at the Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office under the care and custody of the chief law enforcement official or his or her designee.  A summary of the results of the Computerized Criminal History data may be released by the Police Department to the licensing authority, including the City Council, the City Administrator, or other city staff involved the license approval process.  (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

(C)       Before the investigation is undertaken, the applicant must authorize the Saint Louis County Sheriff’s Office by written consent to undertake the investigation. The written consent must fully comply with the provisions of Minn. Stat. Chap. 13 regarding the collection, maintenance and use of the information. Except for the positions set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.09, the city will not reject an applicant for a license on the basis of the applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the license sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.  If the City rejects the applicant’s request on this basis, the City shall notify the applicant in writing of the following: (Ord 05-10, Passed 10-4-10)

(1)       The grounds and reasons for the denial.

(2)       The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set forth in Minnesota Statutes Section 364.06.

(3)       The earliest date the applicant may reapply for the license.

(4)      That all competent evidence of rehabilitation will be considered upon reapplication.

Chapter Number 35, Enforcing Administrative Offenses
CHAPTER 35: PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES

35.01 PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES.

Subd. 1.  Purpose. Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this Section are intended to provide the public and the City of Mountain Iron with an informal, cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of certain City Code provisions.  The procedures are intended to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with administrative offenses.  At any time prior to the payment of the administrative penalty as is provided for hereafter, the individual may withdraw from participation in the procedures, in which event the City may bring criminal charges in accordance with law.  Likewise, the City of Mountain Iron at its discretion may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may bring criminal charges in the first instance.  In the event a party participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the monetary penalty, which may be imposed, the City of Mountain Iron will seek to collect the costs of the administrative offense procedure as part of a subsequent criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty of the criminal violation.

Subd. 2.  Administrative Offense Defined.  An administrative offense is a violation of a provision of the portions of the City Code presented in Exhibit “A” and is subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses and penalties as set forth in Subdivision 9 of this Section.

Subd. 3.  Any officer of the Mountain Iron Sheriff’s Department or authorized City employee shall, upon determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator.  Said notice shall set forth the nature, date and time of the violation, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the amount of the scheduled penalty.

Subd. 4.  Payment.  Once such notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven (7) days of the time of issuance of the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the violation, or may request a hearing in writing, as is provided for hereafter.  The payment shall be deemed to be an admission of the violation.

Subd. 5.  Hearing.  Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this Section may, within seven (7) days of the time of issuance of the notice, request a hearing by a hearing officer who shall forthwith conduct an informal hearing to determine if a violation has occurred.  The hearing officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the penalty.  If the violation is sustained by the hearing officer, the violator shall pay the penalty within seven (7) days.

Subd. 6.  Hearing Officer.  A City of Mountain Iron employee or employees designated in writing by the Mayor and approved by the Mountain Iron City Council shall be designated individually or collectively as hearing officer.  The hearing officer shall serve until such point the Mayor and City Council appoint a new hearing officer.  The hearing officer is authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating to administrative offenses provided for in this Section.

Subd. 7.  Failure to Pay.  In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable statutes.  If a penalty is paid and an individual is found not to have committed the administrative offense by the hearing officer, no such charge may be brought by the City of Mountain Iron for the same violation.

Subd. 8.  Disposition of Penalties.  All penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be paid to the City of Mountain Iron and deposited in the City’s General Fund.

Subd. 9.  Offenses and Penalties.  Offenses which may be charged as administrative offenses and penalties for such offenses may be established by Resolution of the City Council from time to time.  Copies of such Resolution shall be maintained in the office of the City Administrator.

Subd. 10.  Subsequent Offenses.  In the event a party is charged with a subsequent administrative offense within a twelve (12) month period of paying an administrative penalty for the same or substantially similar offense, the subsequent administrative penalty shall be increased by twenty-five percent (25%) above the initial administrative penalty, except as otherwise provided by Resolution.

EXHIBIT “A”

City of Mountain Iron Administrative Offenses

Tobacco Violations                 City Code, Chapter 12

Nuisance Violations                City Code, Chapter 28

Nuisance Violations                City Code, Chapter 52

Land Use Violations                City Code, Chapter 22

Garbage Violations                  City Code, Chapter 57

Chapter Number 50, Garbage Disposal
CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE DISPOSAL

Section

                      50.01     Definitions

                      50.02     Deposit of refuse restricted

                      50.03     Storage of garbage, other refuse and recyclables

                      50.04     Collection of garbage, other refuse and recyclables

                      50.05     Disposal of garbage and other refuse

                      50.06     Garbage charges

                      50.99     Penalty

50.01 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            GARBAGE.  All putrescible wastes, including animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding human excreta, sewage and other water carried wastes.

            OTHER REFUSE.  Ashes, crockery, paper boxes, rags, old clothing and all similar non-putrescible wastes; but does not include earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster or other similar substances that may accumulate as a result of construction operations.

            RECYCLABLES.  Newspapers, glass, aluminum and steel/bi-metal beverage cans, #1 and #2 plastic and corrugated cardboard.

(Ord. 01-00, passed 5-1-2000)

50.02 DEPOSIT OF REFUSE RESTRICTED.
            (A)      No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, any garbage, other refuse or recyclables upon any street, alley, vacant lot or upon any ground appurtenant to any building or other city property, except in the manner provided by this chapter.  No persons, excepting duly authorized city collectors, shall transport garbage, other refuse or recyclables over any street or alley in the city or disturb, collect, or in any manner interfere with garbage, other refuse or recyclables placed in city authorized containers.

            (B)       Unauthorized deposit of solid waste.  No person shall:

                        (1)       Deposit solid waste, recyclable materials, demolition debris or yard waste upon any public or private highway, street, road or right-of-way; deposit solid waste, recyclable materials, demolition debris or yard waste upon or within any river, creek, stream, lake, waterway or other body of water of any kind or character; or deposit solid waste, recyclable materials, demolition debris or yard waste on the property of another; or

                        (2)       Cause, maintain or permit the accumulation of solid waste which creates an unsanitary condition or permits or encourages the accumulation or breeding of rats, insects or other vermin; or

                        (3)       Deposit solid waste, recyclable materials, demolition debris or yard waste within the city in any manner that violates the provision of this chapter.

(Ord. 01-00, passed 5-1-2000)

50.03 STORAGE OF GARBAGE, OTHER REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES.
            Except as otherwise provided in this section, all garbage, other refuse and recyclables shall be placed and kept in those containers authorized or provided by the city, which shall be the only kind and type permitted for keeping, storage and holding of garbage, other refuse and recyclables.  All garbage, other refuse and recyclables shall be drained of liquid so far as practical.   The city supplied containers shall be placed in those portions of the streets or alleyways, as the city may deem necessary and proper or upon private property pursuant to the agreement with the property owner.  Recyclables shall be stacked in an accessible location on the premises for pickup according to a schedule established by the City Council or disposed of at a location designated by the city.  The city’s policy for the provision, maintenance and replacement of authorized garbage containers shall be as follows:

            (A)      The city shall provide the only authorized garbage containers to be used by its residents.

            (B)       The city shall provide the first container, at city expense, to all of its residents at such time as the owner/occupant of the property takes up residence.

            (C)       The city shall make minor repairs in regards to the lids, handles and wheels of the containers at city expense as may be necessary.

            (D)      The city shall replace containers damaged beyond repair while in the possession of the property owner/occupant, at the property owner’s/occupant’s expense.

           (E)       The cost of the replacement can will be added to the resident’s monthly fees and be subject to normal penalties and interest charges for non-payment.

(Ord. 01-00, passed 5-1-2000)

50.04 COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, OTHER REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES.
            (A)      The city shall provide for a method of collection of all garbage, other refuse and recyclables from the premises within the city.  Collections for garbage and other refuse shall be made at least one time each week from restaurants, hotels, and other commercial establishments, except those which in the judgment of the County Health Department would not create a health menace or other nuisance if less frequent collections were provided.  Collections for garbage and other refuse shall be made from all occupied residential premises at least once each week.  The city shall initially furnish authorized containers and shall replace said containers as may be necessary.  However, the City Council may, by resolution, provide rules and regulations wherein the cost to replace such containers shall be paid by the owner/occupant of the residence, business or other establishment requiring the replacement. Such cost, if imposed upon the owner/occupant, shall be added to the monthly charges.

            (B)       All garbage, other refuse and recyclables shall be transported on the streets or alleys in the city in vehicles with leak-proof boxes of easily cleanable construction and completely covered with metal or heavy canvas.  The vehicle shall be so operated that the contents shall not spill or drip upon streets, alleys or otherwise create a nuisance. 

            (C)       No garbage or other refuse shall be disposed of other than at the state approved landfill facility or through an incinerator installed or maintained by a permit from the County Health Department or through a garbage disposal or grinder.

            (D)      The City Refuse and Recycling Department shall not collect garbage, other refuse or recyclables from any premises within the city limits if such premises has been designated by the City Council as being impractical from which to make collections.

            (E)       Independent contractors who provide garbage service to businesses within the city are hereby required to be licensed by the city and/or St. Louis County.  The license fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.  The license granted an independent contractor shall be withheld or revoked by the City Council for a transfer of ownership, substantial change in management, or a diminishing quality of service to Mountain Iron businesses. 

(Ord. 01-00, passed 5-1-2000)

50.05 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND OTHER REFUSE.
            The City Refuse and Recycling Department shall provide for the disposal of garbage and other refuse collected in a sanitary manner, so as not to cause a public health nuisance, the attracting of rats and flies, or other conditions detrimental to public health or comfort. Garbage must be bagged before putting it in garbage canisters to prevent garbage from blowing around when the canister is dumped.

(Ord. 01-00, passed 5-1-2000)

50.06 GARBAGE CHARGES.
            (A)      There is hereby imposed upon each residence, business or other establishments in the city, a monthly garbage charge in accordance with the schedule, established from time to time by resolution of the City Council, and kept in a book of rate schedules in the office of the City Administrator.

            (B)       Charges shall be billed monthly to the owner of the premises on the fourteenth of each month, for the preceding month and shall be paid to the City of Mountain Iron on or before the fifth day of the month following the billing date.  When any charges remain unpaid after the due date, a penalty of 10% of the current bill shall be added to the delinquent amount due, for each month the unpaid balance remains.  The city by resolution from time to time shall establish a fee to be imposed by the city for return of a customer’s refuse canister when such canister has been removed by the city because of prior delinquent sanitation bills. The customer shall be informed of the additional fee at the time when the notice is given that the canister will be removed unless the delinquent bill is paid.  If a customer’s container is picked up for delinquent sanitation bills, the customer will continue to be charged the monthly city garbage fee and the monthly county service fee.

            (C)       Charges in default of payment as of September 1 of each year may be certified by the City Council to the County Auditor and shall be collected and remitted to the city in the same manner as assessments for local improvements.  Such assessment will include the penalties provided herein.  M.S. Chapter 443, as it may be amended from time to time, titled “Rubbish Removal” as amended is hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as fully as it sets out at length herein and all amendments are hereby adopted.

            (D)      In addition to securing the approval of the County Health Department as herein provided, no person shall hereafter install an incinerator without first securing permission of the City Council, which permission may be withheld if in the opinion of the City Council, such incinerator would create an unhealthy, noxious or undesirable condition.  At the time of the granting of such permission, the City Council shall by resolution establish a charge for each incinerator and shall after the passage of this chapter keep such rates in a book of rate schedules in the office of the City Administrator.

            (E)       It is the intent of this ordinance that all garbage and refuse hauling within the city be done by the city for all residents of Mountain Iron and for all commercial and industrial properties except where special circumstances warrant otherwise in the best interest of the city.  The City Council may, by resolution, permit owners or occupants of commercial or industrial property to haul and dispose of their own garbage and other refuse, for which a license fee, set by resolution of the City Council, will be charged; this charge being payable in advance and upon payment, a license will be issued to the applicant.  However, if a business so authorized to dispose of its own garbage and other refuse shall fail to remove its garbage and other refuse so as to maintain its premises in compliance with the requirements of the County Health Department, its license and authorization to so remove garbage and other refuse shall cease, and the city may then haul and dispose of such garbage and other refuse and make appropriate charges.

            (F)       Prohibited disposal.   No person shall place or cause to be placed any rubbish, garbage, other refuse, construction materials, or anything they intend to dispose of or abandon within or next to a garbage can or dumpster or anywhere else unless they own or lease the receptacle, or have the permission of the property owner or tenant.  This does not prohibit the placement of recyclables within the approved recycling center.

(Ord. 01-00, passed 5-1-2000)

50.99 PENALTY.
            Any person who fails to comply with, or violates, any of the provisions of this chapter may be charged with a violation thereof and, upon conviction, may be sentenced to payment of a fine not to exceed $700 and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days.  A separate offense shall occur for each day on which a violation occurs or continues.

(Ord. 01-00, passed 5-1-2000)

Chapter Number 51, Water Service
CHAPTER 51:  WATER SERVICE

Section

Water and Light Department

            51.01   Department established

            51.02   Consent to regulations

            51.03   Repairs

            51.04   Application

            51.05   Expenses of connection

            51.06   Rates

            51.07   Powers

            51.08   Liability

Discharge of Surface Waters

            51.20   Sump pump required

            51.21   Discharge of surface waters prohibited

Hydrants

            51.30   Fire Hydrants

            51.32   Private Fire Hydrants

            51.34   Enforcement

WATER AND LIGHT DEPARTMENT

51.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
            There is established a City Water and Light Department.  The water, power and heating systems as they are now constituted or shall hereafter be enlarged or extended shall be operated and maintained under the provisions of this chapter subject to the authority of the City Council at any time to amend, alter, change or appeal the same.

(Prior Code, § 30.01)

51.02 CONSENT TO REGULATIONS.
            The City Council shall have control of all utilities that have been accepted by the city and all work done on the utility or to be done within the right-of-way of any street, highway, alley or other public lands to the end that a proper and sufficient system be maintained.

(Prior Code, § 30.02)

 51.03 REPAIRS.

            Every person applying for water, electrical or heat from the city systems and every owner of property for which application is made shall be deemed by such application to consent to all rules, regulations and rates contained in the resolutions or ordinances of the city and to all new rules, regulations or rates duly adopted.  All service, service devices and plumbing maintained by the consumer shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection by duly authorized representatives of the city. The owner shall be notified of any repairs found to be necessary by such representative and if the owner fails, neglects or refuses to make the proper repairs, then the Council may order the Director of Public Works to correct the situation at the owner’s expense.

(Prior Code, § 30.03)

51.04 APPLICATION.
            No person shall make any type of connection to the city water system, power system or heating system except upon making application therefor on a form provided by the city and receiving a permit issued by the city for such purpose. The application shall include an exact description of the property to be served, the uses for which the connection is requested and the size of service lines requested or to be used. The application shall be accompanied by a fee determined by resolution of the City Council for each service applied for. All connections shall be made under the supervision of the Director of Public Works or the City Engineer.

(Prior Code, § 30.04)

51.05 EXPENSES OF CONNECTION.
            The City Council may from time to time by resolution establish which phases of the connection to the city services for water, power or heat the landowner or the city is responsible for. The City Council may further determine whether the city or the landowner shall provide meters to read the amount of water, electricity or steam consumed on the premises.

(Prior Code, § 30.05)

51.06 RATES.
            The City Council may from time to time, by resolution, determine the rates to be charged the consumers of water, power and steam heat.  These rates shall be set forth in a rate schedule, a copy of which shall be kept in the office of the City Administrator and which shall be open to examination by the public during reasonable business hours.

(Prior Code, § 30.06)

51.07 POWERS.
            The Director of Pubic Works shall have the right to enter upon the premises for any purpose to carry out the intents of this section, and if he or she should find that any water line or drain connected with any main public water lines, sewer or ditch lines should become obstructive or broken if not fit for the purposes of drainage, then he or she shall notify such property owner and if the owner fails or neglects or refuses to make the proper repairs, then the Council may order the Director of Public Works to correct such situation and the Council shall assess the expenses thereof against the property owners.

(Prior Code, § 30.07)

51.08 LIABILITY.
            The owner, agent, occupant or other person having charge of the premises shall be liable for all costs and expenses in connecting from the main line to the property line, and the city shall limit its liability for the repair or maintenance of any city owned public utility to that part of said utility located within the right-of-way or any highway, street, alley or other public land.

(Prior Code, § 30.08)

DISCHARGE OF SURFACE WATERS

51.20 SUMP PUMP REQUIRED.
            (A)      Sump pump systems required. Sump pump systems shall be recommended in present and required in new residential, commercial and industrial buildings, except in situations of an on grade construction.

            (B)       Storm water discharge prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or user of any premises to direct into or allow any storm water, ground water, roof run-off, pond overflow, well water or water from residential, industrial, or commercial air conditioning systems to drain into the sanitary sewer system of the City.  No rainspout, or other form of surface drainage and no foundation drainage or sump pump shall be connected or any substance other than sanitary sewage discharged into any sanitary sewer except as provided herein.  It is unlawful for any person or residence to discharge any water from roof, surface, perimeter drain tile, footing tiles, swimming pools, hot tubs or other natural precipitation into the sanitary sewer or adjoining properties.

            (C)       Sump pump discharge. Dwellings, buildings and structures may use a permanently installed sump pump and discharge line to the outside to prevent the inflow infiltration of clear water into the sanitary sewer, except as provide herein. A permanent installation shall provide for year round discharge capability to the outside of the building, connected to a storm sewer, or discharges through the curb to the street. When required, the discharge line from the sump pump shall be of rigid construction without valving or quick connection for altering the path of the discharge.

           (D)      Seasonal Waivers. The Director of Public Works shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding requests for seasonal waivers from the applicability of the provisions of this Ordinance where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration or cause a safety problem. Application for waivers shall be addressed in writing to the Director of Public Works, City of Mountain Iron. The application should identify the property for which the waiver is being applied, the name of the property owner/applicant and describe in detail what characteristics of the subject property create an undue hardship. Within a reasonable time, the Director of Public Works shall make a decision on the matter and serve a copy of such order to the applicant by mail.  Upon approval of an application for a waiver, the property owner shall be allowed to temporarily pump into the sanitary sewer system between the dates of November 1 through April 1 provided the applicant agrees to pay a $25.00 per month surcharge.  The holder of a waiver shall request an authorized City Employee to certify that prior to April 15th of each subsequent year their discharge water connection has been removed from the sanitary sewer. Failure to provide such certification will place the waiver holder in violation of this ordinance.

(E)       Variance.  Any application for a variance will be addressed in writing to the Director of Public Works.  The application shall identify the property for which the variance is being applied, the name of the property owner/applicant and describe in detail what characteristics of the subject property create a problem.  The Director of Public Works will discuss and suggest a solution to the problem with the owner/applicant.  If the owner/applicant is not satisfied, the application along with the Directors of Public Works advice will forwarded for review to the Utility Advisory Board.  The Utility Advisory Board will recommend if a variance for non-compliance should be granted and the amount of sewer surcharge that will apply.  Then, the application for the variance, along with the Utility Advisory Board’s recommendation will be forwarded to the City Council for a final decision.

            (F)       Draintile system. A draintile, sump basket, pump, electrical receptacle and pipe connection to the outside shall be recommended for any existing present residential buildings and required for new residential buildings within the City.  The Building Official may determine the need for such installation when slab on grade construction occurs.  The system shall be installed as follows:

                        (1)       The building shall have a draintile placed around the perimeter of the foundation connected to a sump pit.  The sump pit shall be located at least ten (10) feet away from any inside floor drain on all new construction.

                        (2)       When required a discharge pipe shall be installed to the outside wall of the building with recommended rigid pipe (plastic, copper, galvanized or black pipe).

                        (3)       When required the sump pump electrical supply shall be installed according to the National Electrical Code.

                        (4)       When the construction consists of hollow masonry units, weep hoses shall be inserted into every core of each block of the first course and placed into the gravel filled trench in such a manner to protect the hoses from blockage when the concrete floor is poured.

            (G)      Alternate system. The provision of this section is not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this Section, provided any alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the Building Official.  The building official may approve any such alternate, provided that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this Section and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Section.  The Building Official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use.  The details of any action granting approval of an alternate method shall be recorded and entered in the files of the Department of the Building Official.

            (H)      Existing installations. When a drain tile system is to be installed in an existing structure that had no system of surface water drainage when first constructed, the system shall be installed the same as for new construction.

(Ord. 01-03, passed 4-7-2003)

51.21 DISCHARGE OF SURFACE WATERS PROHIBITED.
            (A)      No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, groundwater, roof run-off, yard drainage, yard fountain, pond overflow or any substance other than sanitary sewage into the sanitary collection system.

            (B)       Any person, firm or corporation having a roof, sump pump, swimming pool discharge, cistern overflow pipe or any surface drain now connected and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer system shall disconnect and/or remove same prior to December 31, 2004.  Any disconnects or openings in the sanitary sewer shall be sealed or repaired in an effective, workman-like manner.

            (C)       All required sump pumps shall have a discharge system installed to the outside wall of the building.  The pipe attachment may be a permanent fitting such as PVC pipe with glued fittings.  The discharge shall extend at least three (3) feet outside of the foundation wall.

            (D)      Every person owning improved real estate that discharges into the City’s sanitary sewer system shall allow the City of Mountain Iron employee(s) to inspect the buildings to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary sewer system.  Any person refusing to allow their property to be inspected shall immediately become subject to the surcharge hereinafter provided for.  Any property found to violate this Section shall make the necessary changes to comply with this Section and such changes shall be verified by City of Mountain Iron employee(s).

            (E)       A surcharge of $25.00 dollars per month is hereby imposed and shall be added to every sewer billing mailed on and after December 31, 2004, to property owners who are not in compliance with this Section.  The surcharge shall be added every month, until the property is in compliance.  The imposition of such surcharge shall in no way limit the right of the City of Mountain Iron to seek an injunction in District Court ordering the property owner to discontinue the non-conforming connection to the sanitary sewer system or from pursuing any other legal remedies available.

            (F)       Upon verified compliance with this Section, the City reserves the right to inspect such property at least yearly to verify compliance herewith.

 (Ord. 01-03, passed 4-7-2003)

HYDRANTS

Ordinance Number 01-18, Adopted Feb 5, 2018

51.30  FIRE HYDRANTS.

All publicly owned hydrants shall remain visible and accessible from the roadway for maintenance and emergency use. All sides, including top, shall have a minimum three foot clear zone. No person other than authorized City employees shall operate fire hydrants or interfere in any way with the water system without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Public Works Director as follows:

(A)      Permit: Permit to use a fire hydrant shall be issued for each individual job or contract and for a minimum of 30 days and for such additional 30 day periods as the Public Works Director shall determine. The permit shall state the location of the hydrant and shall be for the use of that hydrant and none other.

(B)       Deposit: The user shall make an advance cash deposit set by City Council resolution to guarantee payment for water used and to cover breakage and damage to hydrant, which shall be refunded upon expiration of the permit, less applicable charges for use.

(C)       Rental Charge: The user shall pay a rental charge set by City Council resolution.

(D)      Hydrant Rentals: There shall be a rental fee for fire hydrants, set by City Council resolution, payable by each owner (including the City) upon whose property such hydrant is situated.

(E)       Temporary Connection to Fire Hydrants: An owner of a private water system may make a temporary aboveground connection to a fire hydrant, subject to the time periods, conditions and payment as specified in subsection C of this Section. In addition, the method of connection to the private system shall conform to all existing requirements of the City Code and the type of meter used shall meet the approval of the Public Works Director.

51.32  PRIVATELY OWNED HYDRANTS.

(A)      Section 508 of the Minnesota State Fire Code requires inspection, testing and maintenance of fire protection water supplies which include water lines and fire hydrant systems. Fire hydrant systems shall be subject to periodic tests, maintained in an operative condition at all times and shall be repaired where defective. Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing shall comply with approved standards. Section 101 of the Minnesota State Fire Code authorizes the city to adopt rules to implement the fire code. The City considers the private hydrants part of the municipal waterworks system. It is in the public interest that private hydrants be inspected and tested by qualified personnel and repaired and maintained in good working order to protect life and property.

(B)       Fire Protection Inspections shall be conducted annually on all private hydrants directly or indirectly connected to the municipal water system. This inspection shall include testing of the operation and flow of the hydrants. The owner of the hydrant may use a City approved plumber that is licensed in the state of Minnesota to perform the inspection or elect to have the City perform the inspection for a fee.

(C)       If the property owner elects to have the City complete the inspection a hydrant inspection fee shall be charged for each hydrant inspected by the City or City’s agent and the fee shall be billed once annually to the owner of the private hydrant as part of the water bill. The city council must establish the rates to be charged for a hydrant inspection to the customer annually within the fee schedule.

(D)      In the event the inspection indicates that repairs are required, the city shall notify the owner of the hydrant or water line, with a copy to the fire department, setting forth the repairs required. If repairs are not made within the time period set forth by the Public Works Department in the notification, the necessary repairs shall be made by the city and the cost billed to the owner.

(E)       The property owner may sign a waiver and petition the city for the repairs. The city will contract for the repairs and assess the property in accordance with the city’s assessment policy.

(F)       If the property owner elects to hire their own City approved inspection company that is licensed in the state of Minnesota, they will be required to submit a completed City provided annual inspection form to the Public Works Department.

(G)      Action to Collect Charges: Any amount due for the above charges in excess of 90 days past due shall be certified to the County Auditor for collection with real estate taxes. This certification shall take place regardless of who requested the inspection services, whether it was the owner, tenant or other person. All applications for inspection services shall contain an explanation in clear language that unpaid bills will be collected in real estate taxes in the following year. The City shall also have the right to bring a civil action or other remedies to collect unpaid charges.

51.34  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY. 

Penalties shall be accordance with Section 10.99 of the Mountain Iron City Code.

Chapter Number 52, Sewer Service
CHAPTER 52:  SEWER SERVICE

Section

            Sewage Department

            52.01   Department established

            52.02   Consent to regulations

            52.03   Liability

            52.04   Rates

            52.05   Application for connection

            52.06   Inspection

            52.07   Drainage of water into sewer system prohibited

            52.08   Superintendent of Public Works

            Sewer Use

            52.20   Definitions

            52.21   Use of public sewers required

            52.22   Regulation of individual sewage treatment systems

            52.23   Building sewers and connections

            52.24   Discharge regulations

            52.25   Protection from damage

            52.26   Wastewater backups

            52.27   Wastewater service charges and industrial waste cost recovery

            52.28   General cost recovery

            52.29   Bills

            52.99   Penalty

SEWAGE DEPARTMENT

52.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
            There is established a City Sewage Department.  The sewer systems as they are now constituted or shall hereafter be enlarged or extended shall be operated and maintained under the provisions of this chapter subject to the authority of the City Council at any time to amend, alter, change or appeal the same.

(Prior Code, § 31.01)

52.02 CONSENT TO REGULATIONS.
            (A)      The City Council shall have control of all utilities that have been accepted by the city, and all work done on the utility or to be done within the right-of-way of any street, highway, alley or other public lands to the end that a proper and sufficient system may be maintained. 

(Prior Code, § 31.02)

            (B)       Every person applying for sewage service from the Sewage Department, and every owner of property for which such application has been made, shall be deemed by such application to consent to all the rules, regulations and rates contained in the resolutions or ordinances of the city and to all new rules, regulations or rates duly adopted.  All plumbing and service devices maintained by the consumer shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection by duly authorized representatives of the city.  The owner shall be notified of any repairs found to be necessary by such representatives and if the owner fails or neglects or refuses to meet said proper repairs then the Council may order the Superintendent of the Sewage Department to correct such situations at the owner’s expense. 

(Prior Code, § 31.03)

52.03 LIABILITY.
            (A)      The owner, agent, occupant or other person having charge of the premises shall be liable for all costs and expenses in connecting from the main sewage line to the property line and that the city shall not be liable for the installation, repair or maintenance of any sewage piping or facility from the main line to the building or buildings which are using this service.  

(Prior Code, § 31.04)

            (B)       The owner, agent, occupant or other person having charge of the premises shall be liable for all costs and expenses in connecting from the main line to the property line, and the city shall limit its liability for the repair or maintenance of any city owned public utility to that part of the utility located within the right-of-way of any highway, street, alley or other public land.  

(Prior Code, § 31.10)

52.04 RATES.
            The rates, if any, for use of the city sewage system shall be determined by the City Council, by Resolution, and shall be exhibited in a rate schedule which should be kept in a rate book in the office of the City Administrator and shall be available for public inspection during reasonable business hours.

(Prior Code, § 31.05)

52.05 APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION.
           No person shall make any type connection to the sanitary sewer system or the storm sewer system except upon making an application therefore on a form provided by the city and receiving a permit issued by the city for such purpose.  The application shall include an exact description of the property to be served, the uses for which the connection is requested and the size of the lines requested to be used. There shall be a permit fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council, which shall accompany any application.  All connections shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works or the City Engineer.

(Prior Code, § 31.06)

52.06 INSPECTION.
            After such connection to the sanitary sewer system or the storm sewer system has been made, the Sewage Department shall be notified.  It shall be unlawful to cover any connection line until an inspection has been made and such connection in the work incident thereto has been approved by the city as a proper and suitable connection.

(Prior Code, § 31.07)

52.07 DRAINAGE OF WATER INTO SEWER SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
            It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or user to any premises to direct into or allow any storage water or surface water to drain into the sanitary sewer system of the city.

(Prior Code, § 31.08)  Penalty, see § 52.99

52.08 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
            The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the right to enter upon the premises for any purpose to carry out the intents of this chapter, and if he or she should find that any waterline, sewer or drain connected with any main public waterlines, sewer or ditch lines should become obstructive or broken or not fit for the purposes of drainage, then he or she shall notify such property owner and if the said owner fails or neglects or refuses to make the proper repairs, then the Council may order the Superintendent of Public Works to correct such situation and the Council shall assess the expenses thereof against the property owners.

(Prior Code, § 31.09)

SEWER USE

52.20 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            AUTHORITY. The City of Mountain Iron, Minnesota.

            BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20°C.

            BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer beginning three feet outside the building wall.

            BUILDING DRAIN, SANITARY.  A building drain which conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only.

            BUILDING DRAIN, STORM.  A building drain which conveys storm water or other clear water drainage but no wastewater. 

            BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house connection).

            BUILDING SEWER, SANITARY. An industry that: 

                        (1)       Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; 

                        (2)       Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste;

                        (3)       Has in its waste a toxic amount as defined in standards issued under Section 307 (a building sewer which conveys sanitary or industrial sewage only).

            BUILDING SEWER, STORM.  A building sewer which conveys stormwater or other clear water  drainage but no sanitary or industrial sewage.

            CLASSES OF USERS.  The division of wastewater treatment customers by waste characteristics and process or discharge similarities.

                        (1)       RESIDENTIAL. All dwelling units such as detached, semi-detached and row houses, mobile homes, garden and standard apartments and permanent multi-family dwellings.  (Transient lodging, considered commercial in nature, is not included.)

                        (2)       COMMERCIAL. Transient lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise for personal, household or industrial consumption and/or rendering services to others.

                        (3)       INSTITUTIONAL. Social, charitable, religious and educational activities such as schools, churches, hospitals, nursing homes, penal institutions and similar institutional users.

                        (4)       GOVERNMENTAL. Includes legislative, judicial, administrative and regulatory activities of federal, state and local governments, such as courthouses, police and fire stations, city halls and similar users.

                        (5)       INDUSTRIAL. Manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into other products.  These activities occur in establishments usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power driven machines and material handling equipment. 

            COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT.  Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.  The term substantial degree is not subject to precise definition, but generally contemplates removals in the order of 80% or greater.  Minor incidental removals in the order of 10% to 30% are not considered substantial.  Examples of the additional pollutants which may be considered compatible include:

                        (1)       Chemical oxygen demand;

                        (2)       Total organic carbon;

                        (3)       Phosphorus and phosphorus oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin  (except as prohibited where these materials would interfere with the operation of the treatment works).

            DEPRECIATION. An annual operating cost reflecting capital consumption and obsolescence (reduction of future service potential) of treatment works.

            EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.

            FECAL COLIFORM. Any of a number of organisms common to the intestinal tract of man and animals, whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator of pollution.

            FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility approved by the Authority.

            GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the commercial handling, storage and sale of produce.

            INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant that is not defined as a compatible pollutant, including non-biodegradable dissolved solids.

            INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY. Recovery from the industrial users of a treatment works of the grant amount allocable to treatment of waste from such users pursuant to Section 204 (b) of Pub. L. 92-500 and 40 CFR 35. 928(1) and (2).

            INFILTRATION. The water entering a sewer system, including building drains and sewers, from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls.  (Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from inflow.)

            INFILTRATION/INFLOW. Total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.

           INFLOW. The water discharge into a sewer system, including building drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers, catch basins, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.  (Inflow does not include and is distinguished from infiltration.)

            MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY.  An industry that:

                        (1)       Has a flow of greater than 50,000 gallons per day;

                        (2)       Has a flow which is greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or

                        (3)       Is designated as an industrial user by the municipality or the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency on the basis that the industry discharge has a reasonable potential to adversely impact the wastewater treatment facility or the quality of its effluent or residuals.

            NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.

            NORMAL DOMESTIC SEWAGE. As defined for the purposes of determining surcharge, shall mean wastewater or sewage having an average daily suspended solids concentration of not more than 250 mg/l, an average daily phosphorous concentration of 11 mg/l and containing not more than 2.5 mg/l of Hexane soluble matter (grease and oil).

            NPDES PERMIT.  A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System for discharge of wastewater to the navigable waters of the United States pursuant to Section 402 of Pub. L. 92-500.

            OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS.  All costs, direct and indirect (other than debt service), necessary to insure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing basis, conform to all related federal, state and local requirements and assure optimal long-term facility management.  (These costs include depreciation and replacement.)

            PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group discharging any wastewater to the Waste Water Treatment Facility.

            pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration.  The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.

            PRETREATMENT. The treatment of industrial sewage from privately owned industrial sources prior to introduction into a public treatment works.

            PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater the 3/8 inch in any dimension.

            PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer that is not owned by a public authority.

            PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any governmental agency having jurisdiction by law over construction and use of a wastewater collection or treatment facility.

            PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the public authority and will consist of the following types.

                        (1)       COLLECTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewater from individual point source discharges.

                        (2)       INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater from collector sewers to a treatment facility.

                        (3)       FORCE MAIN. A pipe in which wastewater is carried under pressure or forced flow.

                        (4)       PUMPING STATION. A station positioned in the public sewer service at which wastewater is pumped to a higher level.

                        (5)       STORM SEWER.  Separate from the SANITARY SEWER, it is used to convey clearwater flow to an appropriate discharge point.

            REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.

            SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and industrial wastes and to which storm, surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.

            SEWAGE. The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes for residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions (including polluted cooling water).  The two most common types of sewage are:

                        (1)       SANITARY SEWAGE. The combination of liquid and water-carried waste discharge from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities;

                        (2)       INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE. A combination of liquid and water-carried wastes, discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any trade or process carried on in that establishment (this shall include the wastes from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.)

            SHALL. Mandatory; MAY is permissive.

            SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRY. Any industry that will contribute greater than 10% of the design flow or design pollutant loading of the treatment works.

            SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hours concentration of flows during normal operations.

            STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater” prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

            STORM SEWER. A sewer for conveying water, groundwater or unpolluted water from any source and to which sanitary and/or industrial waste are not intentionally admitted.

            SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering.

            TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.

            TOXIC AMOUNT. Concentrations of any pollutant or combination of pollutants, which upon exposure to or assimilation into any organism will cause adverse effects, such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations and defined in standards issued pursuant to Section 207(a) of Pub. L. 92-500.

            UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.

            USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of a wastewater treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of such works pursuant to Section 204(b) of Pub. L. 92-500.

            VOLATILE ORGANIC MATTER. The material in the sewage solids transformed to gases or vapors when heated at 550°C for 15 to 20 minutes.

            WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, transport and treat domestic industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.

            WATER WORKS. All facilities for water supply, filtration plant, storage reservoir, water lines and services and booster stations for obtaining, treating and distributing potable water.

            WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.

(Prior Code, § 37.01)

52.21 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
            (A)      It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.

            (B)       It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter and the NPDES.

            (C)       Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.

            (D)      The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 90 days after date of an official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within ten feet of the property.

(Prior Code, § 37.02)  Penalty, see § 52.99

52.22 REGULATION OF INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS.
Private sewage collection and disposal systems shall not be permitted within those areas of the City served by the City sanitary sewer system. Individual or collective sewage systems may be permitted in those areas not served by the sanitary sewer system when a permit for such system has been approved by the St. Louis County Health Department.  (Prior Code, § 37.03)  (Am. Ord. 08-02, passed 11-4-2002, Am. Ord. 05-09, passed June 15, 2009, Am. Ord. 03-10, passed May 3, 2010)

52.23 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
            (A)      No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining written permit from the city or its authorized representative.

            (B)       All disposals by any person into the sewer system are unlawful except those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.

            (C)       There shall be two classes building sewer permits:  for residential and commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes.  In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City Council.  The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity.

            (D)      A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including series, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.

            (E)       All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 

            (F)       A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be construed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.

            (G)      Old buildings sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all requirements of this chapter.

            (H)      The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the rules and regulations of the City Council.  In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No.9 and the City Engineer’s Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Minnesota shall apply.

            (I)        Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor.  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in accordance with § 52.20 and discharged to the building sewer.

            (J)        No person(s) shall make connections of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface run-off or ground water to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.

            (K)      The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements and applicable rules and regulations of the City Council or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and City Engineer’s Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Minnesota.  All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.

            (L)       All excavating for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property distributed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.

(Prior Code, § 37.04)

52.24 DISCHARGE REGULATIONS.
            (A)      No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.

            (B)       Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the city to a storm sewer or natural outlet.

            (C)       No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

                        (1)       Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;

                        (2)       Liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other waste, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;

                        (3)       Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;

                        (4)       Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the fowl in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

            (D)      No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until the city has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:

                        (1)       Meets the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(B) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (citation) and applicable federal regulations;

                        (2)       Has been approved by the Agency in accordance with the conditions of any grant made to the city by the United States Environmental Protection Agency;

                        (3)       For the construction or any part of the sewer system or treatment works of the city.

            (E)       No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.  In forming the opinion as the acceptability of these wastes, the city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flow and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:

                        (1)       Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F  (0° and 65°C);

                        (2)       Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0° and 65°C);

                        (3)       Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.  The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city;

                        (4)       Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling waste or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;

                        (5)       Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for such materials;

                        (6)       Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which may be established by the city EPA as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;

                        (7)       Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;

                        (8)       Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;

                        (9)       Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg any time except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;

                        (10)     Materials which exert or cause:

                                    (a)       Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids  (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);

                                    (b)       Excessive discoloration  (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);

                                    (c)       Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works;

                                    (d)       Unusual volume of flow to concentrations of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein;

                        (11)     Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.

            (F)       (1)       If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substance or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 52.20 and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in Chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, Subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128, Thursday, November 8, 1973 and any amendments thereto and which in the judgment of the city may have deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving  waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:

                                    (a)       Reject the waste;

                                    (b)       Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;

                                    (c)       Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;

                                    (d)       Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of § 52.20.

                        (2)       If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.

            (G)      Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.

            (H)      Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.

            (I)        Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes.  Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.

            (J)        The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.  The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At such times as deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.

            (K)      All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,” published by the American Public Health Association and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property, the particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.

            (L)       No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system and industrial cost recovery system.

            (M)      Each residential household, commercial complex, commercial business or industry shall pay to the city the established amount set forth by the EPA user charge system or industrial cost recovery for the proper operation of the sewage treatment plant.  Any building which is privately owned, whether occupied or not, shall be subject to this payment.  Any established multi dwelling shall make payment in the amount established by the user charge system.  The payment shall be made unless the water service is discontinued and the service valve closed.

(Prior Code, § 37.05)

52.25 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
            No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.  Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.

(Prior Code, § 37.06)  Penalty, see § 52.99

52.26 WASTEWATER BACKUPS.
            All building drains which have back-up problems shall have a back water valve installed at the owner’s expense, and it shall be the owner’s responsibility to see that the back water valve is kept clean and workable. The city will assume no liability for any damages resulting from back up.

(Prior Code, § 37.08)

52.27 WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY.
            (A)      Wastewater service charges:

                        (1)       The wastewater service charge for the use of and for the service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.

                        (2)       The debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service of all outstanding loans by the number of users.  Through further divisions, the monthly debt service charges can be computed.

                        (3)       The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal concentrations:

                                    (a)       A five day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l;

                                    (b)       A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l.

                        (4)       It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows:

                                    (a)       Estimate the projected annual revenue required for operating and maintaining the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year, for all works categories;

                                    (b)       Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible;

                                    (c)       Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated;

                                    (d)       Proportion the estimated costs to non-industrial and industrial users by volume, suspended solids and BOD;

                                    (e)       Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength;

                                    (f)        Compute surcharge costs per 1,000 gallons per mg/l in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.

            (B)       A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal concentration for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l).  The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS respectively.  This chapter specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.

            (C)       The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by the City Administrator for the city in their annual audit report.  The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs, including replacement costs.

            (D)      The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be based on the following schedule which is based on a normal single family residence having a unit factor of 1.0:

                        (1)       Barbershops:                                                   0.20 per chair;

                        (2)       Bars:                                                               0.044 per seat;

                        (3)       Beauty shops:                                                 0.20 per booth;

                        (4)       Churches:                                                        0.008 per seat;

                        (5)       Cleaners (pick up only):                                 0.048 per employee;

                        (6)       Clinics (min. assignment 1.00 unit

                                    per profession):                                              0.50 per doctor;

                        (7)       Convalescent homes:                                      0.22 per bed;

                        (8)       Drug stores (with fountain service):              0.10 per seat;

                        (9)       Factories (exclusive of industrial wastes):     0.313 per person per shift;

                        (10)     Grocery stores and supermarkets:                  0.48 per employee;

                        (11)     Laundry:                                                         1.0 per washer;

                        (12)     Multiple family residence:                             1.0 per dwelling unit;

                        (13)     Restaurants (dinner and/or drinks);                0.10 per seat;

                        (14)     Rooming houses (no meals):                          0.119 per person;

                        (15)     Schools;                                                          0.10 per student;

                        (16)     Service stations:                                             0.20 per pump;

                        (17)     Single family dwelling units having

                                    less than 400 sq. ft. of floor space

                                    (notwithstanding other provisions

                                    of this section):                                               0.56 per dwelling unit;

                        (18)     Snack bars, drive-ins, and the like:                0.08 per seat or shift;

                        (19)     Stores (other than specifically listed):                       0.15 per employee;

                        (20)     Tourist courts (individual bath units):                        0.27 per cubical;

                        (21)     Trailer parks (self-contained unit):                1.0 per trailer;

                        (22)     Trailers (individual):                                      1.0 per trailer;

                        (23)     Car wash (service stations, and the like):       0.54 per stall.

            (E)       A user that discharges other than sanitary or domestic wastewater shall meter all water that is discharged to the sanitary sewers. Any customer connected to the system that discharges or may be expected to discharge more than 18,000 gallons of wastewater per quarter may be required by the city to have installed at his or her expense an approved meter to register accurately all water flowing to the sanitary sewage system.

            (F)       A debt service charge per month, as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council, to each user of the wastewater facility of the city is established.

            (G)      There shall be and there is established a basic use rate for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city.  This basic user rate for use shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.  The charge per month for users without water meters and who are those users other than normal single family residences shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.  The charge per month for users with water meters and who are users other than normal single family residences shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

            (H)      The rates of surcharge for BOD5 and SS are as follows:

                                    CS + (Bc (b) + Sc (S)) Vu

            (I)        The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.

            (J)        The wastewater service charge shall be computed by the following formula:

                                    CW = CD + CM + (Vu – X) CU + CS

                        Where:       

                                    CW      =          Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period.

                                   CM      =          Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement

                                    CD       =          Debt service charge

                                    Vu       =          Wastewater volume for the billing period.

                                    X         =          Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge

                                    Cu       =          Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement

                                    CS       =          Amount of surcharge

                                    Bc        =          $021/BOD5

                                    Sc        =          $0.17 # suspended solids

                                    B         =          BOD5  – 200 mg/l

                                    S          =          SS        =          250 mg/l

(Prior Code, § 37.09)

52.28 GENERAL COST RECOVERY.
            When an industrial user, as defined in 40 CFR 35.905-8, requests connection to the public sewer collection and disposal system and industrial cost recovery system, as industrial must be developed in accordance with 40 CFR 35.928.

(Prior Code, § 37.10)

52.29 BILLING.
            (A)      Bills. Charges for sanitary sewer service as specified in § 52.21 shall be billed monthly to the owner or occupant of the premises on the tenth day of each month for sanitary sewer service for the preceding month. Bills shall be paid at the Mountain Iron City Hall on or before the first day of the month following the billing date. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the city.

            (B)       Delinquent bills. When any charges for sanitary sewer service remain unpaid after the due date, a penalty of 10% shall be added to the delinquent amount for each month that the unpaid balance remains. 

            (C)       Lien; notice of delinquency.  Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 45 days after it has been rendered, the City Administrator shall file with the County Recorder a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises served the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.  If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the City Administrator has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of premises if his or her address be known to the City Administrator, whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days after it has been rendered. The failure of the City Administrator to record such lien or to mail such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing section.

            (D)      Foreclosure of lien.  Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens, such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the city.  The City Attorney is authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 45 days after it has been rendered.

            (E)       Revenues. All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund.  All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the City Administrator separate and apart from their private funds and separate and apart from all of the funds of the city.  The City Administrator shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to them and deposit the same in the amount of the fund designated as the “Sewage Fund of the City.” The Administrator shall administer such Fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute.

            (F)       Accounts.  The City Administrator shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system and at regular annual intervals he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.  In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations.  In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:

                        (1)       Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year;

                        (2)       Billing data showing total number of gallons billed;

                        (3)       Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;

                        (4)       Number of users connected to the system;

                        (5)       Number of non-metered users;

                        (6)       A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of waste discharged.

            (G)      Notice of rates.  A copy of this section properly certified by the City Administrator shall be filed in the office of Register of Deeds, St. Louis County and shall be deemed notice to all owners to real estate of the charges of the sewerage system of the city on their properties.

            (H)      Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense.

            (I)        Access to records. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transactions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to the federal grant.

            (J)        Effective date and rates.  The rates and service charges established for user charges in this chapter shall be effective as of October 1, 1980 and on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding quarter.

            (K)      Powers and authority of enforcing agents.  The Approving Authority shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with provisions of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty of violation of the service contract and shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary sewer and/or water service. Such disconnection and reconnection would be at the total expense of the customer.  Where acid and chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the Approving Authority is authorized to immediately terminate services by such measures as are necessary to protect the facilities.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each day of each violation shall be deemed a separate offense.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.

(Prior Code, § 37.11)

52.99 PENALTY.
            (A)      Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99 of this code.

            (B)       (1)       Any person found to be violating any provision of §§ 52.20 et seq., except § 52.24, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall within the period of time stated in such notice permanently cease all violations.  The city may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.

                        (2)       Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount set forth in § 10.99. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.

                        (3)       Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation.

(Prior Code, § 37.07)

Chapter Number 70, General Provisions
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section

            70.01   State Highway Traffic Regulation Act adopted by reference

            70.02   Scope of title

            70.03   Removal of vehicles by police

            70.04   Loading zones

            70.05   Common carriers for hire, stands

            70.06   Safety zones and no parking districts

            70.07   Registration of commercial carriers

            70.08     Operation

           70.09     Vehicle Parking

            70.10     Residential Areas

            70.11     Unlawful Overtime Parking

            70.12     Violations

70.01 STATE HIGHWAY TRAFFIC REGULATION ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
            Except for M.S. §§ 169.04, 169.10, 169.11, 169.66, 169.751, 169.752, 169.753, 169.754, 169.78, 196.965, 169.966, 169.98, as they may be amended from time to time, M.S. Chapter 169, known as the Highway Traffic Regulation Act, as amended by Laws, 1974, Chapters 21, 22, 23, 52, 57, 59, 79, 110, 122, 133, 134, 332, 343, 350, 358, 379, 389, 406, 460, 500, and as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted as a traffic regulation ordinance of the city. Every provision contained in such chapter is adopted and made a part of this title by reference as if fully set forth herein.

(Prior Code, § 50.01)

70.02 SCOPE OF TITLE.
            It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this title. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with the authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.

(Prior Code, § 50.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99

70.03 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES BY POLICE.
            (A)      Any vehicle, wherever found, whether on public or private property, in violation of this code or other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, is declared to be a nuisance and the same may be summarily abated by removal, under the direction or at the request of a police officer, to a place of storage by means of a towing truck or otherwise or such police officer may require the driver or owner to remove such vehicle off the paved or traveled portion of a street.  However, no vehicle shall be removed from private property if the vehicle is owned by the owner of the private property or a person who is a resident, tenant of the owner, or otherwise is in control of the property, unless that person has given express permission to remove the vehicle or an administrative search and seizure warrant has been first obtained.

            (B)       Any vehicle found upon the streets of the city in such damaged condition or state of disrepair that it cannot be driven and which, in the opinion of a police officer, constitutes an obstruction of the street may be removed and impounded by the Police Department to a place of storage, provided that if the owner or operator has requested, such vehicle may be towed to the owner’s own or any other garage.

(Prior Code, § 50.04)

70.04 LOADING ZONES.
            The Chief of Police of the city shall have the power to designate loading zones on streets in the city with the approval thereof by a majority of the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 50.09)

70.05 COMMON CARRIERS FOR HIRE, STANDS.
            The Chief of Police shall locate and designate a place or places in the city where vehicles engaged in carrying passengers, baggage, property or material for hire may stand awaiting customers and may relocate such places in his or her discretion by filing written notice thereof with the City Administrator of the city; said changes to take effect when approved by the Council of the city.

(Prior Code, § 50.11)

70.06 SAFETY ZONES AND NO PARKING DISTRICTS.
            The city is authorized, empowered and directed to designate all such safety zones and no parking districts in the public streets of the city as such are or shall be required for the safety and convenience of the citizens and inhabitants of the city and mark and indicate the location of such safety zones and no parking districts by using and placing suitable safety zones and no parking signs upon the driveways and sidewalks and streets of the city, and no person driving, operating or having under his or her control any vehicle of any kind whatever shall cause, permit or allow such vehicle to stand, remain at or upon any such safety zone or no parking district in the city.

(Prior Code, § 50.13)

70.07 REGISTRATION OF COMMERCIAL CARRIERS.
            All owners of vehicles operating on designated truck routes within the city shall register their intent to utilize the truck routes with the City Administrator of the city. The City Administrator will annually provide notice to registered carriers of the provisions of this section and any alterations in designated routes. A violation of this section shall constitute a petty misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 50.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99

70.08 OPERATION.
            M.S. § 169.222, as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as fully as it is set out at length herein and all amendments are adopted.

70.09 VEHICLE PARKING.
The term “recreational vehicle” shall mean a vehicle designed and used for recreational purposes and enjoyment including, but not limited to, self-propelled motor homes, truck campers, camping trailers, all terrain vehicles, boats, race cars and race car trailers, snowmobiles, construction trailers, all other trailers, vehicles used to transport goods, refuse or merchandise, semi-tractors and trailers and vehicles converted into storage or camping vehicles.

(Ord 04-05, passed 10-03-05)

70.10 RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
(A)     With the exception of construction trailers, the vehicles described in 70.09 above shall not be allowed to park on any public street, for longer than 72 hours to load/unload and to perform maintenance on the vehicle.  Construction trailers may be parked on City streets only when they are being used in conjunction with an adjacent construction project and only while attended. 

(B)       The parking and storage of the vehicles described in 70.09 on a lot is permitted subject to the following restrictions:

(1)       Parking and storage is permitted at all times within an enclosed building or within the rear yard.

(2)       The above-described vehicles must have affixed thereto current registration or license plates as required by law.

(3)       All permitted recreational vehicle storage must be on an established driveway and must be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb, where present, or fifteen (15) feet from the paved area of the street if no curb is present.

(4)       Recreational vehicle parking is allowed on a sideyard.  The term “sideyard” shall mean the yard between the nearest point of the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.

(5)       All recreational vehicles parked in accordance with this ordinance must not be missing “major parts”, which would, without these parts, constitute junk. 

            (Ord 04-05, passed 10-03-05)

70.11 UNLAWFUL OVERTIME PARKING.
It shall be unlawful to park a car, pick-up truck, van or motorcycle on any City street, alley or public parking lot for longer than:

(A)      24 consecutive hours from during calendar parking.

(B)       72 consecutive hours from during the remainder of the year.

 (Ord 04-05, passed 10-03-05, Amd Ord 01-11, 2-2-11)

70.12 VIOLATION.
Any person in violation of 70.11 A shall receive a parking citation immediately.  Any person in violation of 70.11 B shall receive a 24 hour warning tag from the St. Louis County Sheriff’s Department or a designee of the City.  If after 24 hours the violation continues, any person in violation shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor.  Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.

(Ord 04-05, passed 10-03-05)

70.13 CALENDAR PARKING.
(A)      The calendar system of parking is adopted which means that all parking from 12:00 p.m. to 12:00 p.m. on even days of the month shall be allowed only on the even side of the street or avenue and on the odd days of the month on the odd side of the street or avenue commencing November 1st and continuing until April 1st of each year. The allowed changeover period during each day shall be from 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 p.m. (Ord 01-11, 2-2-11, Amd Ord. 04-11, 12-5-11) (Amd Ord. 01-15, 03-02-15)

(B)       During calendar parking any Law Enforcement officer may remove a vehicle from a street to a garage or other place of safety when the vehicle is left unattended and constitutes an obstruction to traffic or hinders snow removal or street improvement or maintenance operations. Such vehicle shall not be released until the fees for towing and storage are paid in addition to any fine imposed for a violation of this schedule. Violation of this schedule shall result in fines to be established by Council Resolution from time to time. (Ord 01-11, 2-2-11, Amd Ord. 04-11, 12-5-11)

70.14 PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON MARBLE AVENUE AND MAIN STREET.
(A)      There shall be no parking on east side of Marble Street from 50 feet south of Main Street to Main Street from 7:00 am to 4:00 pm between September 1st and June 1st when school is in session.   (Ord 01-11, 2-2-11) (Amd Ord. 01-15, 03-02-15) (Amd Ord. 03-15, 04-16-15)

(B)       There shall be no parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the west side of Marble Avenue from Coral Street to 200 feet south of Main Street between November 1st and April 1st of each year. (Ord 01-11, 2-2-11) (Amd Ord. 01-15, 03-02-15)

(C)       Parking Permits.  The west side of Marble Avenue between 200 feet south of Main Street and Coral Street shall be posted and reserved for the parking of residents from 7:00 am to 4:00 pm between September 1st and June 1stwhen school is in session.  To facilitate enforcement of the parking regulations, the City shall issue numbered parking permits to the residents along Marble Avenue between 200 feet south of Main Street and Coral Street. Residents to whom such permits are issued are responsible for displaying the permits on the vehicle for which they are issued on the windshield or visor where they can be clearly seen. Loss or theft of the permit shall be reported to the Sheriff or City Administrator. (Ord 01-11, 2-2-11) (02-13, November 4, 2013) (Amd Ord. 01-15, 03-02-15) (Amd Ord. 03-15, 04-16-15)

            (D)      There shall be no parking between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Main Street from Mineral Avenue to Mesabi Avenue between November 1st and April 1st of each year. (Ord 01-11, 2-2-11)

Chapter Number 71, Traffic Regulations
CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS

Section

            71.01   Unattended vehicles

            71.02   Exhibition of speed

            71.03   Free passage of sidewalks

            71.04   Truck routes

            71.05   Street damage and debris

71.01 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
            No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a commercial motor vehicle, unattended on any street, alley, used car lot or unattended parking lot in the city without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key and taking it with him or her; provided, that any violation of these provisions shall not mitigate the offense of stealing such motor vehicle, nor shall such violation be used to affect a recovery in any civil action for theft of such motor vehicle or the insurance thereon or have any other bearing in any civil action.

(Prior Code, § 50.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99

71.02 EXHIBITION OF SPEED.
            (A)      It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any motor vehicle exhibition of speed upon a street or highway within the limits of the city.

            (B)       Exhibition of speed shall be defined as a willful act of showing off or displaying a dangerous and imprudent speed where the presence of another person is known to the driver or operator of a motor vehicle or may be reasonably anticipated by him or her.

            (C)       Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 50.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99

71.03 FREE PASSAGE OF SIDEWALKS.
            It shall be unlawful for any group or persons to assemble or congregate together on any sidewalk of the city so as to obstruct the free passage thereof.

(Prior Code, § 50.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99

71.04 TRUCK ROUTES.
            It is unlawful for any person to drive a tractor, agricultural implement, truck over 9,000 pound gross vehicle weight, truck-trailer, tractor-trailer or truck-tractor upon any street within the city except those that have been designated and sign posted as truck routes. The city shall by resolution from time to time adopt a system of designated and sign-posted truck routes considering the structural capacity of the designated route, including consideration of the volume of traffic expected to occur on that route after designation, all in accordance with M.S. §§ 169.822 to 169.88, with reference to M.S. § 169.04, as they may be amended from time to time. The City Administrator shall maintain on file the current resolution designating authorized truck routes within the city. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall further entitle the city to seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in order to remedy a violation of this section.

(Prior Code, § 50.14)  Penalty, see § 10.99

71.05 STREET DAMAGE AND DEBRIS.
            It is unlawful for any person to park, operate or maintain a motor vehicle in the city in such a manner as to cause structural damage to any street or roadway within the city, and it shall further be unlawful for any such person to park, operate or maintain such vehicle in any such manner as to cause rocks, sand, debris or other materials to be deposited on or adjacent to any street within the city. All vehicle loads shall be appropriately covered pursuant to applicable state and federal regulations during transit and parking. The owner of any vehicle which causes rocks, sand, debris or other materials to be deposited on or adjacent to any street within the city shall be liable for and shall remove the materials immediately from the street or adjacent area and in the event failure to do so within 48 hours of notification to the offender the city may remove the same and shall charge the owner of the vehicle responsible for such spillage at rates established by the city. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall further entitle the city to seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction in order to remedy a violation of this section.

(Prior Code, § 50.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99

Chapter Number 72, Recreational Motor Vehicles
CHAPTER 72:  RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES

Section

            72.01   Purpose and intent

            72.02   Definition

            72.03   Operation regulations

            72.04   Enforcement and Penalty

72.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes §§ 84.92 – 84.928 regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles; and

WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes §§ 84.928 Subd. 1(a) and 84.928 Subd. 1(k) authorize cities to enact an ordinance which provides for the operation of all-terrain vehicles on a public road or street under its jurisdiction to access businesses and residences and to make trail connections; and

WHEREAS, Minnesota Statutes § 84.928 Subd. 6(c)(2) authorizes City Council action to enact an ordinance which provides for the operation of all-terrain vehicles on the road right-of-way shoulder, or inside bank or slope of a City street if safe operation in the ditch or outside slope is impossible, notwithstanding any law to the contrary; and

WHEREAS, the City of Mountain Iron has a general interest in allowing expanded use by all-terrain vehicles of the public road right-of-way of roads under the city’s jurisdiction to (1) make connections to businesses, residences and trail connections, and (2) because most ditches and outside slopes are impassible; and

WHEREAS, the City of Mountain Iron has an interest in establishing a permit process which allows limited permissive operation of all-terrain vehicles on certain public road right-of-way of roads under the City’s jurisdiction in a manner set forth in this ordinance.

(Prior Code, § 60.01) (Amd 03-17, 04-03-17)

72.02 DEFINITION.
All-terrain vehicle. An “All-terrain vehicle” shall be as defined in Minnesota Statutes § 84.92, as may be amended from time to time.

City. “City” means the City of Mountain Iron.

Class 1 all-terrain vehicle. A “Class 1 all-terrain vehicle” shall be as defined in Minnesota Statutes § 84.92, as may be amended from time to time.

Class 2 all-terrain vehicle. A “Class 2 all-terrain vehicle” shall be as defined in Minnesota Statutes § 84.92, as may be amended from time to time.

Corridor access trail. “Corridor access trail” means:

For Class 1 all-terrain vehicles, the outside slope, ditch bottom, inside slope, shoulder or where no shoulder exists, the extreme right-hand side of the driving surface, of a county road which connects two established all-terrain vehicle trails; Federal, state or county forest roads designated open to all-terrain vehicle use; designated Federal, state or county all-terrain vehicle trails or trails established and designated as all-terrain vehicle trails by another political subdivision, and which have been permitted pursuant to Minnesota Statutes 84.928 subdivision 1a(h).
For Class 2 all-terrain vehicles, the shoulder or where no shoulder exists, the extreme right-hand side of the driving surface, of a county road which connects two established all-terrain vehicle trails; Federal, state or county forest roads designated open to all-terrain vehicle use; designated Federal, state or county all-terrain vehicle trails or trails established and designated as all-terrain vehicle trails by another political subdivision, and which have been permitted pursuant to Minnesota Statute 84.928 subdivision 1a(h).
City Street. “City Street” means a road that is under the jurisdiction of the City of Mountain Iron.

Established all-terrain vehicle trail. “Established All-Terrain Vehicle Trail” means an all-terrain vehicle trail that has been designated as a Federal, State, County or other political subdivision all-terrain vehicle trail.

Person. “Person” means an individual or an organization as defined in Minnesota Statutes § 336.1-201 (b)(27).

Public road right-of-way. “Public road right-of-way” means the entire width of a public roadway, including the traveled lanes, banks, ditches, shoulders and medians of a roadway that is not privately owned.

(Prior Code, § 60.02) (Amd 03-17, 04-03-17)

72.03 OPERATION REGULATIONS.
On City streets, all-terrain vehicles may operate on the on the right-hand shoulder or the extreme right-hand side of a City Street in addition to where all-terrain vehicles are permissible to operate under §84.928 Subdivision 1, and left-hand turns may be made from any part of the City street if it is safe to do so under the prevailing conditions.
After the enactment of this Ordinance, the City Council may by resolution close or restrict any specific City street to all-terrain vehicle use.
The Public Works Director may in its sole discretion close streets to all-terrain vehicle use if damage to the roadway results or where public safety is adversely affected as a result of all-terrain vehicle use. Actions under this section may be reviewed by the City Council.
Except as provided in this Ordinance, all operation of all-terrain vehicles shall be in compliance with Minnesota Statutes §§ 84.92 – 84.928 and Minnesota Rules Chapter 6102, as well as any other applicable Federal, state or local statute, law, rule, regulation or ordinance.
 (Prior Code, § 60.03) (Amd 03-17, 04-03-17)

72.04 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
Penalties shall be accordance with Section 10.99 of the Mountain Iron City Code.

 (03-17, 04-03-17)

Chapter Number 73, Snowmobiles
CHAPTER 73:  SNOWMOBILES

Section

            73.01   Minnesota Statutes adopted by reference

            73.02   Areas of permitted operation

            73.03   Operation restrictions

            73.04   Age of operators

            73.05   Speed restrictions

            73.06   Hours of operation

            73.07   Required equipment

73.01 MINNESOTA STATUTES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
            M.S. § 84.873, as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted by the city. Every provision contained in such section is adopted and made part of this chapter by reference as if fully set forth herein. Street or highway shall be defined as in M.S. § 169.01, Subd. 29, as it may be amended from time to time.

(Prior Code, § 58.08)

73.02 AREAS OF PERMITTED OPERATION.
            Snowmobiles will be operated only upon streets, highways, alleys and other rights-of-way within the city limits.

(Prior Code, § 58.01)

73.03 OPERATION RESTRICTIONS.
            It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile under the following circumstances:

            (A)      On private property of another without the express permission to do so by the owner or occupant of said property;

            (B)       On public school ground, park property, play grounds, recreational areas and golf courses without express permission to do so by the proper public authority;

            (C)       In a manner so as to create loud unnecessary or unusual noise as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.

(Prior Code, § 58.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99

73.04 AGE OF OPERATORS.
            (A)      No person under the age of 14 years shall operate a snowmobile on any public street, highway, alley, right-of-way or other public grounds within the limits of the city. 

(Prior Code, § 58.03)

            (B)       No person over 14 years of age, but under 18 years of age, shall operate a snowmobile on any public street, highway, alley, right-of-way or other public grounds within the limits of the city unless he or she has in his or her immediate possession a valid snowmobile safety certificate issued by the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. 

(Prior Code, § 58.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99

73.05 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
            No snowmobile shall be operated in an excess of 15 miles per hour within the platted areas within the city.

(Prior Code, § 58.05)

73.06 HOURS OF OPERATION.
            No snowmobile shall be used by any person of any age within the platted areas located within the city limits between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m., unless a direct access either to or from a destination.

(Prior Code, § 58.06)

73.07 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
            (A)      All snowmobiles shall be equipped at all times with a muffler in good working order which blends the exhaust noise into the overall snowmobile noise and is in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise. The exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or cracking sound. This section does not apply to organized races or similar competitive events held on:

                        (1)       Private lands with the permission of the owner, lessee or the custodian of the land; and

                        (2)       Public lands and water under the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, with the Commissioners permission; and

                        (3)       Other public lands with the consent of the agency owning the land.

            (B)       No such races or similar competitive events shall be held within the platted limits line within the city limits.

(Prior Code, § 58.07)

Chapter Number 91, Parks and Recreation
CHAPTER 91:  PARKS AND RECREATION

Section

            91.01   Definitions

            91.02   Limitations on hours of use

            91.03   Motor vehicle operation

            91.04   Disturbances

            91.05   Firearms and explosives

            91.06   Camping

            91.07   Sanitation

            91.08   Vandalism

            91.09   Concessions

            91.10   Glass containers

            91.11   Recreational areas

            91.12   Alcoholic beverages

            91.13   Fires

            91.14   Pets

            91.15   Campground regulations

            91.16   Enforcement

91.01 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            PUBLIC PARK. A parcel of land in the City of Mountain Iron now or hereafter owned or controlled by the city and dedicated or designated as park land and/or recreation area or as may otherwise be designated by the City Council from time to time.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.02 LIMITATIONS ON HOURS OF USE.
            It shall be unlawful for any person or organization, other than an officer serving the city, to enter directly or indirectly, to use, occupy or pass through or on any public park in the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or as otherwise posted.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99

91.03 MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATION.
            It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle within a public park except upon roadways or other designated locations therein.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99

91.04 DISTURBANCES.
            It shall be unlawful for any person or groups of persons to conduct themselves in any way that shall disturb or adversely affect any other person’s peaceful enjoyment of the public parks.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99

91.05 FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES.
            No person shall discharge firearms, air rifles, B.B. guns, sling shots, explosives or fireworks in or about any public park in the city. Exceptions are allowed for special events; permission must be granted through city law enforcement and/or Chapter 111 of the city code.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

Cross reference:

            Special events, see Chapter 111

91.06 CAMPING.
            No overnight camping is permitted in any park except in areas designated by the Director of Parks and Recreation.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.07 SANITATION.
            It is unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage, refuse, sewage or trash of any kind except in designated receptacles. It is unlawful to clean fish except in designated areas.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99

91.08 VANDALISM.
            The destruction, alteration, injury or removal of any real or personal property of the city, including but not limited to trees or vegetation, whether living or dead, ruins, relics, building or geological formation is strictly prohibited.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.09 CONCESSIONS.
            It is unlawful for any person to engage in or solicit business of any nature whatsoever within a public park or recreation area without proper city permits or licenses.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.10 GLASS CONTAINERS.
            It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association or corporation to take into, possess or maintain within any public park any glass container.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99

91.11 RECREATIONAL AREAS.
            All interested persons wishing to use ball fields, tennis courts, horseshoe pits and the like on a seasonal basis must request reservations for such use from the Park and Recreation Director or designee. Any recreational areas not reserved may be used on a first-come basis.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
            (A)      In a public park, it is unlawful to have in your possession any intoxicating liquor or 3.2% malt liquor container larger than 32 ounces without a permit.

            (B)       A special permit for keg beer must be applied for at least one week in advance with the Parks and Recreation Director.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.13 FIRES.
            Fires are permitted only in fireplaces or fire rings provided in designated areas and shall be extinguished when unattended, personal portable grills excepted.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.14 PETS.
            All pets must be kept on a leash and confined to the designated pet exercise areas. The owner or person responsible for any animal, which leaves droppings on the premises, shall be responsible to remove the droppings immediately.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000) 

91.15 CAMPGROUND REGULATIONS.
            Rules and regulations governing the use of the West Two Rivers Campground are part of this chapter as if fully contained herein.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

91.16 ENFORCEMENT.
            The Park Director or his or her designee and all on duty law enforcement officers are charged with the duty of removing and evicting any person from any public park for violation of any city ordinance or state statute.

(Ord. 02-00, passed 11-6-2000)

Chapter Number 92, Swimming Pools
CHAPTER 92:  SWIMMING POOLS

Section

            92.01   Definitions

            92.02   Permit required

            92.03   Plans to be submitted

            92.04   Construction in accordance with approved plans; deviations

            92.05   Permit fee

            92.06   Design and construction requirements

            92.07   Electrical requirements

            92.08   Chemical treatment

            92.09   Approval of other design and equipment

            92.10   Location

            92.11   Dangers to life and health prohibited

            92.12   Safety precautions

            92.13   Enforcement officers specified

            92.14   Retroactivity

92.01 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            PORTABLE SWIMMING POOL. A rubber or plastic swimming pool that can be erected without permanent support.

            PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL. Any constructed or assembled swimming pool or portable swimming pool which is used or intended to be used as a swimming pool in connection with group I occupancies as defined in the State Building Code and available only to the family of the householder and his or her guests.

            SWIMMING POOL. Any structure, basin, chamber or tank constructed or designed to contain an artificial body of water for swimming, diving, relaxation or recreational bathing and having a depth of two feet or more at any point and with a surface area exceeding 150 square feet.

(Prior Code, § 41.01)

92.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
            No person shall construct or erect a private residential swimming pool or reconstruct any such pool or do any alteration, addition, remodeling or repair to such swimming pool in excess of the value of $100 without first obtaining a building permit.  A permit shall be required for the re-erection of any such swimming pool which was once erected with permit or which was in existence at the date of the enactment of this chapter and then disassembled and which is not re-erected in the same location.

92.03 PLANS TO BE SUBMITTED.
            (A)      Plans and specifications and pertinent explanatory data shall be submitted with the application for a permit. No new plan shall be required for the re-erection of a pool according to a plan previously submitted. The plans shall be reviewed relative to design, operation and maintenance insofar as health and safety features are concerned in accordance with the standards prescribed in this section. The plans shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-fourth inch per foot.

            (B)       The plans shall include the following data and such other information as may be reasonably requested by the Building Inspector:

                        (1)       The general layout of the entire building lot on which the pool is to be located, including the distances of the pool from the lot lines, the location of any utilities and the location of any source of contamination within 50 feet of the pool;

                        (2)       The dimensions of pool, including the effective length and width of the pool, pool decks and other similar items;

                       (3)       The source of water supply and method of drainage, including all pipes, inlets, outlets and waste and discharge lines.

(Prior Code, § 41.03)

92.04 CONSTRUCTION IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPROVED PLANS; DEVIATIONS.
            Swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems and other features shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. If any deviations from such plans are desired, a supplementary plan covering that portion of the work involved shall be filed for approval and shall conform to the provisions of this section.

(Prior Code, § 41.04)

92.05 PERMIT FEE.
            The fee for a permit shall be determined by resolution of the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 41.05)

92.06 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
            The design and construction of all private residential swimming pools shall comply with the following requirements.

            (A)      Structural design.  The pool structure shall be engineered and designed to withstand the expected forces to which it will be subjected.

            (B)       Overflow and surface drainage. The pool and surrounding area shall be constructed and arranged in such a manner that no splash or overflow water shall return to the pool.  No surface or roof drainage shall be permitted to enter the pool.

            (C)       Finish.  Pool floor and walls shall have a cleanable, white or similar light-colored and impermeable surface.

            (D)      Handholds.  Handholds shall be provided and shall not be more than nine inches above the normal water line and shall extend around the entire periphery of the pool.

            (E)       Pool deck.  Unobstructed deck areas not less than 48 inches wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The deck surface shall be such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The deck shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch to the foot, designed so as to prevent back drainage into the pool.  If deck drains are provided, drain pipe lines shall be at least two inches in diameter and drain openings shall have an open area of at least four times the cross-sectional area of the drain pipe. The deck drain system shall have indirect connection to the sanitary sewer. The deck drains shall not be connected to the recirculation system piping. No deck, other than the ground surface, shall be required for any pool that is totally above ground and which is less than four feet in height.

            (F)       Steps or ladders.  One or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be provided from any pool having a water depth of 36 inches or more. Treads of steps and ladders shall be equipped with nonslip material.

            (G)      Plumbing.  All supply and waste piping connected to such swimming pool shall be installed in accordance with the Minnesota State Plumbing Code.

            (H)      Water supply.  The water supply serving the swimming pool shall be potable water or of a quality otherwise acceptable to the Commissioner of Health.  All portions of the water distribution system serving the swimming pool and auxiliary facilities shall be protected against backflow.  Water introduced into the pool, either directly or to the recirculation system, shall be supplied through an air gap in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code.  When such connections are not possible, the supply shall be protected by a suitable backflow preventer in accordance with the Minnesota Plumbing Code, installed on the discharge side of the last control to the fixture, device or appurtenance.

            (I)        Drainage.

                        (1)       Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool to the sanitary sewer or other suitable disposal unit acceptable to the Director of Inspections.

                        (2)       There shall be no direct physical connection between the sewer system and any drain from the swimming pool or recirculation system.  Any swimming pool or gutter drain or overflow from the recirculation system when discharged to the sewer system, storm drain or other approved natural drainage course shall connect through a suitable air gap or air break so as to preclude the possibility of backup of sewage or waste into the swimming pool piping system.

                        (3)       The water from the pool shall not be drained onto the streets or sidewalks or any other public property or private property not owned by the pool owner.

            (J)        Heaters.  All gas-fired or oil burning swimming pool heaters and boilers shall comply with the Plumbing Code and Heating Code of the city.

(Prior Code, § 41.06)

92.07 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
            (A)      All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with a residential swimming pool or portable swimming pool shall conform to the State Electrical Code.

            (B)       The following parts of swimming pools shall not be placed under existing service drop conductors or any other open overhead wiring; nor shall such wiring be installed above the following:

                        (1)       Swimming pool and the area extending ten feet horizontally from the inside of the walls of the pool;

                        (2)       Diving structure;

                        (3)       Observation stands, towers or platforms.

            (C)       Any metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to a private residential swimming pool or portable swimming pool which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall be effectively grounded.

            (D)      When used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.

(Prior Code, § 41.07)

92.08 CHEMICAL TREATMENT.
            Gaseous chlorinating systems shall not be used as a disinfecting method for a private residential swimming pool or portable swimming pool. Below ground pools shall meet the requirements for recirculation, disinfection and water quality maintenance as required for public swimming pools as set forth in regulation MHD 115, filed with the State Department of Administration on August 4, 1971.

(Prior Code, § 41.08)

92.09 APPROVAL OF OTHER DESIGN AND EQUIPMENT.
            Any swimming pool, the design and equipment of which incorporates features other than those set forth herein shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Inspections and the Commissioner of Health in accordance with acceptable standards and in conformance with current public health and safety practices.

(Prior Code, § 41.09)

92.10 LOCATION.
            No portion of a swimming pool or appurtenances thereto shall be located from the lot line at a distance less than that required for side yards for a one-story building as set forth in the zoning code.

(Prior Code, § 41.10)

92.11 DANGERS TO LIFE AND HEALTH PROHIBITED.
            No private residential swimming pool or portable swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the city if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to health.

(Prior Code, § 41.11)

92.12 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
            (A)      A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that the swimming pool is in use.

            (B)       Every pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than 15 inches in diameter and having 60 feet of 3/16 inch Manila line attached and one or more light but strong poles with blunted ends and not less than 12 feet in length for making reach assists or rescues.

(Prior Code, § 41.14)

92.13 ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS SPECIFIED.
           The Building Inspector and the Commissioner of Health are authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 41.13)

92.14 RETROACTIVITY.
            The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all private residential swimming pools existing on September 1, 1977, except that §§ 92.02 through 92.05 and § 92.10 shall not apply unless such pool is disassembled.

(Prior Code, § 41.12)

Chapter Number 93, Animals
CHAPTER 93:  ANIMALS

Section

            General Provisions

            93.01   Definitions

            93.02   Animal units

            Licensing

            93.15   Inoculations

            93.16   License fee

            93.17   Unlicensed animals

            93.18   Counterfeit tags

            Regulations

            93.30   Running at large prohibited

            93.31   Leashes

            93.32   Clean up

            93.33   Number of animals

            93.34   Barnyard animals

            93.35   Intimidating an animal

            93.36   Annoying animals

            93.37   Vicious dogs

            93.38   Female animals

            93.39   Business restrictions

            Administration and Enforcement

            93.50   Impounded animals

            93.51   Notification

            93.52   Holding facility

            93.53   Tranquilizer guns

            93.54   Liability for damages

            93.55   Biting animals; impoundment

            93.56   Quarantine expenses

            93.57   Pathological examination

            93.58   Report of bites

            93.59   Report of veterinarian

            93.99   Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS

93.01 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            ACO. Animal Control Officer.

            ANIMAL. A domestic dog or cat or dog kind.

            CAT. Both male and female and includes any animal of the domestic feline kind.

            DANGEROUS ANIMAL. An animal which has caused damage to property or injury to a person or other animals, or which animal, by its actions, exhibits a propensity for imminent danger to persons or other animals.

            DOG. Both male and female and includes any animal of the dog kind.

            OWN. To have a property interest in or to harbor, feed, board, keep or possess.

            OWNER. A person who owns an animal hereby regulated.

(Prior Code, § 56.01)

93.02 ANIMAL UNITS.
            (A)      General.  The city determines impact by using animal units, and the following table shows the animal unit for each species.

                                    Animal                                                                        Unit

                        One dairy cow                                                            1.4 animal unit

                        One slaughter steer or heifer                                      1.0 animal unit

                        One horse                                                                    1.0 animal unit

                        One swine                                                                   0.4 animal unit

                        One sheep, goat, dog                                                0.2 animal unit

                        One duck, turkey, cat                                                  0.02 animal unit

                        One chicken                                                                0.01 animal unit

            (B)       Maximum animal units allowed.

                        (1)       Dogs and cats may be kept as pets as long as they do not equal or exceed the threshold of one animal unit on parcels of under two acres.

                        (2)       On parcels of 2.0 to 4.5 acres, one animal unit is allowed.

                        (3)       On parcels of 4.51 to 9.0 acres, five animal units are allowed.

                        (4)       For parcels larger than 9.0 acres, nine animal units plus one unit per acre beyond nine acres, to a maximum of 30 per quarter/quarter section or government lot. If an individual owns more than one quarter/quarter or government lot that may be considered in the general area, that property may be used in calculating the total animal units allowed at the rate of 20 animal units per quarter/quarter section or government lot, even if all the animals are kept on a single parcel.

(Ord. 04-02, passed 5-6-2002)

LICENSING

93.15 INOCULATIONS.
            No license or tag shall be issued by the City Administrator for a dog or cat which has reached the age of six months unless the applicant shall present a current certificate from a veterinarian certifying that the dog or cat to be licensed has been inoculated with a permanent type chick embryo rabies vaccine.

(Prior Code, § 56.05)

93.16 LICENSE FEE.
            The annual license fee shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council for each altered (spayed or neutered) animal and for each unaltered animal. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.

(Prior Code, § 56.08)

93.17 UNLICENSED ANIMALS.
            The ACO or his or her assistant shall impound any dog or cat found unlicensed, without a metal tag attached to his or her collar or running at large, and they are empowered and instructed to enter upon any private premises where they have reasonable cause to believe there is an unlicensed or untagged dog or cat or while in pursuit of a dog or cat running at large.

(Prior Code, § 56.09)

93.18 COUNTERFEIT TAGS.
            It shall be unlawful to counterfeit or attempt to counterfeit the tags provided for in this chapter for licensing or take from any dog or cat a tag legally placed upon it with intent to place it upon another dog or cat. Tags shall not be transferable and no refunds shall be made for any reason.

(Prior Code, § 56.14)  Penalty, see § 93.99

REGULATIONS

93.30 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
            It shall be unlawful for the dog or cat of any person who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat, to run at large. A person, who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog or cat which runs at large shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 56.02)

93.31 LEASHES.
            The restriction imposed by § 93.30 shall not prohibit the appearance of any dog or cat upon streets or public property when such dog or cat is on a leash which is not longer than six feet and is kept under control of the accompanying person, nor shall it restrict any dog or cat to the premises of its owner, but no dog or cat shall be permitted to enter upon any public park, playground or bathing beach area at anytime or upon the school yard or premises of any public or private school during school days, even when on a leash.

(Prior Code, § 56.03)

93.32 CLEAN UP.
            It is required that an owner who walks his or her animal within city limits, on property other than his or her own, will be responsible for all feces pick-up.

(Prior Code, § 56.04)

93.33 NUMBER OF ANIMALS.
            No person shall exceed the number of three animals per dwelling unit.  This section shall not apply to a licensed kennel.

(Prior Code, § 56.06)

93.34 BARNYARD ANIMALS.
            It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to keep, maintain, stable, yard or fence any cow, bull, steer, calf, ox, goat, sheep, horse, stallion, mare, mule, swine, chicken or other non-domestic or barnyard animal within the platted area of the city.

(Prior Code, § 56.07)  Penalty, see § 93.99

93.35 INTIMIDATING AN ANIMAL.
            It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to molest or intimidate a dog or cat.

(Prior Code, § 56.13)  Penalty, see § 93.99

93.36 ANNOYING ANIMALS.
            (A)      Habitual barking.  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor a dog which habitually barks or cries.  Habitual barking shall be defined as barking for repeated intervals of at least five minutes with less than one minute of interruption.  The barking must also be audible off of the owner’s or caretaker’s premises.

            (B)       Damage to property.  It shall be unlawful for any person’s dog or other animal to damage any lawn, garden, or other property, whether or not the owner has knowledge of the damage.

            (C)       Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating the terms and provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 56.15)  Penalty, see § 93.99

93.37 VICIOUS DOGS.
            No person shall keep or suffer to be kept on his or her premises occupied by him or her within the city, nor permit to run at large, any dog of a ferocious or vicious disposition or habit.  Whenever it shall reasonably appear that any dog has bitten one or more persons or animals, such dog shall be deemed a vicious dog and it shall be lawful for any police officer or ACO to forthwith kill or destroy any such animal.

(Prior Code, § 56.16) 

93.38 FEMALE ANIMALS.
            Except for controlled breeding purposes, every female animal in heat shall be kept confined in a house or secure enclosure provided by the owner or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such manner that such female animal cannot come in contact with other animals.

(Prior Code, § 56.24)

93.39 BUSINESS RESTRICTIONS.
            (A)      If the landowner is operating any type of business involving animals, a conditional use permit is required.

            (B)       No animals may be penned within 200 feet of a neighboring dwelling and any well, except up to five domesticated dogs or cats shall be permitted. PENNED is defined as the confined feeding, breeding, raising or holding of animals. This provision does not apply if the animals are pastured in an area of ten acres or more.

            (C)       The keeping of amounts greater than 1,000 poultry or small animals or more than 250 swine shall require a conditional use permit.

            (D)      Where any parcel contains five or more units of swine or poultry, enclosed quarters or fencing shall be provided at not less than twice the required setback for the zone district unless the provision in division (B) of this section results in a greater setback.

            (E)       All required state and federal permits shall be obtained for the keeping of animals.

            (F)       Animal waste must be disposed of in an environmentally sound manner, and in no case shall runoff from waste discharge directly into a lake, river, unsealed well or wetland. The construction of an animal waste system is encouraged and may be required by the Planning Commission or the Planning Director.

(Ord. 04-02, passed 5-6-2002)

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

93.50 IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
            (A)      All animals conveyed to the pound shall be kept, with humane treatment and sufficient food and water for their comfort, at least five regular business days, unless the animal is a dangerous animal in which case it shall be kept for seven regular business days, and except if the animal is a cruelly-treated animal in which case it shall be kept for ten regular business days, unless sooner reclaimed by their owners or keepers as provided by this section. In case the owner or keeper shall desire to reclaim the animal from the pound, the following shall be required, unless otherwise provided for in this code or established from time to time by resolution of the City Council:

                        (1)       The description of the animal by specie, breed, sex, approximate age and any other distinguishing detail;

                        (2)       The location at which the animal was seized;

                        (3)       The date of seizure;

                        (4)       The name and address of the owner of said animal;

                        (5)       The name and address of the person the animal is transferred to, if not the owner.

            (B)       The releasing fee for impounded animals is as set by the Mesabi Humane Society.  If the animal is unclaimed, such animal shall be humanely destroyed and the carcass disposed of.  After the five day holding period the impounded animal may be released to the Mesabi Humane Society for adoption.  Adopting individuals must apply for and obtain a city license.

(Prior Code, § 56.10)

93.51 NOTIFICATION.
            Upon impounding of any animal, the owner shall be notified by the most expedient means, or if the owner is unknown, written notice shall be posted for five days at the City Hall and at the pound describing the animal and the place and time of taking.

(Prior Code, § 56.11)

93.52 HOLDING FACILITY.
            It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break open the holding facility or attempt to do so, to take or let out any dogs or cats therefrom or to take or attempt to take from any officer any dog or cat taken up by him or her in compliance with this section or in any manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his or her duties under this section.

(Prior Code, § 56.12)  Penalty, see § 93.99

93.53 TRANQUILIZER GUNS.
            For the purpose of enforcement of this section, any peace officer or animal control officer (ACO) may use a so called tranquilizer gun or other instrument for the purpose of immobilizing and catching an animal. The tranquilizer gun will be used only in extreme circumstances.

(Prior Code, § 56.17)

93.54 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
            If a dog or cat, without provocation, attacks or injures the person or property of any person who is peaceably conducting himself or herself in any place where he or she may lawfully be in any part of the city, the owner of the animal shall be liable for damages to the person so attacked or injured to the full amount of the injury or damage sustained to his or her person or property.

(Prior Code, § 56.18)

93.55 BITING ANIMALS; IMPOUNDMENT.
            Any animal impounded for biting persons shall be impounded for observation for a minimum of ten  days.  Animals impounded for biting may be quarantined on the premises of the owner for the ten day observation period upon certification by a licensed veterinarian that the dog has been inoculated against rabies within the past three years and is otherwise healthy.  In instances of home quarantine, the owner shall be responsible for keeping the dog contained within the house or, if outside, on a chain at all times.  The city and/or the ACO shall have access to the animal at any reasonable time for study and observation of rabies symptoms.  In the event that the animal is a stray or when the owner of the animal is not known, such quarantine shall be at the holding facility or a veterinary hospital.

(Prior Code, § 56.19)

93.56 QUARANTINE EXPENSES.
            All expenses of the quarantine period shall be the responsibility of the animal’s owner. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if free of rabies and upon payment of fees as set forth in this section and upon compliance with all applicable provisions.

(Prior Code, § 56.20)

93.57 PATHOLOGICAL EXAMINATION.
            When an animal under quarantine and diagnosed as being rabid or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid dies or is killed, the ACO shall immediately send the head of such animal and rabies data to the State Health Department for pathological examination and shall notify all persons concerned of the results of such an examination.

(Prior Code, § 56.21)

93.58 REPORT OF BITES.
            It is the duty of every physician and medical practitioner to report to the Chief Law Enforcement Official the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.

(Prior Code, § 56.22)

93.59 REPORT OF VETERINARIAN.
            It is the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Chief Law Enforcement Official his or her diagnosis of an animal observed by him or her as a rabies suspect.

(Prior Code, § 56.23)

93.99 PENALTY.
            Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine as set forth in § 10.99.

(Prior Code, § 56.25)

Chapter Number 94, Streets and Sidewalks
CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

Section

            Construction, Installation and Repairs

            94.01   Permit required

            94.02   Application for permit

            94.03   Emergency work

            94.04   Bond

            94.05   Permit

            94.06   Record of permits

            94.07   Work requirements

            94.08   Restoration of premises

            94.98   Violations

CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND REPAIRS

94.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
            Unless acting under a contract with the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized city official or employee in the course of his or her employment, to make, cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public place within the limits of the city, without first having obtained and having in force a permit to do so.

(Prior Code, § 14.01)

94.02 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
            Any person desiring to procure a permit as for new construction or non-emergency repair as herein provided shall file with the City Administrator at least 24 hours before the time proposed to begin such work a written application. Such application shall state the name and business or residence address of the applicant, the name of the street, alley, sidewalk, curb or public place in or under which it is desired to make the excavation or opening, the kind of pavement or sidewalk thereon, the purpose, size and location of the proposed excavation or opening, the name and business or residence address of the person for whose benefit the work is to be done and the time during which it is desired such opening is to be permitted. When required by the City Administrator, the application shall be accompanied by a plat or pencil tracing or sketch showing the location, character and dimensions of the proposed excavation or opening for the installation of new work or the location and character of the alterations involving the location of pipes, conduits, wires or other conductors.

(Prior Code, § 14.02)

94.03 EMERGENCY WORK.
            In cases of extreme emergency which are herein limited to water and sewer repairs only and which emergencies may occur during non-business hours, work may be commenced upon notification being provided to the City Administrator, Superintendent of Public Works or any other city official.  Immediately upon opening of business on the first business day after the emergency work has commenced, application shall be made with the City Administrator as herein provided.

(Prior Code, § 14.03)

94.04 BOND.
            The application shall be accompanied by a surety bond, cash or certified check in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council to safeguard the public, conditioned on the faithful performance of such work in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city within the time fixed by the city in the permit and for the restoration of any street, alley, sidewalk, curb or other public place in which the excavation or opening shall be made by such person to its original condition and to the satisfaction of the city and for the maintenance of such condition for such length of time as shall be required by the city and that such persons will indemnify and save harmless the city against and from any and all damages or claims for damages, losses, costs, charges or expenses that may be brought against it by any person for or on account of injury to persons or property resulting from or occasioned by operating in or using any of the streets under a franchise.  Any person who, by reason of his or her business, has the necessity of working in any public places may file a bond in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council conditioned as above to cover all excavations made by him or her for a period of one year from the date of filing, but permits for all excavations must be applied for and issued as herein provided.

(Prior Code, § 14.04)

94.05 PERMIT.
            The City Administrator upon the filing of the application and bond and the payment of a fee shall issue a permit which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location, nature, purpose and extent of the excavation or opening, the kind or kinds of pavement to be disturbed, the amount of the deposit paid by the applicant and the dates of granting and expiration of the permit.  All permits shall be consecutively numbered and shall be made in triplicate, one copy to be given to the applicant, one copy to be delivered to the City Engineer and one copy to remain on file in the office of the City Administrator. Such permit shall at all times be in the possession of a competent person actually on the work and shall be shown upon request to a police officer or properly authorized officer or employee of the city.

(Prior Code, § 14.05)

94.06 RECORD OF PERMITS.
            The City Administrator shall prepare and keep a record of permits issued, numbered in the order in which they were issued; name and address of persons to whom issued; location, nature, purpose and extent of excavation or opening; time in which the street is to be restored; fee and amount of deposit paid; and such other and further items as will enable anyone to obtain a complete history of each permit from its issuance to its termination. The copies of the permits kept by the City Administrator, if properly bound, may be used as a basis for such record.

(Prior Code, § 14.06)

94.07 WORK REQUIREMENTS.
            All work under a permit shall be under the supervision of the City Engineer and in conformity with the following requirements.

            (A)      Execution. All work shall be started within 24 hours after the receipt of the permit and shall be pursued diligently and continuously until completed. When in consequence of the weather or any process of the law or any other unexpected obstacle, the work shall be stopped for so long a time that public travel shall be obstructed, the excavation or opening shall be refilled and repaved as if the work contemplated in a permit were actually completed.

            (B)       Amount of surface removed. In no case shall a person open or remove a greater area of surface and at no other location than that specified in the original or supplementary application; provided, that if at the time of actually doing the work it shall be necessary to open or remove a greater area of surface than originally applied for, the applicant shall first notify and procure the consent of the City Engineer to do so upon the express condition that he or she will, before noon of the following business day, file a supplementary application for the making of additional excavation.

            (C)       Opening of streets at intersection; interference with fire hydrants and the like; snow removal and the like.  At the intersection of cross streets, no more than one-half of the width of the street shall be opened at one time; the other half shall remain untouched for the accommodation of traffic until the first half is restored for safe use. All work shall be prosecuted so as not to interfere with easy access to fire houses, fire hydrants and United States mail boxes.  The permittee must remove within 24 hours all snow and ice that may fall or form upon the street within three feet upon either side of the opening and keep such space free from snow and ice until the opening is properly refilled.

            (D)      Inspection.  The installation of all service lines shall be inspected by a duly authorized city representative before any backfilling takes place.

            (E)       Backfilling. All excavations shall be backfilled and compacted to original density. The broken edges of the original surfacing shall be cut away with a saw. All backfilling and sawing shall be inspected by a duly authorized city representative before any resurfacing is done. The backfilled and compacted excavation shall be resurfaced using materials in-kind to the original and shall include all subbase, base and surfacing courses encountered.           

            (F)       Resurfacing.  All resurfacing shall be inspected by a duly authorized city representative.

            (G)      Restoration of curb and gutter.  Any portion of the curb and gutter that is damaged in the course of construction shall be restored to its original condition or replaced.  All restoration of curbs and gutters shall be inspected by duly authorized city representatives.

            (H)      Water and sewer taps.  All taps into city sewer and water mainlines shall be made by city employees under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works. 

                        (1)       Water tap.

                                    (a)       When the city is requested to make a water tap it will be the responsibility of the owner and/or contractor to have the line exposed.  The ditch must meet OSHA standards. If the ditch appears unsafe, the city will refuse to make the tap until the ditch is in conformance with OSHA standards.

                                    (b)       There are two different types of taps.  One is a short-tap, the other being a long-tap.  A short-tap is when the main line is on the same side of the street or alley as the property.  A long-tap is when the main line is either in the center of the street or alley or on the opposite side of the street or alley of the property.

                                    (c)       The taps will consist of the following materials: curb stop, corporation, curb box and enough pipe to bring the curb stop to the highway right-of-way.

                                    (d)       The fee will be as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council for a short-tap as well as for a long-tap. The fee will be paid before the tap is made.

                        (2)       Sewer tap.

                                    (a)       There will be a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council for making any tap in any sewer main owned by the city.  Only city personnel shall make sewer taps.

                                    (b)       The owner and/or contractor will have the line inspected within the highway right-of-way by authorized city personnel before any material is put back into the ditch.

(Prior Code, § 14.07)

94.08 RESTORATION OF PREMISES.
            In the event that the applicant fails to restore the premises within a reasonable period of time, the city may, after giving five days written notice to the applicant, restore the premises with its own force or by contract and may deduct the cost thereof from the deposit of the applicant. If the cost of restoration exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall, within ten days, after written notice of the amount is given to him or her by the Administrator, reimburse the city for the additional cost.

(Prior Code, § 14.08)

94.98 VIOLATIONS.
            Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§ 94.01 et seq., including but not limited to their failure to obtain a permit, failure to make a proper deposit, failure to restore the premises as herein provided or failure to reimburse the city for the additional cost, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Each day during which a violation continues shall be considered as a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.

(Prior Code, § 14.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99

Chapter Number 95, Trees
CHAPTER 95:  TREES

Section

             95.01     Tree diseases

            95.99   Penalty

95.01 TREE DISEASES.
            (A)      Trees constituting nuisance declared.  The following are public nuisances whenever they may be found within the city:

                        (1)       Any living or standing elm tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm disease fungus Ceratocystis Ulmi (Buisman) Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus Multistriatus (Eichh.) or Hylungopinus Rufipes (Marsh);

                        (2)       Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and burned or sprayed with an effective elm bark beetle insecticide;

                        (3)       Any living or standing oak tree or part thereof infected to any degree with the Oak Wilt fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum;

                        (4)       Any dead oak tree or part thereof which in the opinion of the designated officer constitutes a hazard, including but not limited to logs, branches, stumps, roots, firewood or other oak material which has not been stripped of its bark and burned or sprayed with an effective fungicide;

                        (5)       Any other shade tree with an epidemic disease.

            (B)       Abatement of nuisance.  It is unlawful for any person to permit any public nuisance as defined in division (A) of this section to remain on any premises the person owns or controls within the city.  The City Council may by resolution order the nuisance abated.  Before action is taken on that resolution, the City Council shall publish notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the nuisance.  This notice shall be mailed to the affected property owner and published once no less than one week prior to the meeting.  The notice shall state the time and place of the meeting, the street affected, action proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of assessment, if any, of costs.  At such hearing or adjournment thereof, the City Council shall hear any property owner with reference to the scope and desirability of the proposed project.  The City Council shall thereafter adopt a resolution confirming the original resolution with modifications as it considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by contract.

            (C)       Record of costs.  The City Administrator shall keep a record of the costs of abatement done under this section for all work done for which assessments are to be made, stating and certifying the description of the land, lots, parcels involved, and the amount chargeable to each.

            (D)      Unpaid charges.  On or before September 1 of each year, the City Administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section.  The City Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the property involved as a special assessment as authorized by M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection the following year along with the current taxes.

Penalty, see § 95.99

95.99 PENALTY.
            Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99 of this code.

(Prior Code, § 59.12)

CHAPTER 96:  NUISANCES

Section

            General Provisions

                      96.01     Assessable current services

            Nuisances

                      96.15     Public nuisance

                      96.16     Public nuisances affecting health

                      96.17     Public nuisances affecting morals and decency

                      96.18     Public nuisances affecting peace and safety

                      96.19     Nuisance parking and storage

                      96.20     Inoperable motor vehicles

                      96.21     Building maintenance and appearance

                      96.22     Duties of city officers

                      96.23     Abatement

                      96.24     Recovery of cost

            Weeds

                      96.35     Short title

                      96.36     Jurisdiction

                      96.37     Definitions; exclusions

                      96.38     Owners responsible for trimming, removal and the like

                      96.39     Filing complaint

                      96.40     Notice of violations

                      96.41     Appeals

                      96.42     Abatement by city

                      96.43     Liability

            Open Burning

                      96.60     Definitions

                      96.61     Prohibited materials

                      96.62     Permit required for open burning

                      96.63     Purposes allowed for open burning

                      96.64     Permit application for open burning; permit fees

                      96.65     Permit process for open burning

                      96.66     Permit holder responsibility

                      96.67     Revocation of open burning permit

                      96.68     Denial of open burning permit

                      96.69     Burning ban or air quality alert

                      96.70     Rules and laws adopted by reference

                      96.99     Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS

96.01 ASSESSABLE CURRENT SERVICES.
            (A)      Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

                        CURRENT SERVICE.  Shall mean one or more of the following: snow, ice, or rubbish removal from sidewalks; weed elimination from street grass plots adjacent to sidewalks or from private property; removal or elimination of public health or safety hazards from private property, excluding any hazardous building included in M.S. §§ 463.15 through 463.26 as they may amended from time to time; installation or repair of water service lines; street sprinkling, street flushing, light street oiling, or other dust treatment of streets; repair of sidewalks and alleys; trimming and care of trees and removal of unsound and insect-infected trees from the public streets or private property; and the operation of a street lighting system.

            (B)       Snow, ice, dirt and rubbish.

                        (1)       Duty of owners and occupants.  The owner and the occupant of any property adjacent to a public sidewalk shall use diligence to keep the walk safe for pedestrians.  No owner or occupant shall allow snow, ice, dirt or rubbish to remain on the walk longer than 24 hours after its deposit thereon.  Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation.

                        (2)       Removal by city.  The City Administrator or other person designated by the City Council may cause removal from all public sidewalks all snow, ice, dirt and rubbish as soon as possible beginning 24 hours after any matter has been deposited thereon or after the snow has ceased to fall.  The City Administrator or other designated person shall keep a record showing the cost of removal adjacent to each separate lot and parcel.

            (C)       Public health and safety hazards.  When the city removes or eliminates public health or safety hazards from private property under the following provisions of this chapter, the administrative officer responsible for doing the work shall keep a record of the cost of the removal or elimination against each parcel of property affected and annually deliver that information to the City Administrator.

            (D)      Installation and repair of water service lines.  Whenever the city installs or repairs water service lines serving private property under Chapter 51 of this code, the City Administrator shall keep a record of the total cost of the installation or repair against the property.

            (E)       Repair of sidewalks and alleys.

                        (1)       Duty of owner.  The owner of any property within the city abutting a public sidewalk or alley shall keep the sidewalk or alley in repair and safe for pedestrians.  Repairs shall be made in accordance with the standard specifications approved by the City Council and on file in the office of the City Administrator.

                        (2)       Inspections; notice.  The City Council or its designee shall make inspections as are necessary to determine that public sidewalks and alleys within the city are kept in repair and safe for pedestrians or vehicles.  If it is found that any sidewalk or alley abutting on private property is unsafe and in need of repairs, the City Council shall cause a notice to be served, by registered or certified mail or by personal service, upon the record owner of the property, ordering the owner to have the sidewalk or alley repaired and made safe within 30 days and stating that if the owner fails to do so, the city will do so and that the expense thereof must be paid by the owner, and if unpaid it will be made a special assessment against the property concerned.

                        (3)       Repair by city.  If the sidewalk or alley is not repaired within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the City Administrator shall report the facts to the City Council and the City Council shall by resolution order the work done by contract in accordance with law.  The City Administrator shall keep a record of the total cost of the repair attributable to each lot or parcel of property.

            (F)       Personal liability.  The owner of property on which or adjacent to which a current service has been performed shall be personally liable for the cost of the service.  As soon as the service has been completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator, or other designated official, shall prepare a bill and mail it to the owner and thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Administrator.

            (G)      Damage to public property.  Any person driving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance upon any street, road, highway or structure shall be liable for all damages which the surface or structure thereof may sustain as a result of any illegal operation, or driving or moving of the vehicle, equipment or object or contrivance; or as a result of operating, driving or moving any vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance weighing in excess of the maximum weight permitted by statute or this code.  When the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, equipment, object or contrivance, but is operating, driving or moving it with the express or implied permission of the owner, then the owner and the driver shall be jointly and severally liable for any such damage.  Any person who willfully acts or fails to exercise due care and by that act damages any public property shall be liable for the amount thereof, which amount shall be collectable by action or as a lien under M.S. § 514.67, as it may be amended from time to time.

            (H)      Assessment.  On or before September 1 of each year, the City Administrator shall list the total unpaid charges for each type of current service and charges under this section against each separate lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this section.  The City Council may then spread the charges against property benefitted as a special assessment under the authority of M.S. § 429.101 as it may be amended from time to time and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.

Penalty, see § 96.99

NUISANCES

96.15 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
            Whoever by his or her act or failure to perform a legal duty intentionally does any of the following is guilty of maintaining a public nuisance, which is a misdemeanor:

            (A)      Maintains or permits a condition which unreasonably annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, morals, comfort or repose of any considerable number of members of the public;

            (B)       Interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous for passage any public highway or right-of-way, or waters used by the public; or

            (C)       Is guilty of any other act or omission declared by law or §§ 96.16, 96.17 or 96.18, or any other part of this code to be a public nuisance and for which no sentence is specifically provided.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.16 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.
            The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:

            (A)      Exposed accumulation of decayed or unwholesome food or vegetable matter;

            (B)       All diseased animals running at large;

            (C)       All ponds or pools of stagnant water;

            (D)      Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within 24 hours after death;

            (E)       Accumulations of manure, refuse or other debris;

            (F)       Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not rodent-free or fly-tight or which are so maintained as to constitute a health hazard or to emit foul and disagreeable odors;

            (G)      The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream or lake, canal or body of water by sewage, industrial waste or other substances;

            (H)      All noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation upon public or private property;

            (I)        Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities;

            (J)        All public exposure of people having a contagious disease; and

            (K)      Any offensive trade or business as defined by statute not operating under local license.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.17 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY.
            The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:

            (A)      All gambling devices, slot machines and punch boards, except as otherwise authorized by federal, state or local law;

            (B)       Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in those occupations;

            (C)       All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses;

            (D)      All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured or disposed of in violation of law or where, in violation of law, people are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquor, or where intoxicating liquor is kept for sale or other disposition in violation of law, and all liquor and other property used for maintaining that place;

            (E)       Any vehicle used for the unlawful transportation of intoxicating liquor, or for promiscuous sexual intercourse, or any other immoral or illegal purpose.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.18 PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY.
            The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:

            (A)      All snow and ice not removed from public sidewalks 24 hours after the snow or other precipitation causing the condition has ceased to fall;

            (B)       All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear view of all traffic approaching an intersection;

            (C)       All wires and limbs of trees which are so close to the surface of a sidewalk or street as to constitute a danger to pedestrians or vehicles;

            (D)      All obnoxious noises in violation of Minn. Rules Chapter 7030, as they may be amended from time to time which are hereby incorporated by reference into this code.

            (E)       The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the discharging of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any recreational device except through a muffler or other device that effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all applicable state laws and regulations.

            (F)       The using or operation or permitting the using or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for producing or reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly audible manner so as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any person nearby.  Operation of any device referred to above between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section.

            (G)      No person shall participate in any party or other gathering of people giving rise to noise, unreasonably disturbing the peace, quiet, or repose of another person. When a police officer determines that a gathering is creating such a noise disturbance, the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No person shall refuse to leave after being ordered by a police officer to do so. Every owner or tenant of such premises who has knowledge of the disturbance shall make every reasonable effort to see that the disturbance is stopped.

            (H)      Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds except under conditions as are permitted by this code or other applicable law;

            (I)        Radio aerials or television antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner;

            (J)        Any use of property abutting on a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the street or sidewalk;

            (K)      All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, so situated so as to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by ordinance;

            (L)       The allowing of rain water, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk;

            (M)      Any barbed wire fence less than six feet above the ground and within three feet of a public sidewalk or way;

            (N)      All dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or operated on private property as to attract the public;

            (O)      Waste water cast upon or permitted to flow upon streets or other public properties;

            (P)       Accumulations in the open of discarded or disused machinery, household appliances, automobile bodies or other material in a manner conducive to the harboring of rats, mice, snakes or vermin, or the rank growth of vegetation among the items so accumulated, or in a manner creating fire, health or safety hazards from accumulation;

            (Q)      Any well, hole or similar excavation which is left uncovered or in another condition as to constitute a hazard to any child or other person coming on the premises where it is located;

            (R)       Obstruction to the free flow of water in a natural waterway or a public street drain, gutter or ditch with trash of other materials;

            (S)       The placing or throwing on any street, sidewalk or other public property of any glass, tacks, nails, bottles or other substance which may injure any person or animal or damage any pneumatic tire when passing over the substance;

            (T)       The depositing of garbage or refuse on a public right-of-way or on adjacent private property;

            (U)      All other conditions or things which are likely to cause injury to the person or property of anyone.

            (V)      (1)       Noises prohibited. 

                                    (a)       General prohibition.  No person shall make or cause to be made any distinctly and loudly audible noise that unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person or precludes their enjoyment of property or affects their property’s value. This general prohibition is not limited by the specific restrictions of this section.

                                    (b)       Defective vehicles or loads.  No person shall use any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise.

                                    (c)       Loading, unloading, unpacking.  No person shall create loud or excessive noise in loading, unloading, or unpacking any vehicle.

                                    (d)       Radios, phonographs, paging systems, and the like.  No person shall use or operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, paging system, machine or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in a distinct and loudly audible manner as to unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby. Operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or other device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, in the hallway or apartment adjacent, or at a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or building, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

                                    (e)       Schools, churches, hospitals, and the like.  No person shall create any excessive noise on a street, alley or public grounds adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or hospital when the noise unreasonably interferes with the working of the institution or disturbs or unduly annoys its occupants or residents and when conspicuous signs indicate the presence of such institution.

                        (2)       Hourly restriction of certain operations.

                                    (a)       Domestic power equipment.  No person shall operate a power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller, edger, drill or other similar domestic power maintenance equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.  Snow removal equipment is exempt from this provision.

                                    (b)       Refuse hauling.  No person shall collect or remove garbage or refuse in any residential district except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.

                                    (c)       Construction activities.  No person shall engage in or permit construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric, diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.

                        (3)       Noise impact statements.  The Council may require any person applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license for any structure, operation, process, installation or alteration or project that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact statement on a form prescribed by the Council.  It shall evaluate each such statement and take its evaluation into account in approving or disapproving the license or permit applied for or the zoning change requested.

            (W)     Reflected glare or light from private exterior lighting exceeding 0.5 footcandles as measured on the property line of the property where the lighting is located when abutting any residential parcel, and one footcandle when abutting any commercial or industrial parcel.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.19 NUISANCE PARKING AND STORAGE.
            (A)      Declaration of nuisance.  The outside parking and storage on residentially-zoned property of large numbers of vehicles and vehicles, materials, supplies or equipment not customarily used for residential purposes in violation of the requirements set forth below is declared to be a public nuisance because it (a) obstructs views on streets and private property, (b) creates cluttered and otherwise unsightly areas, (c) prevents the full use of residential streets for residential parking, (d) introduces commercial advertising signs into areas where commercial advertising signs are otherwise prohibited, (e) decreases adjoining landowners’ and occupants’ enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (f) otherwise adversely affects property values and neighborhood patterns.

            (B)       Unlawful parking and storage.

                        (1)       A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage of ice fish houses, skateboard ramps, playhouses or other similar non-permanent structures outside continuously for longer than 24 hours in the front-yard area of residential property unless more than 100 feet back from the front property line.

                        (2)       A person must not place, store, or allow the placement or storage of pipe, lumber, forms, steel, machinery, or similar materials, including all materials used in connection with a business, outside on residential property, unless shielded from public view by an opaque cover or fence.

                        (3)       A person must not cause, undertake, permit or allow the outside parking and storage of vehicles on residential property unless it complies with the following requirements:

                                    (a)       No more than four vehicles per lawful dwelling unit may be parked or stored anywhere outside on residential property, except as otherwise permitted or required by the city because of nonresidential characteristics of the property.  This maximum number does not include vehicles of occasional guests who do not reside on the property.

                                    (b)       Vehicles that are parked or stored outside in the front-yard area must be on a paved or graveled parking or driveway area.

                                    (c)       Vehicles, watercraft and other articles stored outside on residential property must be owned by a person who resides on that property. Students who are away at school for periods of time but still claim the property as their legal residence will be considered residents on the property.

(4) These provisions are in addition to any provisions provided for in Section 154 of the Mountain Iron City Code.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.20 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES.
            (A)      It shall be unlawful to keep, park, store or abandon any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition, partially dismantled, used for repair of parts or as a source of repair or replacement parts for other vehicles, kept for scrapping, dismantling or salvage of any kind, or which is not properly licensed for operation with the state, pursuant to M.S. § 168B.011, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.

            (B)       This section does not apply to a motor vehicle enclosed in a building and/or kept out of view from any street, road or alley, and which does not foster complaint from a resident of the city. A privacy fence is permissible.

            (C)       Any motor vehicles described in this section constitute a hazard to the health and welfare of the residents of the community in that such vehicles can harbor noxious diseases, furnish a shelter and breeding place for vermin and present physical danger to the safety and well-being of children and citizens; and vehicles containing fluids which, if released into the environment, can and do cause significant health risks to the community.

(D) These provisions are in addition to any provisions provided for in Section 154 of the Mountain Iron City Code.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.21 BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND APPEARANCE.
            (A)      Declaration of nuisance.  Buildings, fences and other structures that have been so poorly maintained that their physical condition and appearance detract from the surrounding neighborhood are declared to be public nuisances because they (a) are unsightly, (b) decrease adjoining landowners and occupants’ enjoyment of their property and neighborhood, and (c) adversely affect property values and neighborhood patterns.

            (B)       Standards.  A building, fence or other structure is a public nuisance if it does not comply with the following requirements:

                        (1)       No part of any exterior surface may have deterioration, holes, breaks, gaps, loose or rotting boards or timbers.

                        (2)       Every exterior surface that has had a surface finish such as paint applied must be maintained to avoid noticeable deterioration of the finish.  No wall or other exterior surface may have peeling, cracked, chipped or otherwise deteriorated surface finish on more than 20% of:

                                    (a)       Any one wall or other flat surface; or

                                    (b)       All door and window moldings, eaves, gutters, and similar projections on any one side or surface.

                        (3)       No glass, including windows and exterior light fixtures, may be broken or cracked, and no screens may be torn or separated from moldings.

                        (4)       Exterior doors and shutters must be hung properly and have an operable mechanism to keep them securely shut or in place.

                        (5)       Cornices, moldings, lintels, sills, bay or dormer windows and similar projections must be kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects that make them hazardous or unsightly.

                        (6)       Roof surfaces must be tight and have no defects that admit water. All roof drainage systems must be secured and hung properly.

                        (7)       Chimneys, antennae, air vents, and other similar projections must be structurally sound and in good repair.  These projections must be secured properly, where applicable, to an exterior wall or exterior roof.

                        (8)       Foundations must be structurally sound and in good repair.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.22 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS.
            The Police Department or Sheriff, if the city has at the time no Police Department, shall enforce the provisions relating to nuisances.  Any peace officer shall have the power to inspect private premises and take all reasonable precautions to prevent the commission and maintenance of public nuisances.  Except in emergency situations of imminent danger to human life and safety, no police officer shall enter private property for the purpose of inspecting or preventing public nuisances without the permission of the owner, resident or other person in control of the property, unless the officer has obtained a warrant or order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the entry.

96.23 ABATEMENT.
            (A)      Notice.  Written notice of violation; notice of the time, date, place and subject of any hearing before the City Council; notice of City Council order; and notice of motion for summary enforcement hearing shall be given as set forth in this section.

                        (1)       Notice of violation.  Written notice of violation shall be served by a peace officer on the owner of record or occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of violation, notice of violation shall be served by posting it on the premises.

                        (2)       Notice of City Council hearing.  Written notice of any City Council hearing to determine or abate a nuisance shall be served on the owner of record and occupant of the premises either in person or by certified or registered mail.  If the premises is not occupied, the owner of record is unknown, or the owner of record or occupant refuses to accept notice of the City Council hearing, notice of City Council hearing shall be served by posting it on the premises.

                        (3)       Notice of City Council order.  Except for those cases determined by the city to require summary enforcement, written notice of any City Council order shall be made as provided in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.

                        (4)       Notice of motion for summary enforcement.  Written notice of any motion for summary enforcement shall be made as provided for in M.S. § 463.17 (Hazardous and Substandard Building Act), as it may be amended from time to time.

            (B)       Procedure.  Whenever a peace officer determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on the premises in the city, the officer shall notify in writing the owner of record or occupant of the premises of such fact and order that the nuisance be terminated or abated.  The notice of violation shall specify the steps to be taken to abate the nuisance and the time within which the nuisance is to be abated.  If the notice of violation is not complied with within the time specified, the officer shall report that fact forthwith to the City Council.  Thereafter, the City Council may, after notice to the owner or occupant and an opportunity to be heard, determine that the condition identified in the notice of violation is a nuisance and further order that if the nuisance is not abated within the time prescribed by the City Council, the city may seek injunctive relief by serving a copy of the City Council order and notice of motion for summary enforcement.

            (C)       Emergency procedure; summary enforcement.  In cases of emergency, where delay in abatement required to complete the notice and procedure requirements set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section will permit a continuing nuisance to unreasonably endanger public health safety or welfare, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.  To proceed with summary enforcement, the officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists or is being maintained on premises in the city and that delay in abatement of the nuisance will unreasonably endanger public health, safety or welfare.  The officer shall notify in writing the occupant or owner of the premises of the nature of the nuisance and of the city’s intention to seek summary enforcement and the time and place of the City Council meeting to consider the question of summary enforcement.  The City Council shall determine whether or not the condition identified in the notice to the owner or occupant is a nuisance, whether public health, safety or welfare will be unreasonably endangered by delay in abatement required to complete the procedure set forth in division (A) of this section, and may order that the nuisance be immediately terminated or abated.  If the nuisance is not immediately terminated or abated, the City Council may order summary enforcement and abate the nuisance.

            (D)      Immediate abatement.  Nothing in this section shall prevent the city, without notice or other process, from immediately abating any condition which poses an imminent and serious hazard to human life or safety.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.24 RECOVERY OF COST.
            (A)      Personal liability.  The owner of premises on which a nuisance has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the cost to the city of the abatement, including administrative costs.  As soon as the work has been completed and the cost determined, the City Administrator or other official shall prepare a bill for the cost and mail it to the owner.  Thereupon the amount shall be immediately due and payable at the office of the City Administrator.

            (B)       Assessment.  After notice and hearing as provided in M.S. § 429.061, as it may be amended from time to time, if the nuisance is a public health or safety hazard on private property, the accumulation of snow and ice on public sidewalks, the growth of weeds on private property or outside the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees, the City Administrator shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other the charges as well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. § 429.101 against each separate lot or parcel to which the charges are attributable.  The City Council may then spread the charges against the property under that statute and other pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not exceeding ten, as the City Council may determine in each case.

Penalty, see § 96.99

WEEDS

96.35 SHORT TITLE.
             This subchapter shall be cited as the “Weed Ordinance.”

96.36 JURISDICTION.
             This subchapter shall be in addition to any state statute or county ordinance presently in effect, subsequently added, amended or repealed.

96.37 DEFINITIONS; EXCLUSIONS.
             (A)      For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

                        DESTRUCTION ORDER.  The notice served by the City Council or designated city official, in cases of appeal, on the property owner of the ordinance violation.

                        PROPERTY OWNER.  The person occupying the property, the holder of legal title or a person having control over the property of another, such as a right-of-way, easement, license or lease.

                        WEEDS, GRASSES and RANK VEGETATION.  Includes but is not limited to the following:

                                    (1)       Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be limited to:  alum (allium), Buckthorn, Bur Cucumber, Canada Thistle, Corncockle, Cressleaf Groundsel, Curly Dock, Dodder, Field Bindweed, French Weed, Hairy Whitetop, Hedge Bindweed, Hoary Cress, Horsenettle, Johnsongrass, Leafy Spurge, Mile-A-Minute Weed, Musk Thistle, Oxeye Daisy, Perennial Sowthistle, Poison Hemlock, Purple Loosestrife, Quackgrass, Russian Knapweed, Russian Thistle, Serrated Tussock, Shatter Cane, Sorghum, Wild Carrot, Wild Garlic, Wild Mustard, Wild Onion, Wild Parsnip;

                                    (2)       Grapevines when growing in groups of 100 or more and not pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive years;

                                    (3)       Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;

                                    (4)       Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches.

                                    (5)       Rank vegetation includes the uncontrolled, uncultivated growth of annuals and perennial plants.

                                    (6)       The term WEEDS does not include shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops.

            (B)       In no event shall cultivated plants or crops include plants which have been defined by state statute or administrative rule as being noxious or detrimental plants.

96.38 OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR TRIMMING, REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.
             All property owners shall be responsible for the removal, cutting, or disposal and elimination of weeds, grasses and rank vegetation or other uncontrolled plant growth on their property, which at the time of notice, is in excess of 12 inches in height.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.39 FILING COMPLAINT.
             Any person, including the city, who believes there is property located within the corporate limits of the city which has growing plant matter in violation of this subchapter shall make a written complaint signed, dated and filed with the City Administrator.  If the city makes the complaint, an employee, officer or Council Member of the city shall file the complaint in all respects as set out above.

96.40 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS.
             (A)      Upon receiving notice of the probable existence of weeds in violation of this subchapter, a person designated by the City Council shall make an inspection and prepare a written report to the City Council regarding the condition.  The City Council, upon concluding that there is a probable belief that this subchapter has been violated, shall forward written notification in the form of a “Destruction Order” to the property owner or the person occupying the property as that information is contained within the records of the City Administrator or any other city agency.  The notice shall be served in writing by certified mail.  The notice shall provide that within seven regular business days after the receipt of the notice that the designated violation shall be removed by the property owner or person occupying the property.

            (B)       (1)       All notices are to be in writing and all filings are to be with the City Administrator.

                        (2)       Certified mailing to the City Administrator or others is deemed filed on the date of posting to the United States Postal Service.

96.41 APPEALS.
            (A)      The property owner may appeal by filing written notice of objections with the City Council within 48 hours of the notice, excluding weekends and holidays, if the property owner contests the finding of the City Council.  It is the property owner’s responsibility to demonstrate that the matter in question is shrubs, trees, cultivated plants or crops or is not otherwise in violation of this subchapter, and should not be subject to destruction under the subchapter.

            (B)       An appeal by the property owner shall be brought before the City Council and shall be decided by a majority vote of the Council Members in attendance and being at a regularly scheduled or special meeting of the City Council.

96.42 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
             In the event that the property owner shall fail to comply with the “Destruction Order” within seven regular business days and has not filed a notice within 48 hours to the City Administrator of an intent to appeal, the City Council may employ the services of city employees or outside contractors and remove the weeds to conform to this subchapter by all lawful means.

96.43 LIABILITY.
             (A)      The property owner is liable for all costs of removal, cutting or destruction of weeds as defined by this subchapter.

            (B)       The property owner is responsible for all collection costs associated with weed destruction, including but not limited to court costs, attorney’s fees and interest on any unpaid amounts incurred by the city.  If the city uses municipal employees, it shall set and assign an appropriate per hour rate for employees, equipment, supplies and chemicals which may be used.

            (C)       All sums payable by the property owner are to be paid to the City Administrator and to be deposited in a general fund as compensation for expenses and costs incurred by the city.

            (D)      All sums payable by the property owner may be collected as a special assessment as provided by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time.

OPEN BURNING

96.60 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            FIRE CHIEF, FIRE MARSHAL, and ASSISTANT FIRE MARSHALS.  The Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals of the Fire Department which provides fire protection services to the city.

            OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any matter if the resultant combustion products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney, except a “recreational fire” as defined herein.  Mobile cooking devices such as manufactured hibachis, charcoal grills, wood smokers, and propane or natural gas devices are not defined as “open burning.” 

            RECREATIONAL FIRE.  A fire set with approved starter fuel no more than three feet in height, contained within the border of a “recreational fire site” using dry, clean wood; producing little detectable smoke, odor or soot beyond the property line; conducted with an adult tending the fire at all times; for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation for social purposes; extinguished completely before quitting the occasion; and respecting weather conditions, neighbors, burning bans, and air quality so that nuisance, health or safety hazards will not be created.  No more than one recreational fire is allowed on any property at one time.

            RECREATIONAL FIRE SITE.  An area of no more than a three foot diameter circle (measured from the inside of the fire ring or border); completely surrounded by non-combustible and non-smoke or odor producing material, either of natural rock, cement, brick, tile or blocks or ferrous metal only an which area is depressed below ground, on the ground, or on a raised bed.  Included are permanent outdoor wood burning fireplaces.  Burning barrels are not a “recreation fire site” as defined herein.  Recreational fire sites shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any structure.

            STARTER FUELS.  Dry, untreated, unpainted, kindling, branches, cardboard or charcoal fire starter.  Paraffin candles and alcohols are permitted as starter fuels and as aids to ignition only.  Propane gas torches or other clean gas burning devices causing minimal pollution must be used to start an open burn.

            WOOD.  Dry, clean fuel only such as twigs, branches, limbs, “presto logs,” charcoal, cord wood or untreated dimensional lumber. The term does not include wood that is green with leaves or needles, rotten, wet, oil soaked, or treated with paint, glue or preservatives.  Clean pallets may be used for recreational fires when cut into three foot lengths.

96.61 PROHIBITED MATERIALS.
            (A)      No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning oils, petro fuels, rubber, plastics, chemically treated materials, or other materials which produce excessive or noxious smoke such as tires, railroad ties, treated, painted or glued wood composite shingles, tar paper, insulation, composition board, sheet rock, wiring, paint or paint fillers.

            (B)       No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of hazardous waste or salvage operations, open burning of solid waste generated from an industrial or manufacturing process or from a service or commercial establishment or building material generated from demolition of commercial or institutional structures.

            (C)       No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of discarded material resulting from the handling, processing, storage, preparation, serving or consumption of food.

            (D)      No person shall conduct, cause or permit open burning of any leaves or grass clippings.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.62 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR OPEN BURNING.
           No person shall start or allow any open burning on any property in the city without first having obtained an open burn permit, except that a permit is not required for any fire which is a recreational fire as defined in § 96.60.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.63 PURPOSES ALLOWED FOR OPEN BURNING.
            (A)      Open burn permits may be issued only for the following purposes:

                        (1)       Elimination of fire of health hazard that cannot be abated by other practical means.

                        (2)       Ground thawing for utility repair and construction.

                        (3)       Disposal of vegetative matter for managing forest, prairie or wildlife habitat, and in the development and maintenance of land and rights-of-way where chipping, composting, landspreading or other alternative methods are not practical.

                        (4)       Disposal of diseased trees generated on site, diseased or infected nursery stock, diseased bee hives.

                        (5)       Disposal of unpainted, untreated, non-glued lumber and wood shakes generated from construction, where recycling, reuse, removal or other alternative disposal methods are not practical.

            (B)       Fire Training permits can only issued by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.64 PERMIT APPLICATION FOR OPEN BURNING; PERMIT FEES.
            (A)      Open burning permits shall be obtained by making application on a form prescribed the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and adopted by the Fire Department.  The permit application shall be presented to the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, and Assistant Fire Marshals for reviewing and processing those applications.

            (B)       An open burning permit shall require the payment of a fee.  Permit fees shall be in the amount established by resolution of the City Council, as it may be amended from time to time.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.65 PERMIT PROCESS FOR OPEN BURNING.
           Upon receipt of the completed open burning permit application and permit fee, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals shall schedule a preliminary site inspection to locate the proposed burn site, note special conditions, and set dates and time of permitted burn and review fire safety considerations.

96.66 PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBILITY.
            (A)      Prior to starting an open burn, the permit holder shall be responsible for confirming that no burning ban or air quality alert is in effect.  Every open burn event shall be constantly attended by the permit holder or his or her competent representative.  The open burning site shall have available, appropriate communication and fire suppression equipment as set out in the fire safety plan.

            (B)       The open burn fire shall be completely extinguished before the permit holder or his or her representative leaves the site.  No fire may be allowed to smolder with no person present.  It is the responsibility of the permit holder to have a valid permit, as required by this subchapter, available for inspection on the site by the Police Department, Fire Department, MPCA representative or DNR forest officer.

            (C)       The permit holder is responsible for compliance and implementation of all general conditions, special conditions, and the burn event safety plan as established in the permit issued.  The permit holder shall be responsible for all costs incurred as a result of the burn, including but not limited to fire suppression and administrative fees.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.67 REVOCATION OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
            The open burning permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of DNR forest officer, the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals.  Reasons for revocation include but are not limited to a fire hazard existing or developing during the course of the burn, any of the conditions of the permit being violated during the course of the burn, pollution or nuisance conditions developing during the course of the burn, or a fire smoldering with no flame present.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.68 DENIAL OF OPEN BURNING PERMIT.
            If established criteria for the issuance of an open burning permit are not met during review of the application, it is determined that a practical alternative method for disposal of the material exists, or a pollution or nuisance condition would result, or if a burn event safety plan cannot be drafted to the satisfaction of the Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Assistant Fire Marshals, these officers may deny the application for the open burn permit.

96.69 BURNING BAN OR AIR QUALITY ALERT.
            No recreational fire or open burn will be permitted when the city or DNR has officially declared a burning ban due to potential hazardous fire conditions or when the MPCA has declared an Air Quality Alert.

Penalty, see § 96.99

96.70 RULES AND LAWS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
            The provisions of M.S. §§ 88.16 to 88.22, as these statutes may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this subchapter as if fully set forth at this point.

96.99 PENALTY.
            Violation of any provision of this chapter, including maintaining a nuisance after being notified in writing by first class mail of a violation of any provision of this chapter, shall be a misdemeanor and punished as provided in § 10.99

Chapter Number 97, Knox Box
CHAPTER 97           KNOX BOX

Ordinance Number 01-16 Adopted March 4, 2016

 97.01   KEY LOCK BOX SYSTEM.

(A)      The following structures shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the main entrance or such other location required by the Fire Chief. Said lock box shall be installed to the front of the building near the entrance at a height of a minimum of 48 inches and not to exceed 80 inches.

(1)       Commercial or industrial structures protected by an automatic alarm system or automatic suppression system, or such structures that are secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency;

(2)       Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units;

(3)       Governmental structures and nursing care facilities;

(B)       All newly constructed structures subject to this section shall have key lock box (Knox Box) installed and operational prior to the issuance of occupancy permit. All Structures in existence on the effective date of this section and subject to this section shall have one year from the effective date of this section to have a key lock box installed and operational. Any existing structure that is purchased or overtaken during the first year of the ordinance must install a key lock box within 30 days of the purchase or overtaking. Any structure in Section A, Items 1, 2 or 3 that will undergo additions, upgrades or repairs shall also require a key lock box installed at the time of the upgrades/repairs.

(C)       The fire chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented within the city and shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system.

(D)      The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall, at all times, keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access to the structure.

(E)       The fire chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations for the use of the lock box system.

97.03   ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY. 

Penalties shall be accordance with Section 10.99 of the Mountain Iron City Code.

Chapter Number 110, General Business Provisions
CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL BUSINESS PROVISIONS

Section

            General Provisions

            110.01 Licensing massage parlors

            Lodging Tax

            110.20 Definitions

            110.21 Imposition of tax

            110.22 Collections

            110.23 Exemptions

            110.24 Advertising no tax

            110.25 Payment and returns

            110.26 Examination of return, adjustments, notices and demands

            110.27 Refunds

            110.28 Failure to file a return

            110.29 Penalties

            110.30 Administration of tax

            110.31 Examine records

            110.32 Use of proceeds

            110.33 Appeals

            110.34 Violations

GENERAL PROVISIONS

110.01 LICENSING MASSAGE PARLORS.
            (A)      For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

                        MASSAGE. The performance of manipulative exercises upon the human body of another by rubbing, kneading, stroking or tapping with the hand or hands or with any mechanical or bathing device.

                        MASSAGE PARLOR.  Any place or establishment wherein a massage is made available to the public for a monetary or valuable consideration.

            (B)       It is unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to own, establish, maintain or operate a massage parlor without a license therefor from the city in accordance with this section.

            (C)       The annual license fee for a massage parlor shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

            (D)      The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

                        (1)       A duly licensed medical doctor, osteopath, chiropractor, nurse or physical therapist while engaged in the practice of their respective profession; or

                        (2)       A person engaging in the practice of massage on his or her spouse or relative within the first degree of consanguinity in either of their residences; or

                        (3)       A place or establishment which is a duly licensed hospital, dispensary, convalescent home or nursing home.

            (E)       In a prosecution for violation of this section, these exceptions shall constitute affirmative defenses and it shall be incumbent upon the defendant to show that he or she or the place involved is not subject to the provisions of this section.

            (F)       Each word, phrase and division of this section is declared to be an individual section or provision and the holding of any word, phrase and division to be void, ineffective or unconstitutional for any cause whatsoever shall not be deemed to affect any other word, phrase or division or the application of any word, phrase or division to circumstances or facts not connected with such holding.

(Prior Code, Chapter 16)  Penalty, see § 10.99

 LODGING TAX

110.20 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            LODGER. The person obtaining lodging from an operator.

            LODGING. The furnishing for a consideration of lodging by a hotel, motel or rooming house except where such lodging shall be for a continuous period of 30 days or more to the same lodger(s). The furnishing of rooms by religious, educational or non-profit organizations shall not constitute lodging for purposes of this chapter.

            MUNICIPALITY. The City of Mountain Iron.

            OPERATOR. A person who provides lodging to others or any officer, agent or employee of such person.

            PERSON. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, estate, receiver, trustee, executor, administrator, assignee, syndicate or any other combination of individuals. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any provision of this chapter prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to a corporation, association or partnership shall mean the officers or partners thereof as the case may be.

            RENT. The total consideration valued in money charged for lodging, whether paid in money or otherwise, but shall not include any charges for services rendered in connection with furnishing lodging other than the room charge itself.

            TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator.

110.21 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
            There is imposed a tax of 3% on the rent charged by an operator for providing lodging to any person after September 15, 1988. The tax shall be stated and charged separately and shall be collected by the operator from the lodger.  The tax collected by the operator shall be a debt owed by the operator to the municipality and shall be extinguished only by payment to the municipality.  In no case shall the tax imposed by this section upon an operator exceed the amount of tax that the operator is authorized and required by this chapter to collect from a lodger.

(Prior Code, § 64.02)

110.22 COLLECTIONS.
            Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter at the time the rent is paid. The tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator for the municipality.  The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the rent charged for the lodging and those persons paying the tax shall receive a receipt of payment from the operator.

(Prior Code, § 64.03)

110.23 EXEMPTIONS.
            An exemption shall be granted to any person as to whom or whose occupancy it is beyond the power of the municipality to tax.  No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and such a claim shall be made in writing and under penalty of perjury on forms provided by the Tax Administrator. All such claims shall be forwarded to the Tax Administrator when the returns and collections are submitted as required by this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 64.04)

110.24 ADVERTISING NO TAX.
            It shall be unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or any customer, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rent or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded.  In computing the tax to be collected, amounts of tax less than one cent shall be considered an additional cent.

(Prior Code, § 64.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99

110.25 PAYMENT AND RETURNS.
            (A)      The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the operator to the Tax Administrator monthly not later than 25 days after the end of the month in which the taxes were collected. At the time of payment the operator shall submit a return upon such forms and containing such information as the Tax Administrator may require. The return shall contain the following minimum information:

                        (1)       The total amount of rent collected for lodging during the period covered by the return;

                        (2)       The amount of tax required to be collected and due for the period;

                        (3)       The signature of the person filing the return or that of his or her agent duly authorized in writing;

                        (4)       The period covered by the return;

                        (5)       The amount of uncollectable rental charged subject to the lodging tax.

            (B)       The operator may offset against the taxes payable with respect to any reporting period the amount of taxes imposed by this chapter previously paid as a result of any transaction, the consideration for which became uncollectable during such reporting period, but only in proportion to the portion of such consideration which became uncollectable.

(Prior Code, § 64.06)

110.26 EXAMINATION OF RETURN, ADJUSTMENTS, NOTICES AND DEMANDS.
            The Tax Administrator shall, after return is filed, examine the same and make any investigation or examination of the records and accounts of the person making the return deemed necessary for determining its correctness. The tax computed on the basis of such examination shall be the tax to be paid. If the tax is found to be greater than that paid, such excess shall be paid to the Tax Administrator ten days after receipt of a notice thereof given either personally or sent by registered mail to the address shown on the return. If the tax paid is greater than the tax found to be due, the excess shall be refunded to the person who paid the tax to the Tax Administrator ten days after determination of such refund.

(Prior Code, § 64.07)

110.27 REFUNDS.
            Any person may apply to the Tax Administrator for a refund of taxes paid for the prescribed period in excess of the amount legally due for that period, provided that no application for refund shall be considered unless filed within one year after such tax was paid or within one year from the filing of the return, whichever period is the longer. The Tax Administrator shall examine the claim and make and file written findings thereon denying or allowing the claim in whole or in part and shall mail a notice thereof by registered mail to such person at the address stated upon the return. If such claim is allowed in whole or in part, the Tax Administrator shall credit the amount of the allowance against any taxes due under this subchapter from the claimant and the balance of said allowance, if any, shall be paid by the Tax Administrator to the claimant.

(Prior Code, § 64.08)

110.28 FAILURE TO FILE A RETURN.
            (A)      If any operator required by this chapter to file a return shall fail to do so within the time prescribed or shall make, willfully or otherwise, an incorrect, false or fraudulent return, the operator shall, upon written notice and demand, file such return or corrected return within five days of receipt of such written notice and shall at the same time pay any tax due on the basis thereof. If such person shall fail to file such return or corrected return, for such person from such knowledge and information as the Tax Administrator can obtain, and assess a tax on the basis thereof, which tax (less any payments theretofore made on account of the tax for the taxable period covered by such return) shall be paid upon within five days of the receipt of written notice and demand for such payment. Any such return of assessment made by the administrator shall be prima facie correct and valid, and such person shall have the burden of establishing its incorrectness or invalidity in any action or proceeding in respect thereto.

            (B)       If any portion of a tax imposed by this chapter, including penalties thereon, is not paid within 30 days after it is required to be paid, the prosecuting attorney for the municipality may institute such legal action as may be necessary to recover the amount due, plus interest, penalties, the costs and disbursements of any action.

            (C)       Upon a showing of good cause, the Tax Administrator may grant an operator one 30 day extension of time within which to file a return and make payment of taxes as required by this chapter, provided that interest during such period of extension shall be added to the taxes due at the rate of 10% per annum.

(Prior Code, § 64.09)

110.29 PENALTIES.
            (A)      If any tax imposed by this chapter is not paid within the time herein specified for the payment, or any extension thereof, there shall be added thereto a specific penalty equal to 10% of the amount remaining unpaid.

            (B)       In case of any failure to make and file a return within the time prescribed by this chapter, unless it is shown that such failure is not due to willful neglect, there shall be added to the tax in addition to the 10% specific penalty provided in division (A) of this section, 10% if the failure is for not more than 30 days with an additional 5% for each additional 30 days or fraction thereof during which such failure continues, not exceeding 25% in the aggregate. If the penalty as computed does not exceed $10, a minimum penalty of $10 shall be assessed. The amount so added to any tax shall be collected at the same time and the same manner and as a part of the tax unless the tax has been paid before the discovery of the negligence, in which case the amount so added shall be collected in the same manner as the tax.

            (C)       If any person willfully fails to file any return or make any payment required by this chapter or willfully files a false or fraudulent return or willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any such a tax or payment thereof, there shall also be imposed as a penalty an amount equal to 50% of any tax (less any amounts paid on the basis of such false or fraudulent return) found due for the period to which such return related. The penalty imposed by this subdivision shall be collected as part of the tax and shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by this chapter.

            (D)      All payments received shall be credited first to penalties, next to interest, and then to the tax due.

            (E)       The amount of tax not timely paid, together with any penalty provided by this section, shall bear interest at the maximum rate per annum as prescribed by M.S. § 270.75, as it may be amended from time to time, from the time such tax should have been paid until paid. Any interest and penalty shall be added to the tax and collected as part thereof.

(Prior Code, § 64.10)

110.30 ADMINISTRATION OF TAX.
            The Tax Administrator shall administer and enforce the assessment and collection of the taxes imposed by this chapter.  The Tax Administrator shall cause to be prepared blank forms for the returns and other documents required by this chapter and shall distribute the same throughout the city and furnish them on application, but failure to receive or secure them shall not relieve any person from any obligation required of him or her under this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 64.11)

110.31 EXAMINE RECORDS.
            The Tax Administrator and those persons acting on behalf of the Tax Administrator authorized in writing by the Tax Administrator or the municipality may examine the books, papers and records of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was made, to ascertain the tax as provided in this chapter. Every such operator is directed and required to give to the said person authorized to examine the books, papers and records, the means, facilities and opportunity for such examinations and investigations as are authorized.

(Prior Code, § 64.12)

110.32 USE OF PROCEEDS.
            Five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the Tax Administrator for costs of collections. Ninety-five percent of the proceeds obtained from the collection of taxes pursuant to this chapter shall be used in accordance with M.S. § 469.190, as it may be amended from time to time, to provide funding to Iron Trail Travel and Convention Bureau for the purpose of marketing and promoting the municipality as a tourist or convention center.

(Prior Code, § 64.14)

110.33 APPEALS.
            (A)      Any operator aggrieved by any notice, order or determination made by the Tax Administrator under this chapter may file a petition for review of such notice, order or determination detailing the operator’s reasons for contesting the notice, order or determination. The petition shall contain the name of the petitioner, the petitioner’s address and the location of the lodging subject to the order, notice or determination.

            (B)       The petition shall be filed with the Tax Administrator within ten days after the notice, order or determination for which review is sought has been mailed or served upon the person requesting review.

            (C)       Upon receipt of the petition the Tax Administrator shall set a date and time for a meeting with the petitioner and shall give the petitioner at least five days prior written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting.

            (D)      At the meeting, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice, order or determination should be modified or withdrawn. If the meeting does not result in the matter being resolved to the satisfaction of the petitioner, the petitioner may appeal to the Mountain Iron City Council.

            (E)       A petitioner seeking to appeal a decision to the City Council must file a written notice of appeal with the City Council, in care of the City Administrator, within ten days after the Tax Administrator’s decision following the meeting in division (D) of this section has been mailed to the petitioner. The matter will thereupon be placed on the Council agenda as soon as is practical. At least five days prior to the hearing before the City Council, the Tax Administrator shall prepare and serve on the petitioner a memorandum of proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law. A copy of the memorandum shall be presented to the City Council at the time of the appeal hearing. The Council shall then review the proposed findings of fact and conclusions to determine whether they are correct. Upon a determination by the Council that findings and conclusions are incorrect, the Council may modify, reverse or affirm the decision of the Tax Administrator based upon an application of the sections of this chapter and the evidence presented.

(Prior Code, § 64.15)

110.34 VIOLATIONS.
            Any person who shall willfully fail to make a return required by this chapter, who shall fail to pay the tax after written demand for payment, shall fail to remit the taxes collected or any penalty or interest imposed by this chapter after written demand for such payment or who shall refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agents or employees to examine the books, records and papers under his or her control or who shall willfully make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(Prior Code, § 64.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99

Chapter Number 111, Special Events
CHAPTER 111:  SPECIAL EVENTS

Section

            111.01 Purpose and findings

            111.02 Definitions

            111.03 Permit required

            111.04 Application for permit

            111.05 Issuance of permit, conditions and posting

            111.06 Exceptions to the permit

            111.98 Violations

111.01 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
            The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Mountain Iron by regulating the time, place and manner of conduct of special events and by establishing permit requirements for conducting special events as such are herein defined.  The Mountain Iron City Council finds that special events often exceed the city’s capacity to provide usual city services.  Such city services include, but are not limited to sanitary, fire, police and utility services.  The Mountain Iron City Council also finds these regulations necessary to ensure that such events are conducted with sufficient consideration given to public safety issues, including, among other things, the impact of such events on parking and vehicular traffic within the city.

(Ord. 03-99, passed 9-20-1999)

111.02 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            PERSON. A natural person, association, organization, club, group formed for a common purpose, partnership of any kind, limited liability company, corporation or any other legal entity.

            SPECIAL EVENTS. An outdoor gathering of at least 25 individuals, whether on public or private property, assembled with a common purpose for a period of one hour or longer.  SPECIAL EVENTS include, but are not limited to concerts, fairs, carnivals, circuses, parades, flea markets, marathons, walkathons, festivals, races, bicycle events, celebrations or any other gathering or events of similar nature. Special events do not include noncommercial events held on private property such as graduation parties or social parties.

(Ord. 03-99, passed 9-20-1999)

111.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
            No person shall hold, conduct or participate in a special event within the city, unless a permit has been issued for such event upon timely written application made to the city.

(Ord. 03-99, passed 9-20-1999)

111.04 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
            Written application for special event permits must be made at least 30 days in advance of the event’s proposed date in a form prescribed by the City Council.  This application period shall not begin to run until a complete application has been filed with the city.  Application forms shall be made available in the office of the City Administrator.  A fee, in an amount as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council, shall be paid to the city along with the completed application form. In addition to the fee, the applicant shall pay all additional costs incurred by the city as a direct result of the special event. Failure to provide a complete application or to pay the fee, as herein required, is sufficient reason to deny the special event permit.

(Ord. 03-99, passed 9-20-1999)

111.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, CONDITIONS AND POSTING.
            (A)      Special event permits will be issued upon City Council approval.  The Council may attach such reasonable conditions to the permit as are deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare.  Such conditions may pertain to any of the following:

                        (1)       Location and hours during which the event may be held;

                        (2)       Sanitation/availability of potable water;

                        (3)       Security/crowd management;

                        (4)       Parking and traffic issues;

                        (5)       Emergency and medical services;

                        (6)       Clean up of premises and surrounding area/trash disposal;

                        (7)       Insurance;

                        (8)       Lighting;

                        (9)       Fire service/safety;

                        (10)     Temporary construction, barricades/fencing;

                        (11)     Removal of advertising/promotional materials;

                        (12)     Noise levels;

                        (13)     Alcohol consumption;

                        (14)     Any other conditions which the Council deems necessary.

            (B)       Upon Council approval, the City Administrator shall issue a permit to the person(s) named in the permit application. The permit shall clearly state the conditions, if any, imposed by the Council.  Copies of the permit shall be posted in three prominent locations during the special event.

(Ord. 03-99, passed 9-20-1999)

111.06 EXCEPTIONS TO THE PERMIT.
            The permit requirement contained in this chapter does not apply to the following:

            (A)      Special events sponsored and managed by the city;

            (B)       Funerals and funeral processions;

            (C)       The grounds of any school, playground, place of worship, hotel conference center, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium or similar permanent place of assembly when used for regularly established assembly purposes.

(Ord. 03-99, passed 9-20-1999)

111.98 VIOLATIONS.
            (A)      Any person who violates any condition of a special event permit or any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as prescribed by state law. 

            (B)       Enforcement of this section may, at the Council’s discretion, take any of the following forms:

                        (1)       Citation/criminal prosecution;

                        (2)       Injunctions, declaratory judgements or other civil remedies;

                        (3)       Permit revocation;

                        (4)       Disbursement of persons gathered.

(Ord. 03-99, passed 9-20-1999)  Penalty, see § 10.99

Chapter Number 112, Gambling
CHAPTER 112:  GAMBLING

Section

            112.01 Definitions

            112.02 Donation required

            112.03 Reports

            112.04 Suspension, revocation and nonrenewal of licenses

            112.05 Charitable Gambling Fund

112.01 DEFINITIONS.
            The terms contained in this section shall have the meaning as ascribed to them by M.S. §§ 349.11 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and any successor statutes dealing with regulation of lawful charitable gambling.

            NET PROFITS.  Profits less allowable expenses under the laws and regulations of the State of Minnesota relating to lawful gambling.

(Ord. 01-99, passed 4-19-1999)

112.02 DONATION REQUIRED.
            Any organization licensed to conduct lawful gambling within the city shall donate 10% of its net profits from the conduct of lawful gambling each month to the Special Charitable Gambling Fund.  Such donations shall be made within 15 days at the end of each calendar quarter.  For purposes of this section, a calendar quarter shall be deemed to end at 11:59 p.m. on the last day of March, June, September and December.

(Ord. 01-99, passed 4-19-1999)

112.03 REPORTS.
            All organizations conducting lawful gambling within the city shall provide the City Administrator with copies of all reports it provides to the Charitable Gambling Board.

(Ord. 01-99, passed 4-19-1999)

112.04 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION AND NONRENEWAL OF LICENSES.
            If any organization shall fail to make payments required by this section or fail to provide the City Administrator with reports as required by this section, such failure shall be grounds for the city to recommend to the Charitable Gambling Board that the gambling license for such organization be suspended, revoked or not renewed.

(Ord. 01-99, passed 4-19-1999)

112.05 CHARITABLE GAMBLING FUND.
            (A)      There is created a Mountain Iron Charitable Gambling Fund which shall be held for safe-keeping by the city in an account separate from any city funds.  Such funds shall be designated the Mountain Iron Charitable Gambling Fund.  No expenditures shall be made from such funds except upon resolution by the City Council and then only for lawful purposes, as defined by M.S. § 349.12, Subd. 25, as it may be amended from time to time.

            (B)       Each organization within the city which is licensed by the state to conduct lawful gambling shall contribute 10% of its net profits, as defined by M.S. § 349.12, as it may be amended from time to time, monthly to the Mountain Iron Charitable Gambling Fund.

(Ord. 01-99, passed 4-19-1999)

Chapter Number 113, Peddling, Hawking, Canvassing, Soliciting
CHAPTER 113:  PEDDLING, HAWKING, CANVASSING, SOLICITING AND AUCTIONEERING

Section

            113.01 Definitions

            113.03 Separate permits

            113.04 Issuance of permits

            113.05 Permit types

            113.06 Revocation of permit

            113.07 Limited hours

            113.08 Fees for permits

            113.09 Signs excluding peddlers and the like

            113.10 Auctions

113.01 DEFINITIONS.
 Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

NON-COMMERCIAL DOOR-TO-DOOR ADVOCATE. A person who goes door-to-door for the primary purpose of disseminating religious, political, social, or other ideological beliefs. For purpose of this Chapter, the term door-to-door advocate shall fall under the term solicitor and include door-to-door canvassing and pamphleteering intended for non-commercial purposes.

PEDDLER. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying for exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personnel property, or services that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. For purpose of this Chapter, the term peddler shall have the same common meaning as the term hawker.

PERSON. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, partnership, or similar association.

PROFESSIONAL FUNDRAISER. Any person, including a corporation or other entity, who, for compensation, performs any solicitations or other services for a religious, political, social, or other charitable organization.

REGULAR BUSINESS DAY. Any day during which the City hall is normally open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be considered regular business days.

SOLICITOR. A person who goes from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property, or services of which he or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person’s activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. For purposes of this Chapter, the term solicitor shall have the same meaning as the term canvasser.

TRANSIENT MERCHANT. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property and who does not remain in any one location for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days.

113.03 EXCEPTIONS TO DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms PEDDLER, SOLICITOR, and TRANSIENT MERCHANT shall not apply to:

(A)      Non-commercial door-to-door advocates. Nothing within this Chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict non-commercial door-to-door advocates. Person engaging in non-commercial door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register as a solicitor under Section 113.13.

(B)       Any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property to a retail seller of the items being sold by the wholesaler.

(C)       Any person who makes initial contacts with other people for the purpose of establishing or trying to establish a regular customer delivery route for the delivery of perishable food and dairy products, such as baked goods or milk.

(D)      Any person making deliveries of perishable food and dairy products to the customers on his or her established delivery route.

(E)      Any person making deliveries of newspapers, newsletters, or other similar publications on an established customer delivery route, when attempting to establish a regular delivery route, or when publications are delivered to the community at large.

(F)       Any person conducting the type of sale commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales.

(G)      Any person participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market.

(H)      Any person conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer.

(I)        Any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale.

Exemption from these definitions shall not, for the scope of this chapter, excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or requirement provided by this or any other City Chapter.

113.05 LICENSING; EXEMPTIONS.
(A)      County license required. No person shall conduct business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant within the City limits without first having obtained the appropriate license from the county as may be required by Minn. Stat. ch. 329, as it may be amended from time to time, if the county issues a license for the activity.

(B)       City license required. Except as otherwise provided for by this Chapter, no person shall conduct business within this jurisdiction as a peddler or a transient merchant without first obtaining a City license. Solicitors need not be licensed, but are required to register with the City pursuant to Section 113.13.

(C)       Application. An application for a City license to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant shall be made at least fourteen (14) regular business days before the applicant desires to begin conducting a business operation within the City. Application for a license shall be made on a form approved by the City Council and available from the office of the City Administrator.  All applications shall be signed by the applicant. All applications shall include the following information:

(1)       The applicant’s full legal name.

(2)       Any and all other names under which the applicant has or does conduct business, or to which the applicant will officially answer to.

(3)       A physical description of the applicant (hair color, eye color, height, weight, any distinguishing marks or features, and the like).

(4)       Full address of applicant’s permanent residence.

(5)       Telephone number of applicant’s permanent residence.

(6)       Full legal name of any and all business operations owned, managed, or operated by applicant, or for which the applicant is an employee or an agent.

(7)       Full address of applicant’s regular place of business, if any exists.

(8)       Any and all business-related telephone numbers of the applicant, including cellular phones and facsimile (fax) machines.

(9)       The type of business for which the applicant is applying for a license.

(10)     Whether the applicant is applying for an annual or daily license.

(11)     The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct business. If the applicant is applying for a daily license, the number of days he or she will be conducting business within the City, with a maximum of fourteen (14) consecutive days.

(12)     Any and all addresses and telephone numbers where the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the City, including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up his or her business.

(13)     A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted with the last five (5) years of any felony, gross misdemeanor or misdemeanor for violating any state or federal statute or any local Chapter, other than minor traffic offenses.

(14)     A list of the three (3) most recent locations where the applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant.

(15)     Proof of any required county license.

(16)     Written permission of the property owner or the property owner’s agent for any location to be used by a transient merchant.

(17)    A general description of the items to be sold or services to be provided.

(18)     Any and all additional information as may be deemed necessary by the City Council.

(19)     The applicant’s driver’s license number or other acceptable form of identification.

(20)     The license plate number, registration information, vehicle identification number (VIN) and physical description for any vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business operation.

(D)      Fee. All applications for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by the fee established by City Resolution as it may be amended from time to time.

(E)       Procedure. Upon receipt of the application and payment of the license fee, the City Administrator will, within two (2) regular business days, determine if the application is complete. An application will be considered complete if all required information is provided. If the City Administrator determines that the application is incomplete, the City Administrator must inform the applicant of the required, necessary information that is missing. If the application is complete, the City Administrator must order any investigation, including background checks, necessary to verify the information provided with the application. Within ten (10) regular business days of receiving a complete application the City Administrator must issue the license unless grounds exist for denying the license application under Section 113.07, in which case the clerk must deny the request for a City peddler or transient merchant license. If the City Administrator denies the license application, the applicant must be notified in writing of the decision, the reason for denial and the applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within twenty (20) days of receiving notice of rejection, a public hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall hear the appeal with twenty (20) days of the date of the request for a hearing. The decision of the City Council following the public hearing can be appealed by petitioning the Minnesota Court of Appeals for a writ of certiorari.

(F)       Duration. An annual license granted under this Chapter shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of issuance. All other licenses granted to peddlers and transient merchants under this Chapter shall be valid only during the time period indicated on the license.

(G)      Professional fundraisers not exempt. A professional fundraiser working on behalf of an otherwise exempt group or person shall not be exempt from the licensing requirements of this Chapter.

(H)      License exemptions.

(1)       No license shall be required for any person to sell or attempt to sell, or to take or attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or raised on any farm.

(2)       No license shall be required for any person going from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place movement for the primary purpose of exercising that person’s state or federal constitutional rights such as the freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, and the like. This exemption will not apply if the person’s exercise of constitutional rights is merely incidental to what would properly be considered a commercial activity.

113.07 LICENSE INELIGIBILITY. 
 The following shall be grounds for denying a peddler or transient merchant license:

(A)      The failure of an applicant to obtain and demonstrate proof of having obtained any required county license.

(B)       The failure of an applicant to truthfully provide any information requested by the City as part of the application process.

(C)       The failure of an applicant to sign the license application.

(D)      The failure of an applicant to pay the required fee at the time of application.

(E)       A conviction with the past five (5) years of the date of application for any violation of any federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local Chapter, which adversely reflects upon the person’s ability to conduct the business for which the license is being sought in a professional, honest and legal manner. Such violations shall include, but are not limited to, burglary, theft, larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of actual or threatened physical harm against another person.

(F)       The revocation with the past five (5) years of any license issued to an applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant.

(G)      When an applicant has a bad business reputation. Evidence of a bad business reputation shall include, but is not limited to, the existence of more than three (3) complaints against an applicant with the Better Business Bureau, the Office of the Minnesota Attorney General or other state attorney general’s office, or other similar business or consumer rights office or agency, with the preceding twelve (12) months, or three (3) complaints filed with the City against an applicant within the preceding five (5) years.

113.09 LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
(A)      Generally. Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the City Council for violation of any of the following:

(1)       Subsequent knowledge by the City of fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statements provided by an applicant on the application form.

(2)       Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made during the course of the licensed activity.

(3)       Subsequent conviction of any offense to which the granting of the license could have been denied under Section 113.07.

(4)       Engaging in any prohibited activity as provided under Section 113.15 of this Chapter.

(5)       Violation of any other provision of this Chapter.

(B)       Multiple persons under one license. The suspension or revocation of any license issued for the purpose of authorizing multiple persons to conduct business as peddlers or transient merchants on behalf of the licensee shall serve as a suspension or revocation of each authorized person’s authority to conduct business as a peddler or transient merchant on behalf of the licensee whose license is suspended or revoked.

(C)       Notice. Prior to revoking or suspending any license issued under this chapter, the City shall provide a license holder with written notice of the alleged violations and inform the licensee of his or her right to a hearing on the alleged violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent residential address listed on the license application, of if no residential address is listed, to the business address provided on the license application.

(D)      Public Hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in part (C) of this section, the licensee shall have the right to request a public hearing. If no request for a hearing is received by the City Administrator within ten (10) days following the service of the notice, the City may proceed with the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of a mailed notice, service shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail. If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing shall be scheduled within twenty (20) days from the date of the request for the public hearing. Within three (3) regular business days of the hearing, the City Council shall notify the licensee of its decision.

(E)       Emergency. If, in the discretion of the City Council, imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the actions of a peddler or transient merchant licensed under this Chapter, the City Council may immediately suspend the person’s license and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent public hearing as prescribed in part (C) of this section.

(F)       Appeal. Any person whose license is suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that decision in court.

113.11 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
 No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred to any person other than the person to whom the license was issued.

113.13 REGISTRATION.
(A)      All solicitors and any person exempt from the licensing requirements of this Chapter under Section 113.05 shall be required to register with the City prior to engaging in those activities. Registration shall be made on the same form required for a license application, but no fee shall be required. Immediately upon completion of the registration form, the City Administrator shall issue to the registrant a certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of registration shall be non-transferrable.

(B)       Individuals that will be engaging in non-commercial door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register.

113.15 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
No peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate, or other person engaged in other similar activities shall conduct business in any of the following manner:

(A)      Calling attention to his or her business or the items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, so as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure.

(B)       Obstructing the free flow of traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, on any street, sidewalk, alleyway, or other public right-of-way.

(C)       Conducting business in a way as to create a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of any specific individual or the general public.

(D)      Conducting business before 8 a.m. or after 8 p.m.

(E)       Failing to provide proof of license, or registration, and identification when requested.

(F)       Using the license or registration of another person.

(G)      Alleging false or misleading statements about the products or services being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the City solely based on the City having issued a license or certificate of registration to that person.

(H)      Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave.

(I)        Otherwise operating their business in any manner that a reasonable person would find obscene, threatening, intimidating or abusive.

113.17 EXCLUSION BY PLACARD.
Unless specifically invited by the property owner or tenant, no peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate, or other person engaged in other similar activities shall enter onto the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, non-commercial door-to-door advocate, or similar activity when the property is marked with a sign or placard:

(A)      At least four inches long.

(B)       At least four inches wide.

(C)       With print of at least 48 point in size.

(D)      Stating “No Peddlers, Solicitors or Transient Merchants,” “Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants Prohibited,” or other comparable statement.

No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section.

113.19 PENALTY.
Any individual found in violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a guilty of a misdemeanor.

113.21 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Chapter is found to be invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining provisions shall not be affected.

 (Amended Ord. 01-10, passed 1-20-10)

Chapter Number 114, Alcoholic Beverages
CHAPTER 114:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES

Original Code Chapter 11

Repealed and Replaced Ordinance Number 02-15, 03-02-15

Section

            114.01 Adoption of State Law

            114.02 City May Be More Restrictive

            114.03 Definitions

            114.04 Nudity Prohibited

            114.05 Consumption in Public Places

            114.06 Number of Licenses Issued

            114.07 License term

            114.08 Types of Licenses

            114.09 License Fee; Prorated

            114.10 City Council Authority

            114.11 Applications for a License

            114.12 Description of Premises

            114.13 Application Renewal

            114.14 Transfer of License

            114.15 Investigation

            114.16 Hearing and Issuance

            114.17 Restrictions on Issuance

            114.18 Conditions of License

            114.19 Hours and Days of Sale

            114.20 Minors on Premises

            114.21 Restrictions on Purchase and Consumption

           114.98 Suspension and Revocation

             114.99   Penalty

114.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.

The provisions of MINN. STAT. CH. § 340A as they may be amended from time to time, with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation, restrictions on consumption, provisions relating to sales, hours of sale, and all other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Ordinance as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council that all future amendments to MINN. STAT. CH. § 340A are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at the time this Ordinance is adopted.

114.02 CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.

The Council is authorized by the provisions of MINN. STAT. § 340A.509 as it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this ordinance, additional restrictions on the sale and possession of alcoholic beverages within its limits beyond those contained in MINN. STAT. CH. 340A as it may be amended from time to time.

114.03 DEFINITIONS.

In addition to the definitions contained in MINN. STAT. § 340A.101 as it may be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of this ordinance:

 LIQUOR.  As used in this ordinance, without modification by the words an “intoxicating” or a “3.2 percent malt” includes both intoxicating liquor and 3.2 percent malt liquor.

 RESTAURANT.  An eating facility, other than a hotel, under the control of a single proprietor or manager, where meals are regularly prepared on the premises, where full waitress/waiter table service is provided, where a customer orders food from printed menus and where the main food course is served and consumed while seated at a single location. To be a restaurant as defined by this section, an establishment shall have a license from the state as required by MINN. STAT. § 157.16, as it may be amended from time to time, and meet the definition of either a “small establishment,” “medium establishment” or “large establishment” as defined in MINN. STAT. § 157.16, SUBD. 3(D), as it may be amended from time to time. An establishment which serves prepackaged food that receives heat treatment and is served in the package or frozen pizza that is heated and served, shall not be considered to be a restaurant for purposes of this ordinance unless it meets the definitions of a “small establishment”, “medium establishment” or “large establishment”.

114.04 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.

The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the City that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment licensed under this ordinance. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this ordinance, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the City.
It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.
A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2 percent malt liquor license or any other license issued under this ordinance or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of Section 23(B).
114.05 CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.

No person shall consume intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in a public park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot or alley, or in any public place other than on the premises of an establishment licensed under this ordinance or where the consumption and display of liquor is lawfully permitted, unless approved by the City Council.

114.06 NUMBER OF LICENSES WHICH MAY BE ISSUED.

State law establishes the number of liquor licenses that a City may issue.

114.07 TERM AND EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.

Each license shall be issued for a maximum period of one year. All licenses, except temporary licenses, shall expire on December 31 of each year unless another date is provided by ordinance. All licenses shall expire on the same date. Temporary licenses expire according to their terms. Consumption and display permits issued by the Commissioner of Public Safety, and the accompanying City consent to the permit, shall expire on March 31 of each year.

114.08 KINDS OF LIQUOR LICENSES.

 (A)     3.2 percent malt liquor on-sale licenses, which may be issued only to golf courses, restaurants, hotels, clubs, bowling centers, and establishments used exclusively for the sale of 3.2 percent malt liquor with the incidental sale of tobacco and soft drinks.

(B)       3.2 percent malt liquor off-sale license.

(C)       Temporary 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses which may be issued only to a club, charitable, religious, or nonprofit organization.

(D)      Off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued only to exclusive liquor stores. The fee for an off-sale intoxicating liquor license established by the Council under Section 9 or a greater amount which may be permitted by MINN. STAT. § 340A.408, SUBD. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.

(E)       On-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, which may be issued to the following establishments as defined by MINN. STAT. § 340A.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and this ordinance: hotels, restaurants, bowling centers, theaters, clubs or congressionally chartered veterans organizations, theaters and exclusive liquor stores. Club licenses may be issued only with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety. The fee for club licenses established by the Council under Section 9 of this ordinance shall not exceed the amounts provided for in MINN. STAT. § 340A.408, SUBD. 2(B) as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at a community festival held within the City under the provisions of MINN. STAT. § 340A.404, SUBD. 4(B) as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may in its sound discretion authorize a retail on-sale licensee to dispense intoxicating liquor off the licensed premises at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair conducted on the premises of a sports, convention, or cultural facility owned by the City, under the provisions of MINN. STAT. § 340A.404, SUBD. 4(A) as it may be amended from time to time; however, the licensee is prohibited from dispensing intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur athletic event being held on the premises.

(F)       Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, Sunday on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued only to a on-sale intoxicating liquor licensee. The maximum fee for this license, which shall be established by the Council under the provisions of Section 9 of this ordinance or the maximum amount provided by MINN. STAT. § 340A.504, SUBD. 3(C) as it may be amended from time to time.

(G)      Combination on-sale/off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses.

(H)      Temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, which may be issued only in connection with a social event sponsored by a club, charitable, religious, or other nonprofit corporation that has existed for at least three years. No license shall be for longer than four consecutive days, and the City shall issue no more than 12 days’ worth of temporary licenses to any one organization in one calendar year.

(I)        On-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety to: theaters, restaurants that have facilities for seating at least 25 guests at one time and meet the criteria of MINN. STAT. § 340A.404, SUBD. 5, as it may be amended from time to time, and which meet the definition of restaurant in section 3; to licensed bed and breakfast facilities which meet the criteria in MINN. STAT. § 340A.401, SUBD. 1, as it may be amended from time to time and to theaters that meet the criteria of MINN. STAT. § 340A.404(B) as it may be amended from time to time The fee for an on-sale wine license established by the Council under the provisions of Section 9 of this ordinance, shall not exceed one-half of the license fee charged for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license. The holder of an on-sale wine license who also holds an on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor license is authorized to sell malt liquor with content over 3.2 percent (strong beer) without an additional license.

(J)        One day consumption and display permits with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety to a nonprofit organization in conjunction with a social activity in the City sponsored by the organization.

(K)      Approval of the issuance of a consumption and display permit by the Commissioner of Public Safety. The maximum amount of the additional fee which may be imposed by the Council on a person who has been issued a consumption and display permit under the provisions of Section 10 of this ordinance or the maximum amount permitted by MINN. STAT. § 340A.414, SUBD. 6, as it may be amended from time to time. Consumption and display permits shall expire on March 31 of each year.

(L)       Culinary class limited on-sale licenses may be issued to a business establishment not otherwise eligible for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license that, as part of its business, conducts culinary or cooking classes for which payment is made by each participant or advance reservation required. The license authorizes the licensee to furnish to each participant in each class, at no additional cost to the participant, up to a maximum of six ounces of wine or 12 ounces of intoxicating malt liquor, during and as part of the class, for consumption on the licensed premises only.

(M)      Temporary off-sale wine licenses, with the approval of the Commission of Public Safety, may be issued for the off-sale of wine at an auction. A license issued under this subdivision authorizes the sale of only vintage wine of a brand and vintage that is not commonly being offered for sale by any wholesaler in Minnesota. The license may authorize the off-sale of wine for not more than three consecutive days provided not more than 600 cases of wine are sold at any auction. The licenses are subject to the terms, including license fee, imposed by Section 9.

(N)      Brew pub on-sale intoxicating liquor or on-sale 3.2 percent malt liquor licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to brewers who operate a restaurant in their place of manufacture and who meet the criteria established at MINN. STAT. § 340A.301 SUBD. 6(D) AND 7(B), as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license at on-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year. If a brew pub licensed under this section possesses a license for off-sale under Section 8 (O) below, the brew pub’s total combined retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.

(O)      Brewer off-sale intoxicating liquor licenses, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, may be issued to a brewer that is a licensee under Section 9 (N) above or that produces fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year and otherwise meets the criteria established at MINN. STAT. § 340A.301 SUBD. 6(D) AND 7(B), as it may be amended from time to time. Off-sale of malt liquor shall be limited to the legal hours for off-sale at exclusive liquor stores in the City. Malt liquor sold off-sale must be removed from the premises before the applicable off-sale closing time at exclusive liquor stores. All malt liquor sold under this license shall be packaged in the manner required by MINN. STAT. § 340A.301, SUBD. 7 as it may be amended from time to time. Sales under this license may not exceed 500 barrels per year. If a brewer licensed under this section possesses a license under Section 8 (N) above, the brewer’s total retail sales at on-sale or off-sale may not exceed 3,500 barrels per year, provided that off-sales may not total more than 500 barrels.

(P)       Brewer temporary on-sale intoxicating liquor licenses may be issued, with the approval of the Commissioner of Public Safety, to brewers who manufacture fewer than 3,500 barrels of malt liquor in a year for the on-sale of intoxicating liquor in connection with a social event within the municipality sponsored by the brewer.

114.09 LICENSE FEES; PRO RATA.

(A)      No license or other fee established by the City shall exceed any limit established by MINN. STAT. CH. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, for a liquor license.

(B)       The Council may establish from time to time in the Resolution Establishing Fees and Charges the fee for any of the liquor licenses it is authorized to issue. The license fee may not exceed the cost of issuing the license and other costs directly related to the enforcement of the liquor laws and this ordinance. No liquor license fee shall be increased without providing mailed notice of a hearing on the proposed increase to all affected licensees at least 30 days before the hearing.

(C)       The fee for all licenses, except temporary licenses, granted after the commencement of the license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.

(D)      All license fees shall be paid in full at the time the application is filed with the City. If the application is denied, the license fee shall be returned to the applicant.

(E)       A refund of a pro rata share of an annual license fee may occur only if authorized by MINN. STAT. § 340A.408, SUBD. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.

(F)       Off-sale intoxicating liquor licensees may request a reduction in their annual license fee by the amount specified in MINN. STAT. § 340A.408 if at the time of initial application or renewal they:

(1)       Agree to have a private vendor approved by the City train all employees within 60 days of hire and annually thereafter in laws pertaining to the sale alcohol, the rules for identification checks, and the responsibilities of establishments serving intoxicating liquors;

(2)       Post a policy requiring identification checks for all persons appearing to be 30 years old or less;

(3)       Establish a written cash award and incentive program to award employees who catch underage drinkers and a written penalty program to punish employees in the event of a failed compliance check;

(4)       Failure to abide by the provisions of this paragraph may result in suspension of the license until the conditions of the fee reduction are met and may result in suspension and/or revocation of the license pursuant to Section 23 of this ordinance.

114.10 COUNCIL DISCRETION TO GRANT OR DENY A LICENSE.

The Council in its sound discretion may either grant or deny the application for any license or for the transfer or renewal of any license. No applicant has a right to a license under this ordinance.

114.11 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.

(A)      Form.  Every application for a license issued under this ordinance shall be on a form provided by the City. Every application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant’s age, representations as to the applicant’s character, with references as the Council may require, the type of license applied for, the business in connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location, a description of the premises, whether the applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long the applicant has been in that business at that place, and other information as the Council may require from time to time. An application for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license shall be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety and shall also contain the information required in this section. The form shall be verified and filed with the City. No person shall make a false statement in an application.

(B)       Financial responsibility.  Prior to the issuance of any license under this ordinance, the applicant shall demonstrate proof of financial responsibility as defined in MINN. STAT. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, with regard to liability under MINN. STAT. § 340A.801, as it may be amended from time to time. This proof will be filed with the City and the Commissioner of Public Safety. Any liability insurance policy filed as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to MINN. STAT. § 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business which is required to be licensed by this ordinance without having on file with the City at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause for revocation of the license.

114.12 DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES.

The application shall specifically describe the compact and contiguous premises within which liquor may be dispensed and consumed.

114.13 APPLICATIONS FOR RENEWAL.

At least 90 days before a license issued under this ordinance is to be renewed, an application for renewal shall be filed with the City. The decision whether or not to renew a license rests within the sound discretion of the Council. No licensee has a right to have the license renewed.

114.14 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.

No license issued under this ordinance may be transferred without the approval of the Council. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is deemed to be a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license. An application to transfer a license shall be treated the same as an application for a new license, and all of the provisions of this code applying to applications for a license shall apply.

114.15 INVESTIGATION.

(A)      Preliminary background and financial investigation. On an initial application for a license, on an application for transfer of a license and, in the sound discretion of the Council that it is in the public interest to do so, on an application for renewal of a license, the City shall conduct a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant or it may contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The applicant shall pay with the application an investigation fee of $500 which shall be in addition to any license fee. If the cost of the preliminary investigation is less than $500, the unused balance shall be returned to the applicant. The results of the preliminary investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.

(B)       Comprehensive background and financial investigation. If the results of a preliminary investigation warrant, in the sound discretion of the Council, a comprehensive background and financial investigation, the Council may either conduct the investigation itself or contract with the Commissioner of Public Safety for the investigation. The investigation fee for this comprehensive background and financial investigation to be paid by the applicant shall be $500, less any amount paid for the initial investigation if the investigation is to be conducted within the state, and $10,000, less any amount paid for the initial investigation, if the investigation is required outside the state. The unused balance of the fee shall be returned to the applicant whether or not the application is denied. The fee shall be paid in advance of any investigation and the amount actually expended on the investigation shall not be refundable in the event the application is denied. The results of the comprehensive investigation shall be sent to the Commissioner of Public Safety if the application is for an on-sale intoxicating liquor license or an on-sale wine license.

114.16 HEARING AND ISSUANCE.

The Council shall investigate all facts set out in the application and not investigated in the preliminary or comprehensive background and financial investigations. Opportunity shall be given to any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license. After the investigation and hearing, the Council shall in its sound discretion grant or deny the application. No license shall become effective until the proof of financial security has been approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.

114.17 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE.

(A)      Each license shall be issued only to the applicant for the premises described in the application.

(B)       Not more than one license shall be directly or indirectly issued within the City to any one person.

(C)      No license shall be granted or renewed for operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, utility charges, service charges, or other financial claims of the City are delinquent and unpaid.

(D)      No license shall be issued for any place or any business ineligible for a license under state law.

(E)       No license shall be issued to any person who is not a resident of the state. If the applicant is a corporation, all of the shareholders shall be residents of the state. The provisions of this division (E) shall not apply to any license existing on the effective date of this ordinance or to the renewal of an existing license.

(F)       No license shall be granted within 500 feet of any school or church. The distance is to be measured from the closest side of the church to the closest side of the structure on the premises within which liquor is to be sold.

114.18 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.

The failure of a licensee to meet any one of the conditions of the license specified below shall result in a suspension of the license until the condition is met.

(A)      Within 90 days after employment, every person selling or serving liquor in an establishment which has an on-sale license shall receive adequate training regarding the applicable laws, ordinances, safety, and detection of attempts to purchase alcohol by those under the legal age to do so.

(B)       Every licensee is responsible for the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this ordinance and the law equally with the employee.

(C)       Every licensee shall allow any peace officer, health officer, City employee, or any other person designated by the Council to conduct compliance checks and to otherwise enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours and after business hours during the time when customers remain on the premises without a warrant.

(D)      No on-sale establishment shall display liquor to the public during hours when the sale of liquor is prohibited.

(E)       Compliance with financial responsibility requirements of state law and of this ordinance is a continuing condition of any license.

(F)       Failure by on off-sale intoxicating liquor license who has received a fee reduction pursuant to section 9 (f) of this ordinance to abide with the provisions of section 9 (f).

114.19 HOURS AND DAYS OF SALE.

(A)      The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by MINN. STAT. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours than state law allows.

(B)       No person shall consume nor shall any on-sale licensee permit any consumption of intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor in an on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.

(C)       No on-sale licensee shall permit any glass, bottle, or other container containing intoxicating liquor or 3.2 percent malt liquor to remain upon any table, bar, stool, or other place where customers are served, more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.

(D)      No person, other than the licensee and any employee, shall remain on the on-sale licensed premises more than 30 minutes after the time when a sale can legally occur.

(E)       Any violation of any condition of this section may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license.

114.20 MINORS ON PREMISES.

(A)      No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed in any rooms constituting the place in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale, except that persons under the age of 18 may be employed as musicians or to perform the duties of a bus person, host or dishwashing services in places defined as a restaurant, hotel, motel or other multi-purpose building serving food in rooms in which intoxicating liquors or 3.2 percent malt liquor are sold at retail on sale.

(B)       No person under the age of 21 years may enter a licensed establishment except to work, consume meals on premises that qualify as a restaurant, or attend social functions that are held in a portion of the premises where liquor is not sold.

144.21 RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.

No person shall mix or prepare liquor for consumption in any public place of business unless it has a license to sell on-sale, or a permit from the Commissioner of Public Safety under the provisions of MINN. STAT. § 340A.414, as it may be amended from time to time, which has been approved by the Council, and no person shall consume liquor in any such place.

114.98 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.

(A)      The Council shall either suspend for a period not to exceed 60 days or revoke any liquor license upon finding that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or provision of this ordinance relating to liquor. Except in cases of lapse of proof of financial responsibility, no suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act, MINN. STAT. §§ 14.57 TO 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time. The Council may act as the hearing body under that act, or it may contract with the Office of Hearing Examiners for a hearing officer.

(B)       The following are the minimum periods of suspension or revocation which shall be imposed by the Council for violations of the provisions of this ordinance or MINN. STAT. CH. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time:

(1)       For commission of a felony related to the licensed activity, sale of alcoholic beverages while the license is under suspension, sale of intoxicating liquor where the only license is for 3.2 percent malt liquor, or violation of Section 4, the license shall be revoked.

(2)       The license shall be suspended by the Council after a finding under division (A) that the licensee has failed to comply with any applicable statute, rule, or provision of this ordinance for at least the minimum periods as follows:

(a)       For the first violation within any three-year period, at least one day suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.

(b)       For a second violation within any three-year period, at least three consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.

(c)       For the third violation within any three-year period, at least seven consecutive days suspension in addition to any criminal or civil penalties which may be imposed.

(d)       For a fourth violation within any three-year period, the license shall be revoked.

(3)       The Council shall select the day or days during which the license will be suspended.

(C)       Lapse of required proof of financial responsibility shall effect an immediate suspension of any license issued pursuant to this ordinance or state law without further action of the Council. Notice of cancellation or lapse of a current liquor liability policy shall also constitute notice to the licensee of the impending suspension of the license. The holder of a license who has received notice of lapse of required insurance or of suspension or revocation of a license may request a hearing thereon and, if a request is made in writing to the Administrator, a hearing before the Council shall be granted within ten days. Any suspension under this division (B) shall continue until the Council determines that the financial responsibility requirements of state law and this ordinance have again been met. 

(D)      The provisions of Section 23 pertaining to administrative penalty may be imposed in addition to or in lieu of any suspension or revocation under this ordinance.

114.99 PENALTIES.

(A)      Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance or MINN. STAT. CH. 340A as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by law.

(B)       The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of MINN. STAT. CH. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this ordinance. Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty. A hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, MINN. STAT. §§ 14.57 TO 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak. Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the license is revoked:

(1)       For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.

(2)       For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.

(3)       For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year period, $2,000.

(C)       The term “violation” as used in Section 22 includes any and all violations of the provisions in this section, or of MINN. STAT. CH. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time or any rules promulgated under that chapter as they may be amended from time to time. The number of violations shall be determined on the basis of the history of violations for the preceding three-year period. Revocation shall occur within 60 days following a violation for which revocation is imposed.

Chapter Number 115, Tobacco Regulations
CHAPTER 115:  TOBACCO AND TOBACCO RELATED DEVISES REGULATIONS

01-14 February 3, 2014

Prior Code 12.01

Section

            115.01 Purpose

            115.02 Definitions

            115.03 License

            115.04 Fees

            115.05 Basis for denial of license

            115.06 Prohibited sales

            115.07 Vending machines

            115.08 Self-service sales

            115.09 Responsibility

            115.10 Training sessions

            115.11 Signage

            115.12 Compliance checks and inspections

            115.13 Other illegal acts

            115.14 Exceptions and defenses

            115.98 Violations

            115.99 Penalty

115.01 PURPOSE.
            Because the city recognizes that many persons under the age of 18 years purchase or otherwise obtain, possess and use tobacco and tobacco related devices and such sales, possession and use are violations of both state and federal laws; and because studies, which the city accepts and adopts, have shown that most smokers begin smoking before they have reached the age of 18 years and that those persons who reach the age of 18 years without having started smoking are significantly less likely to begin smoking; and because smoking has been shown to be the cause of several serious health problems which subsequently place a financial burden on all levels of government; this section shall be intended to regulate the sale, possession and use of tobacco and tobacco related devices for the purpose of enforcing and furthering existing laws, to protect minors against the serious effects associated with the illegal use of tobacco and tobacco related devices and to further the official public policy of the State of Minnesota in regard to preventing young people from starting to smoke as stated in M.S. § 144.391, as it may be amended from time to time.

115.02 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            COMPLIANCE CHECKS.  The system the city uses to investigate and ensure that those authorized to sell tobacco and tobacco related devices are following and complying with the requirements of this chapter.  COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall involve the use of minors as authorized by this chapter. COMPLIANCE CHECKS shall also mean the use of minors who attempt to purchase tobacco or tobacco related devices for educational, research and training purposes as authorized by state and federal laws. COMPLIANCE CHECKS may also be conducted by other units of government for the purpose of enforcing appropriate federal, state or local laws and regulations relating to tobacco and tobacco related devices.

            INDIVIDUALLY PACKAGED. The practice of selling any tobacco wrapped individually for sale. Individually wrapped tobacco and tobacco products shall include, but not be limited to, single cigarette packs, single bags or cans of loose tobacco in any form and single cans or other packaging of snuff or chewing tobacco.  Cartons or other packaging containing more than a single pack or other container as described in this subdivision shall not be considered individually packaged.  Cartons are defined as packaging containing ten or more packages of cigarettes.

            LOOSES.  The common term used to refer to a single or individually packaged cigarette.

            MINOR.  Any natural person who has not yet reached the age of 18 years.

            MOVEABLE PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any form of business operated out of a truck, van, automobile or other type of vehicle or transportable shelter and not a fixed address store front or other permanent type of structure authorized for sales transactions.

            RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place of business where tobacco or tobacco related devices are available for sale to the general public.  RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS shall include, but not be limited to, grocery stores, convenience stores and restaurants.

            SALE.  Any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter or other consideration.

            SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING.  Open displays of tobacco, lighters or tobacco related devices in any manner where any person shall have access to the tobacco, lighters or tobacco related devices, without the assistance or intervention of the licensee or the licensee’s employee. The assistance or intervention shall entail the actual physical exchange of the tobacco, lighter or tobacco related device between the customer and the licensee or employee. Self-service merchandising shall not include vending machines.

TOBACCO and TOBACCO RELATED DEVISES.  For the purposes of this Chapter, the terms “tobacco” and “tobacco related devices” shall have the meanings given them in Section 609.685 of the Minnesota Statutes and as the same may from time to time be amended, and shall include electronic cigarettes defined as any electronic-smoking device that can be used to deliver nicotine or any other substances to the person inhaling from the device. The term shall include such devices whether they are manufactured as electronic cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes or any other product name.

            VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic or other type of device which dispenses tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices upon the insertion of money, tokens or other form of payment directly into the machine by the person seeking to purchase the tobacco or tobacco related device.

115.03 LICENSE.
            No person shall sell or offer to sell any tobacco or tobacco related device without first having obtained a license to do so from the city.

            (A)      Application.  An application for a license to sell tobacco or tobacco related devices shall be made on a form provided by the city. The application shall contain the full name of the applicant, the applicant’s residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, the name of the business for which the license is sought and any additional information the city deems necessary.  Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Administrator shall forward the application to the City Council for action at its next regularly scheduled City Council meeting.  If the City Administrator shall determine that an application is incomplete, he or she shall return the application to the applicant with notice of the information necessary to make the application complete.

            (B)       Action.  The City Council may either approve or deny the license or it may delay action for such reasonable period of time as necessary to complete any investigation of the application or the applicant it deems necessary.  If the City Council shall approve the license, the City Administrator shall issue the license to the applicant.  If the City Council denies the license, notice of denial shall be given to the applicant along with notice of the applicant’s right to appeal the City Council’s decision.

            (C)       Term.  All licenses issued under this chapter expire on December 31 of the year for which they are issued.

            (D)      Revocation or suspension.  Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in §§ 115.98 and 115.99.

            (E)       Transfers.  All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only on the premises for which the license was issued and only for the person to whom the license was issued.  No transfer of any license to another location or person shall be valid without the prior approval of the City Council.

            (F)       Movable place of business.  No license shall be issued to a moveable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall be eligible to be licensed under this chapter.

            (G)      Display.  All licenses shall be posted and displayed in plain view of the general public on the licensed premises.

            (H)      Renewals.  The renewal of a license issued under this chapter shall be handled in the same manner as the original application.  The request for a renewal shall be made at least 30 days but no more than 60 days before the expiration of the current license.  The issuance of a license issued under this chapter shall be considered a privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and shall not entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the license.

115.04 FEES.
            No license shall be issued under this chapter until the appropriate license fee shall be paid in full.  The fee for a license under this chapter shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

 115.05 BASIS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.

            The following shall be grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a license under this chapter; however, except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any particular ground for denial does not mean that the city must deny the license; if a license is mistakenly issued or renewed to a person, it shall be revoked upon the discovery that the person was ineligible for the license under this chapter:

            (A)      The applicant is under the age of 18 years;

            (B)       The applicant has been convicted within the past five years of any violation of a federal, state or local law, section provision or other regulation relating to tobacco or tobacco related devices;

            (C)       The applicant has had a license to sell tobacco or tobacco related devices revoked within the preceding 12 months of the date of the application;

            (D)      The applicant fails to provide any information required on the application or provide false or misleading information;

            (E)       The applicant is prohibited by federal, state or other local law, section or other regulation from holding such a license.

115.06 PROHIBITED SALES.
            It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or offer to sell any tobacco, lighters or tobacco related device:

            (A)      To any person under the age of 18 years;

            (B)       By means of any type of vending machine, except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter;

            (C)       By means of self-service methods whereby the customer does not need to make a verbal or written request to an employee of the licensed premises in order to receive the tobacco, lighters or tobacco related device between the licensee or the licensee’s employee and the customer, except for the sale of cartons of cigarettes;

            (D)      By means of looses as defined in § 115.02;

            (E)       By any other means, to any other person or in any other manner or form prohibited by federal, state or other local law, section provision or other regulation.

115.07 VENDING MACHINES.
            It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco or tobacco related devices by the means of a vending machine. Penalty, see § 115.99

115.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES.
            (A)      It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this chapter to allow the sale of tobacco, lighters or tobacco related devices by any means whereby the customer may have access to such items without having to request the item from the licensee or the licensee’s employee and whereby there is not a physical exchange of the tobacco, lighters or the tobacco related device between the licensee or his or her clerk and the customer.  All tobacco, lighters or tobacco related devices shall either be stored behind a counter or other area not freely accessible to customers or in a case or other storage unit not left open and accessible to the general public. Any retailer selling tobacco, lighters or tobacco related devices at the time this chapter is adopted shall comply with this chapter within 30 days.

            (B)       The following are exceptions to this chapter:

                        (1)       In establishments where minors are at all times prohibited;

                        (2)       In establishments where 90% or more of their revenues are from the sale of tobacco, tobacco products and tobacco related devices.

115.09 RESPONSIBILITY.
            All licensees under this chapter shall be responsible for the actions of their employees in regard to the sale of tobacco, lighters or tobacco related devices on the licensed premises, and the sale of such an item by an employee shall be considered a sale by the license holder.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the city from also subjecting the clerk to whatever penalties are appropriate under this section, state or federal law or other applicable law or regulation.

115.10 TRAINING SESSIONS.
            All licensees and their employees shall attend training on the problem of underage smoking, when to require identification, how to recognize false identification and general procedures for conducting sales and dealing with problems that may arise. Training sessions must be certified by the city in order to comply with this chapter.

115.11 SIGNAGE.
            All licensed premises are required to post signs indicating it is illegal to sell tobacco and tobacco related devices to anyone under the age of 18 years and that the possession and use of such items by minors is also illegal under both state law and local law.  Signs shall be at least 8.5 inches by 11 inches in size and shall be conspicuously placed.

115.12 COMPLIANCE CHECKS AND INSPECTIONS.
            All licensed premises shall be open to inspection by the City Police or other authorized city official during regular business hours.  From time to time, but at least once per year, the city shall conduct compliance checks by engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians, minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years to enter the licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices.  Minors used for the purpose of compliance checks shall not be guilty of unlawful possession of tobacco or tobacco related devices when such items are obtained as a part of the compliance check.  No minor used in compliance shall attempt to use a false identification misrepresenting the minor’s age, and all minors lawfully engaged in a compliance check shall answer all questions about the minor’s age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is asked.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit compliance checks authorized by state or federal laws for educational, research or training purposes or required for the enforcement of a particular state or federal law.

115.13 OTHER ILLEGAL ACTS.
            Unless otherwise provided, the following acts shall be a violation of this chapter.

             (A)      Illegal sales.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or otherwise provide any tobacco or tobacco related device to any minor.

            (B)       Illegal possession.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to have in his or her possession any tobacco or tobacco related device.  This division shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.

            (C)       Illegal use.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to smoke, chew, sniff or otherwise use any tobacco or tobacco related device.

            (D)      Illegal procurement.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco or tobacco related device, and it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to purchase or otherwise obtain such items on behalf of a minor. It shall further be a violation for any person to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or otherwise obtain or use any tobacco or tobacco related device. This division shall not apply to minors lawfully involved in a compliance check.

            (E)       Use of false identification.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any minor to attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of another person or one on which the age of the person has been modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the actual age of the person. Penalty, see § 115.99

115.14 EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES.
            Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the providing of tobacco or tobacco related devices to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious, spiritual or cultural ceremony. It shall be an affirmative defense to the violation of this chapter for a person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by state law.

115.98 VIOLATIONS.
            (A)      Notice.  Upon discovery of a suspected violation, the alleged violator shall be issued, either personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged violation and which shall inform the alleged violator of his or her right to be heard on the accusation.

            (B)       Hearings. If a person accused of violating this chapter so requests, a hearing shall be scheduled, the time and place of which shall be published and provided to the accused violator.

            (C)       Hearing officer.  The City Administrative Hearings Board shall serve as the hearing officer.

            (D)      Decision.  If the hearing officer determines that a violation of this chapter did occur, that decision, along with the hearing officers reasons for finding a violation and the penalty to be imposed under § 115.99 shall be recorded in writing, a copy of which shall be provided to the accused violator.  Likewise, if the hearing officer finds that no violation occurred or finds grounds for not imposing any penalty such findings shall be recorded and a copy provided to the acquired accused violator.

            (E)       Appeals.  Appeals of any decision made by the hearing officer shall be filed in the district court for the city in which the alleged violation occurred.

            (F)       Misdemeanor prosecution.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any alleged violation of this chapter.  If the city elects to seek misdemeanor prosecution, no administrative penalty shall be imposed.

            (G)      Continued violation.  Each violation, and every day in which a violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate offense.

115.99 PENALTY.
            (A)      Licensees and employees.  Any licensee found to have violated this chapter shall be charged an administrative fine of $100 for a first violation of this chapter; $200 for a second offense at the same licensed premises within a 24 month period; and $300, plus a suspension of not more than seven days, for a third or subsequent offense at the same location within a 24 month period. In addition, after the third offense, the license shall be suspended for not less than seven days and penalties for additional offenses will increase up to and including revocation.

            (B)       Other individuals.  Other individuals, including any employee of a licensee, other than minors regulated by division (C) of this section, found to be in violation of this chapter shall be charged an administrative fee as shall be set from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

            (C)       Minors.  Minors found in unlawful possession of or who unlawfully purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco related devices shall be required to serve a minimum of ten community service hours for the city.

            (D)      Misdemeanor.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from seeking prosecution as a misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter.

            (E)       Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99 of this code.

Chapter Number 116, Cable Franchise
CHAPTER 116:  CABLE FRANCHISE

Section

                      116.01   Adopted by reference

116.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
            Cable franchise Ordinance Number 15A, passed 12-30-1992, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if set forth in full herein.

(Ord. 15A, passed 12-30-1992)

Chapter Number 130, General Offenses
CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES

Section

            General Provisions

            130.01 Disorderly conduct and vagrancy

           130.02   Nudity on the premises of licensed establishments prohibited

            Firearms

            130.20 Discharge prohibited

            130.21 Possession and concealment of firearms

            130.22 Exceptions

            130.23 Firing ranges

            130.24 Possession of firearms within the home

            130.25 Use for hunting

            130.26 Reckless acts

            130.27 Possession by minors

            130.28 Furnishing to minors

            130.29 Silencers

Sexually Oriented Businesses

                      130.40   Purpose

                      130.41   Findings

                      130.42   Definitions

                      130.43   Exceptions

                      130.44   License required

                      130.45   Person ineligible

                      130.46   Places ineligible

                      130.47   License application

                      130.48   Fees

                      130.49   Granting of licenses

                      130.50   Conditions of license

                      130.51   Restrictions and regulations

                      130.52   Suspensions and revocation of license

Anti-Blight Regulations

                      130.65   Purpose

                      130.66   Findings

                      130.67   Definitions

                      130.68   Exceptions

                      130.69   Location of sexually oriented businesses

                      130.70   Sign restrictions for sexually oriented businesses

            130.99 Penalty

                                    Appendix        I:          Resolution adopting the findings of the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses

                                    Appendix        II:        Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses

GENERAL PROVISIONS

130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT AND VAGRANCY.
            (A)      M.S. § 609.725, as it may be amended from time to time, known as disorderly conduct is adopted by reference.

(Prior Code, § 54.01)

            (B)       M.S. § 609.725, as it may be amended from time to time, known as vagrancy is adopted by reference. 

(Prior Code, § 54.02) 

130.02 NUDITY ON THE PREMISES OF LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
            (A)      The City Council finds that it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city that nudity is prohibited as provided in this section on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter. This is to protect and assist the owners, operators, and employees of the establishment, as well as patrons and the public in general, from harm stemming from the physical immediacy and combination of alcohol, nudity, and sex. The Council especially intends to prevent any subliminal endorsement of sexual harassment or activities likely to lead to the possibility of various criminal conduct, including prostitution, sexual assault, and disorderly conduct. The Council also finds that the prohibition of nudity on the premises of any establishment licensed under this chapter, as set forth in this section, reflects the prevailing community standards of the city.

            (B)       It is unlawful for any licensee to permit or allow any person or persons on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material. It is unlawful for any person to be on the licensed premises when the person does not have his or her buttocks, anus, breasts, and genitals covered with a non-transparent material.

            (C)       A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law, and is justification for revocation or suspension of any liquor, wine, or 3.2% malt liquor license or the imposition of a civil penalty under the provisions of § 130.99(A).

Penalty, see § 130.99

FIREARMS

130.20 DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
            Except as provided in this subchapter, no person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or firearm of any description within the city limits except in the lawful defense of person, family, or property or in necessary enforcement of law.

(Prior Code, § 51.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99

130.21 POSSESSION AND CONCEALMENT OF FIREARMS.
            Except as provided in this subchapter, and M.S. §§ 624.711 to 624.716, as they may be amended from time to time, regulating the carrying or possession of a firearm under certain conditions, no person shall have in his or her possession any gun, pistol, or firearm of any description within the limits of the city unless such pistol, gun or firearm is dismounted, broken apart or carried in a case in such a manner that it cannot be discharged; nor shall any person carry or conceal any pistol or firearm upon his or her person.

(Prior Code, § 51.02)

130.22 EXCEPTIONS.
            The terms of this subchapter shall not prohibit the possession or discharge of guns, pistols or firearms by duly authorized peace officers or military authorities.

(Prior Code, § 51.03)

130.23 FIRING RANGES.
            The terms of this subchapter shall not prohibit possession or discharge of firearms upon a rifle or firing range, indoor or outdoor, provided such a range is properly equipped and supervised to insure reasonable safety as determined by the City Council.

(Prior Code, § 51.04)

130.24 POSSESSION OF FIREARMS WITHIN THE HOME.
            Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to embrace the possession of firearms within the home or the discharge of the same when done in the lawful defense of person, property or family.

(Prior Code, § 51.05)

130.25 USE FOR HUNTING.
            Discharge of firearms in hunting wild game in accordance with the laws of the State of Minnesota is allowed in those portions of the city which are not within one-fourth mile of a platted area.

(Prior Code, § 51.06)

130.26 RECKLESS ACTS.
            No person shall do any of the following within the limits of the city:

            (A)      Recklessly handle or use a gun, other dangerous weapon or explosive so as to endanger the safety of another;

            (B)       Intentionally point a gun of any kind, capable of injuring or killing a human being, whether loaded or unloaded, at or toward another.

(Prior Code, § 51.07)

130.27 POSSESSION BY MINORS.
            No minor under the age of 14 years of age shall handle or have in his or her possession or under his or her control, except while accompanied by or under the immediate charge of his or her parent or legal guardian, any firearm, gun or air gun of any kind.

(Prior Code, § 51.08)

130.28 FURNISHING TO MINORS.
            No person within the city limits shall:

            (A)      Furnish a minor under 18 years of age with any firearm, air gun, ammunition or explosives without the written consent of the minors parent or legal guardian or the Chief of Police;

            (B)       As a parent or legal guardian, permit a child under 14 years of age to handle or use outside of the parent’s or legal guardian’s presence a firearm or air gun or any kind of ammunition or explosive.

(Prior Code, § 51.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99

130.29 SILENCERS.
            No person within the city limits shall sell or have in his or her possession any device designed to silence or muffle the discharge of a firearm.

(Prior Code, § 51.10)

SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES

130.40 PURPOSE.
            The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to prevent criminal activity and the spread of sexually-transmitted diseases.

130.41 FINDINGS.
            The City Council makes the following findings regarding the effect sexually oriented businesses have on the character of the city’s neighborhoods. In making these findings, the City Council accepts the recommendations and conclusions of the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses dated June 6, 1989, a copy of which is referenced and included in Appendix II of this chapter.  This chapter shall have no force and effect until the City Council accepts these recommendations by resolution of a majority of its members, using the model resolution contained in Appendix I of this chapter.

            (A)      Sexually oriented businesses can contribute to an increase in criminal activity in the area in which such businesses are located, increasing the demands on city crime-prevention programs and law enforcement services.

            (B)       Sexually oriented businesses can be used as fronts for prostitution and other criminal activity. The experience of other cities indicates that proper management and operation of such businesses can minimize this risk.

            (C)       Sexually oriented businesses can increase the risk of exposure to communicable diseases, including Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), for which there is currently no cure. Experiences of other cities indicate that such businesses can facilitate the spread of communicable diseases by virtue of the design and use of the premises, endangering not only the patrons of such establishments but also the general public.

            (D)      Sexually oriented businesses can cause or contribute to public health problems by the presence of live adult entertainment in conjunction with food and/or drink on the same premises.

            (E)       A licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this chapter can facilitate the enforcement of the city’s “anti-blight” regulations, as set forth below, and can aid in monitoring sexually oriented businesses for adverse secondary effects on the community.

            (F)       The risk of criminal activity and/or public health problems can be minimized through a licensing and regulatory scheme as prescribed in this chapter.

130.42 DEFINITIONS.
            The following words and terms have the following meanings when used in this chapter.

            SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Shall include the following:

                        (1)       A business that meets any of the following criteria, measured on a daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly basis:

                                    (a)       Has more than 25% of its inventory, stock-in-trade, or publicly displayed merchandise in sexually oriented materials;

                                    (b)       Devotes more than 25% of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to sexually oriented materials; or

                                    (c)       Derives more than 25% of its gross revenues from sexually oriented materials; or

                        (2)       A business that engages for any length of time in a sexually oriented use as defined in this section or any other use that has an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

            SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATERIALS.  Visual, printed, or aural materials, and other objects or devices, that:

                        (1)       Contain, depict, simulate or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

                        (2)       Are marketed for use in conjunction with, or are primarily used only with or during specified sexual activities; or

                        (3)       Are designed for sexual stimulation.

            SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE.  Any of the following activities and businesses, even if the activity exists for only a short-time:

                        (1)       ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO.   An establishment or business that provides the service of applying paint, ink, or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is nude.

                        (2)       ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment or business used for the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if it meets the criteria established in the definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, as defined in this section.

                        (3)       ADULT CABARET.  A business or establishment that provides dancing or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on:

                                    (a)       The depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

                                    (b)       The presentation, display, or depiction of matter that seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.

                        (4)       ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A business or establishment that provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (5)       ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A business or establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (6)       ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (7)       ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL.  A hotel or motel that presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (8)       ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB.  A massage parlor or health club that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (9)       ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A business or establishment with a capacity of less than 50 persons that, as a prevailing practice, presents on-premises viewing of movies, motion pictures, or other material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (10)     ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  A business or establishment that provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.

                        (11)     ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (12)     ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A motion picture theater with a capacity of 50 or more persons that, as a prevailing practice, presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

                        (13)     ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESS.  An establishment or business that has a variety of items for sale if it meets the criteria established in division (1) of the definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS defined in this section.

                        (14)     ADULT SAUNA.  A sauna that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (15)     ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, if the building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

            SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Shall include the following:

                        (1)       Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

                        (2)       Human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether or not completely and opaquely covered.

            SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Shall include the following:

                        (1)       Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship; anilingus; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio; necrophilia; pedophilia; piquerism or zooerastia;

                        (2)       Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;

                        (3)       Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;

                        (4)       Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts;

                        (5)       Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, who are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged in the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any person;

                        (6)       Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or

                        (7)       Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation.

130.43 EXCEPTIONS.
            This chapter does not regulate the following:

            (A)      Material with significant literary content or social commentary;

            (B)       A business where sexually oriented materials are sold, bartered, distributed, leased, furnished, or otherwise provided for off-site use or entertainment, if the sexually oriented material on each item is blocked from view by an opaque cover as required under M.S. § 617.293, as it may be amended from time to time, and each item is in an area accessible only by an employee of the business;

            (C)       A person or organization exempted under M.S. § 617.295, as it may be amended from time to time;

            (D)      Activity regulated under M.S. § 617.251 as it may be amended from time to time;

            (E)       Displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long as no sexually oriented materials are for sale, and the business does not have a liquor license; and

            (F)       Movies rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-17 or R.

130.44 LICENSE REQUIRED.
            No person may own or operate a sexually oriented business within the city unless the person is currently licensed under this chapter.

Penalty, see § 130.99

130.45 PERSONS INELIGIBLE.
            No license may be issued to a person who:

            (A)      Is not a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;

            (B)       Is a minor at the time the application is filed;

            (C)       Has been convicted of a crime directly related to the licensed occupation and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of the owner, operator or manager of a sexually oriented business under M.S. § 364.03, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time, or a person not of good moral character and repute;

            (D)      Holds a liquor license under Minnesota Basic Code Chapter 114.

            (E)       In the judgment of the licensing authority, is not the real party in interest or beneficial owner of the business operated under the license;

            (F)       Has had a license for a sexually oriented business or similar business revoked anywhere within five years of the license application; or

            (G)      In the case of an individual, is not a resident of the state; in the case of a partnership, the managing partner is not a resident of the state; or in the case of a corporation, the manager is not a resident of the state. The required residency must be established by the time the license is issued and maintained throughout the existence of the license and all renewals. The time for establishing residency may, for good cause, be extended by the licensing authority.

Penalty, see § 130.99

130.46 PLACES INELIGIBLE.
            No license may be issued for:

            (A)      A place or a business ineligible for a license under city ordinance or state law;

            (B)       Operation in a zoning district where the business is not allowed pursuant to §§ 130.65 to 130.70;

            (C)       A place or business that is currently licensed as a tattoo establishment, pawnshop, massage business or establishment that sells alcoholic beverages; or

            (D)      Operation on a premises on which taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or other government agency are delinquent and unpaid, unless the non-payment is not under the control of the applicant.

Penalty, see § 130.99

130.47 LICENSE APPLICATION.
            (A)      The application for a sexually oriented business license under this chapter must be made on a form supplied by the city and must provide the following information:

                        (1)       The business in connection with which the proposed license will operate;

                        (2)       The location of the business premises;

                        (3)       The legal description of the premises to be licensed, including a map of the area for which the license is sought, showing dimensions, locations of buildings, street access and parking facilities;

                        (4)       Whether all real estate and personal property taxes that are due and payable for the premises to be licensed have been paid, and if not paid, the years and amounts that are unpaid;

                       (5)       Whether the applicant is the owner and operator of the business and if not, who is;

                        (6)       Whether the applicant has ever used or been known by a name other than his or her true name, and if so, what was the name or names, and information concerning dates and places where used;

                        (7)       Whether the applicant is married or single. If married, the true name, place and date of birth and street address of applicant’s spouse;

                        (8)       Street address at which the applicant and spouse have lived during the preceding ten years;

                        (9)       Kind, name and location of every business or occupation the applicant and spouse have been engaged in during the preceding ten years;

                        (10)     Names and addresses of the applicant’s and spouse’s employers and partners, if any, for the preceding ten years;

                        (11)     Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been convicted of a violation of a state law or local ordinance, other than a non-alcohol related traffic offense. If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place and offense for which convictions were had;

                        (12)     Whether the applicant or spouse has ever been engaged as an employee or in operating a sexually oriented business, massage business, or other business of a similar nature.  If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place and length of time;

                        (13)     Whether the applicant has ever been in military service. If so, the applicant must, upon request, exhibit all discharges;

                        (14)     If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of all partners and all information concerning each partner as is required of a single applicant as above. A managing partner or partners must be designated.  The interest of each partner or partners in the business must be submitted with the application and, if the partnership is required to file a certificate as to trade name under the provisions of M.S. Chapter 333, as it may be amended from time to time, a copy of the certificate must be attached to the application;

                        (15)     If the applicant is a corporation or other organization, the applicant must submit the following:

                                    (a)       Name, and if incorporated, the state of incorporation;

                                    (b)       Names and addresses of all officers;

                                    (c)       The name of the manager or proprietor or other agent in charge of, or to be in charge of the premises to be licensed, giving all information about said person as is required in the case of a single applicant; and

                                    (d)       A list of all persons who, single or together with their spouse, own or control an interest in said corporation or association in excess of 5% or who are officers of said corporation or association, together with their addresses and all information as is required for a single applicant.

                        (16)     The amount of the investment that the applicant has in the business, land, building, premises, fixtures, furniture or stock-in-trade, and proof of the source of the money;

                        (17)     A list of responsible persons, including the names of owners, managers and assistant managers, who may be notified or contacted by state or city employees in case of emergency. These persons must be residents of the state.

                        (18)     Whether the applicant holds a current license for a sexually oriented business or similar business from another governmental unit;

                        (19)     Whether the applicant has ever been denied a license for a sexually oriented business or similar business from another governmental unit; and

                        (20)     Other information that the city deems appropriate.

            (B)       No person may make a false statement or material omission in a license application or investigation. A false statement or material omission is grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a license.

            (C)       Each licensee has the continuing duty to properly notify the Director of Community Development of a change in the information or facts required to be furnished on the application for a license. This duty continues throughout the period of the license.  Failure to comply with this section will constitute cause for revocation or suspension of the license.

            (D)      The application for the renewal of an existing license must be made at least 90 days prior to the date of the expiration of the license and must be made on the form which the city provides.

Penalty, see § 130.99

130.48 FEES.
            (A)      An applicant for a license must pay to the city the investigation fee as set from time to time by Council resolution, as may be amended from time to time.  This fee will be for the purpose of conducting a preliminary background and financial investigation of the applicant.  If the city believes that the public interest so warrants, it may require a similar investigation at the time of renewal of a license.  If an investigation is ordered at the time of license renewal, the applicant must pay the fee specified above, except that the fee will be the smaller of the stated dollar amount or the actual cost of the investigation.  There will be no refund of the investigation fee after the investigation has begun.

            (B)       The annual fees for a license are as set from time to time by Council resolution, as it may be amended from time to time.

            (C)       Each license expires on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.  Fees for licenses issued during the license year will be prorated according to the number of months remaining in the year.  For this purpose an unexpired fraction of a month will be counted as a whole month having elapsed.

            (D)      No refund of a fee will be made except as authorized by ordinance.

130.49 GRANTING OF LICENSES.
            (A)      No license may be issued until the Police Department, or the county Sheriff, if the city has no Police Department, has conducted an investigation of the representations set forth in the application, the applicant’s moral character, and the applicant’s financial status. All applicants must cooperate this investigation.

            (B)       No license, except for a renewed license, may be issued for a sexually oriented business until the Council has held a public hearing.  Notice of the hearing must be made for a zoning ordinance amendment affecting district boundaries. The Council must grant the license unless the applicant or the location does not meet the requirements of the city code, the application was incomplete, or the application contained false information or a material omission. If the application is denied, the city must notify the applicant with the reason(s) stated for denial.  Notification must be sent certified, United States mail, return receipt requested, to the address provided on the license application. If the Council fails to act on the application within 45 days after receipt of a complete application, the application will be deemed approved. An applicant wishing to appeal the action of the City Council may seek a writ of certiorari before the Minnesota Court of Appeals.

            (C)       (1)       The City Council may issue a license before an investigation, notice and public hearing for an applicant who:

                                    (a)       Had a license within the previous five years for the establishment that is specified in the application and that is continuing to operate under a license;

                                    (b)       Wishes to resume operation of the business without sufficient time, through no fault of his or her own, to meet the normal procedural requirements;

                                    (c)       Had no criminal license convictions, or license suspensions or revocations during the prior licensed period; and

                                    (d)       Otherwise qualifies and meets the requirements for a license.

                        (2)       In this situation, the City Council may immediately issue an interim license to the applicant for a period of no longer than 90 days. The applicant must then proceed through the specified requirements for an investigation, notice, and public hearing.  At the public hearing the Council will decide whether the license should continue in effect or be revoked. The applicant has no greater right to continuation of the license than he or she would have had to issuance of a new license following the normal procedure without the interim license.

            (D)      A license will be issued only to the applicant and for the premises described in the application. No license may be transferred to another person or place without application in the same manner as an application for a new license. Transfer of 25% or more of the stock of a corporation or of a controlling interest of it, whichever is less, will be deemed a transfer of the license. If the licensee is a corporation that is wholly owned by another corporation, the same provisions about the transfer of a stock or a controlling interest will apply to that parent corporation, any second parent corporation that wholly owns the parent corporation, and all other similarly situated parent corporations up through the chain of ownership. Transfer of this amount of stock without prior Council approval is a ground for revocation or suspension of the license.  In addition, each day the licensee operates under the license after a transfer has taken place without obtaining Council approval will be a separate violation of this chapter.

            (E)       In the case of the death of a licensee, the personal representative of a licensee may continue operation of the business for not more than 90 days after the licensee’s death.

130.50 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
            (A)      A license is subject to the conditions in this section, all other provisions of this chapter, and of other applicable regulations, ordinances or state laws.

            (B)       A licensee is responsible for the conduct of his or her place of business and the conditions of order in it. The act of an employee of the licensed premises is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the licensee is liable for all penalties provided by this chapter equally with the employee, except criminal penalties.

            (C)       The license must be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises for which it is used.

Penalty, see § 130.99

130.51 RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS.
            A sexually oriented business is subject to the following restrictions and regulations:

            (A)      No owner, manager or employee may allow sexually oriented materials or entertainment to be visible or perceivable in any manner, including aurally, at any time from outside of the business.

            (B)       No owner, manager or employee may allow a person under the age of 18 to enter the business.

            (C)       No owner, manager or employee may allow a person under the age of 18 to have access to sexually oriented materials, whether by sight, purchase, touch or other means.

            (D)      No owner or manager may employ a person under the age of 18 on the licensed premises.

            (E)       No owner, manager, or employee may have been convicted of a sex crime, as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293 to 609.352, 609.746 to 609.749, 609.79 or 518B.01, as they may be amended from time to time, or related statute dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity, or domestic abuse within the past five years.

            (F)       No business may exceed 10,000 square feet in gross floor area.

            (G)      No owner, manager or employee may allow a patron, employee, or other person on the premises to physically contact, in public view, a specified anatomical area of himself or herself or of another person, except that a live performer may touch himself or herself.

            (H)      A live performer must remain at all times a minimum distance of ten feet from members of the audience, and must perform on a platform intended for that purpose, that must be raised at least two feet from the level of the floor on which the audience is located.  No performer may solicit or accept money, a tip, or other item from a member of the audience.

            (I)        No business may have booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room, or individual rooms, except as follows:

                        (1)       Restrooms are allowed as long as they are no larger than reasonably necessary to serve the purposes of a restroom, no other activities are provided or allowed in the rooms, and there are no chairs, benches, or reclining surfaces in the rooms; and

                        (2)       Storage rooms and private offices are allowed, if the storage rooms and offices are used solely for running the business and no person other than the owner, manager and employees is allowed in them.

            (J)        A licensee must not be open for business to the public:

                        (1)       Between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the days of Monday through Saturday; and

                        (2)       Between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.

Penalty, see § 130.99

130.52 SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATIONS OF LICENSE.
            (A)      Delinquent taxes.  The City Council may suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter for operation on a premises on which real estate taxes, assessments or other financial claims of the city or of the state are due, delinquent, or unpaid, unless the non-payment is not under the control of the licensee.  If an action has been commenced under M.S. Chapter 278, as it may be amended from time to time, questioning the amount or validity of taxes, the Council may on application by the licensee waive strict compliance with this provision; no waiver may be granted, however, for taxes, or a portion of them, that remain unpaid for a period exceeding one year after becoming due, unless the one-year period is extended through no fault of the licensee.

            (B)       Violations.

                        (1)       The Council may either suspend for up to 60 days or revoke a license for a violation upon a finding that the licensee or an agent or employee of the licensee has failed to comply with an applicable statute, regulation or ordinance relating to the subject matter of this chapter or violated the statutes in division (B)(2) of this section.  No suspension or revocation will take effect until the licensee has been afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time, with the exception of the suspension provided for in division (B)(2) of this section.

                        (2)       Conviction of a sex crime, as identified in M.S. §§ 609.293 to 609.352, 609.746 to 609.749, 609.79 or 518B.01, as they may be amended from time to time, or related statute dealing with sexual assault, sexual conduct, harassment, obscenity or domestic abuse by the licensee will result in the immediate suspension pending a hearing on revocation of a license issued under this chapter.

ANTI-BLIGHT REGULATIONS

130.65 PURPOSE.
            The purpose of this chapter is to control, through zoning regulations, certain land uses that have a direct and detrimental effect on the character of the city’s residential and commercial neighborhoods. The City Council specifically recognizes the sanctity and fundamental nature of free speech and does not intend to regulate or ban speech based on content.

130.66 FINDINGS.
            The City Council makes the following findings regarding the effect sexually-oriented businesses have on the character of the city’s neighborhoods. In making these findings, the City Council accepts the recommendations and conclusions of the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989, a copy of which is adopted by reference and included in Appendix II of this chapter. This subchapter shall have no force and effect until the City Council accepts these recommendations by resolution of a majority of its members, using the model resolution contained in Appendix I of this chapter.

            (A)      Sexually oriented businesses have an impact on the neighborhoods surrounding them which is distinct from the impact caused by other uses.

            (B)       Residential and commercial neighborhoods located within close proximity to sexually oriented businesses experience the following negative impacts:

                        (1)       Increased crime rates, particularly in sex-related crimes such as rapes, prostitution, indecent exposure and other lewd and lascivious behavior;

                        (2)       Property values which are either diminished or fail to appreciate at the rate of other comparable properties not located in proximity to sexually oriented businesses;

                        (3)       Increased transiency and decreased stability of ownership;

                        (4)       Deteriorated neighborhood appearance from litter and graffiti;

                        (5)       Sex-related harassment of residents and customers by motorists and pedestrians;

                        (6)       A perception that the area is “unsafe”; and

                        (7)       Difficulty in attracting and retaining customers, employees, and desirable tenants.

            (C)       The adverse impacts which sexually oriented businesses have on surrounding areas diminish as the distance from the sexually oriented business increases.

            (D)      The adverse impacts of sexually oriented businesses are exacerbated when the uses are located near each other.

            (E)       The presence of liquor establishments in the immediate vicinity of sexually oriented businesses also compounds the adverse impacts on the neighborhood.

            (F)       Sexually oriented businesses can exert a dehumanizing influence on persons attending places of worship, children attending day care centers or schools, and people using public parks and libraries.

            (G)      Sexually oriented businesses can significantly contribute to the deterioration of residential neighborhoods and can impair the character and quality of the residential housing in the area where they are located, thereby exacerbating the shortage of affordable and habitable housing for city residents.

            (H)      The concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area can have a substantially detrimental effect on that area and on the overall quality of urban life. A cycle of decay can result from the influx and concentration of sexually oriented businesses. The presence of such businesses is perceived by others as an indication that the area is deteriorating and the result can be devastating: other businesses move out of the vicinity and residents flee from the area. The resulting decline in real estate values erodes the city’s tax base and contributes to overall urban blight.

            (I)        Land-use regulations are appropriate to minimize the detrimental effects that sexually oriented businesses have on adjacent land uses.

130.67 DEFINITIONS.
            The following words and terms shall have the following meanings when used in this section, except as provided otherwise in § 130.68:

            SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Shall include the following:

                        (1)       A business that meets any of the following criteria, measured on a daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly basis:

                                    (a)       Has more than 25% of its inventory, stock-in-trade, or publicly displayed merchandise in sexually oriented materials;

                                    (b)       Devotes more than 25% of its floor area (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements, or any portion of the business not open to the public) to sexually oriented materials; or

                                    (c)       Derives more than 25% of its gross revenues from sexually oriented materials; or

                        (2)       A business that engages for any length of time in a sexually oriented use as defined in this section, or any other use that has an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

            SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATERIALS.  Visual, printed, or aural materials, and other objects or devices, which:

                        (1)       Contain, depict, simulate, or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;

                        (2)       Are marketed for use in conjunction with, or are primarily used only with or during, specified sexual activities; or

                        (3)       Are designed for sexual stimulation.

            SEXUALLY-ORIENTED USE.  Includes any of the following activities and businesses, even if the activity exists for only a short-time:

                        (1)       ADULT BODY PAINTING STUDIO.  An establishment or business that provides the service of applying paint, ink or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to the body of a patron when the person is nude.

                        (2)       ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment or business used for the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audiotape, videotape, movies, or motion picture film if it meets the criteria established in the definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, as defined in this section.

                        (3)       ADULT CABARET.  A business or establishment that provides dancing or other live entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on:

                                    (a)       The depiction of nudity, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

                                    (b)       The presentation, display, or depiction of matter that seeks to evoke, arouse, or excite sexual or erotic feelings or desire.

                        (4)       ADULT COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT.  A business or establishment that provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (5)       ADULT CONVERSATION/RAP PARLOR.  A business or establishment that provides the services of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk or discussion distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (6)       ADULT HEALTH/SPORT CLUB.  A health/sport club that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (7)       ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL.  A hotel or motel that presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (8)       MASSAGE PARLOR/HEALTH CLUB.  A massage parlor or health club that provides massage services distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (9)       ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A business or establishment with a capacity of less than 50 persons that as a prevailing practice presents on-premises viewing of movies, motion pictures, or other material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (10)     ADULT MODELING STUDIO.  A business or establishment that provides live models who, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification, engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.

                        (11)     ADULT MOTION PICTURE ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited where coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are used to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (12)     ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A motion picture theater with a capacity of 50 or more persons that as a prevailing practice presents material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

                        (13)     ADULT NOVELTY PUNINESS.  An establishment or business that has a variety of items for sale if it meets the criteria established in the definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS, as defined in this section.

                        (14)     ADULT SAUNA.  A sauna that excludes minors by reason of age, and that provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

                        (15)     ADULT STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY.  A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation or reducing, if the building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age and if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

            SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Shall include the following:

                        (1)       Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic area, buttock, anus, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

                        (2)       Human male genitals in a state of sexual arousal, whether or not completely and opaquely covered.

            SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Shall include the following:

                        (1)       Actual or simulated: sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals; flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship; anilingus; coprophagy; coprophilia; cunnilingus; fellatio; necrophilia; pedophilia; piquerism or zooerastia;

                        (2)       Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence;

                        (3)       Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation;

                        (4)       Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts;

                        (5)       Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, who are clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes and engaged in the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any person;

                        (6)       Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or

                        (7)       Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation.

130.68 EXCEPTIONS.
            This section does not regulate the following:

            (A)      Any material with significant literary content or social commentary;

            (B)       A business where sexually oriented materials are sold, bartered, distributed, leased, furnished, or otherwise provided for off-site use or entertainment, if (1) the sexually oriented material on each item is blocked from view by an opaque cover as required under M.S. § 617.293, as it may be amended from time to time, and (2) each item is in an area accessible only by an employee of the business;

            (C)       Any person or organization exempted under M.S. § 617.295, as it may be amended from time to time;

            (D)      Any activity regulated under M.S. § 617.251, as it may be amended from time to time;

            (E)       Displaying works of art showing specified anatomical areas, so long as no sexually oriented materials are for sale and the business does not have a liquor license; and

            (F)       Movies rated G, PG, PG-13, NC-17 or R.

130.69 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
            (A)      A sexually-oriented business may locate only in the C-2 and I zones.

            (B)       No person may operate a sexually oriented business on property, any part of which is within the area circumscribed by a circle that has a radius of 250 feet from any of the uses listed below. Distances must be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, between the closest points on the boundary lines of the property parcels where the two uses are located. This distance requirement applies to the following uses:

                        (1)       Property used or zoned for residential uses;

                        (2)       A day care facility, school, library, park, playground, state or federal wildlife area or preserve, religious institution or other public recreational facility;

                        (3)       Premises licensed under city code Chapter 114; and

                        (4)       Another sexually-oriented business.

130.70 SIGN RESTRICTIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
            In order to protect children from exposure to lurid signs and materials, to avoid the appearance that the windows are boarded up and that the property is deteriorating, and to preserve the value of property surrounding sexually oriented businesses, the following sign regulations apply to all sexually oriented businesses:

            (A)      All signs must be flat wall signs.  No signs may be freestanding, located on the roof or contain any flashing lights, moving elements or electronically or mechanically changing messages.

            (B)       No merchandise, photos or pictures of the products or entertainment on the premises may be displayed in or immediately behind window areas or any other area, if they can be viewed from outside the portion of the building in which the business is located.

            (C)       Window areas must not be covered or made opaque in any way. No signs may be placed in a window. A sign no larger than one square foot must be placed on the main entrance door and must state, “adults only.” The letters of this message must be a minimum of two inches high. The only other information on this sign may be the hours of operation.

130.99 PENALTY.
            (A)      The Council shall impose a civil penalty of up to $2,000 for each violation of M.S. Chapter 340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and of this chapter.  Conviction of a violation in a court of law is not required in order for the Council to impose the civil penalty.  A hearing under the Administrative Procedures Act, M.S. §§ 14.57 to 14.70, as it may be amended from time to time, is not required before the penalty is imposed, but the Council shall hold a hearing on the proposed violation and the proposed penalty and hear any person who wishes to speak.  Non-payment of the penalty is grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The following is the minimum schedule of presumptive civil penalties which must be imposed in addition to any suspension unless the licenses is revoked:

                        (1)       For the first violation within any three-year period, $500.

                        (2)       For the second violation within any three-year period, $1,000.

                        (3)       For the third and subsequent violations within any three-year period, $2,000.

            (B)       Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person violating a provision of §§ 130.40 to 130.52 is subject to the penalties established in § 10.99.  A fine or sentence imposed does not affect the right of the city to suspend or revoke the license of the licensee as the Council deems appropriate.

            (C)       A violation of §§ 130.65 through 130.70 is a misdemeanor under Minnesota law and is subject to the penalties and provisions of § 10.99.

APPENDIX I

RESOLUTION ADOPTING THE FINDINGS OF THE REPORT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S WORKING GROUP ON          THE REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES

            WHEREAS because of its small size, the city lacks the resources to investigate and research the impact sexually oriented businesses would have on the character of the city’s neighborhoods; and

            WHEREAS the city intends to rely on the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989, which is included as Appendix II to Chapter 119 of the Minnesota Basic Code, as a basis for regulating sexually oriented businesses in this city; and

            WHEREAS the members of the City Council have reviewed this Report;

            NOW THEREFORE, the City Council of this City hereby accepts the recommendations and conclusions of this Report and adopts the recommendations and conclusions by reference of the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, dated June 6, 1989; and by passage of this resolution implements the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code Chapters 119 and 153.

            Note: If this resolution is being adopted only to implement the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code § 150.05, then the words “and by passage of this resolution implements the provisions of Minnesota Basic Code Chapters 119 and 153” in the last paragraph above should be deleted from the resolution.

APPENDIX II

REPORT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL’S WORKING GROUP ON THE REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES

            This report is adopted by reference and a copy is on file for public view in the office of the City Administrator.

Chapter Number 131, Drugs
CHAPTER 131:  DRUGS

131.01 STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE
New substances are being created which are being used for recreational purposes and as an alternative to otherwise regulated controlled substances banned at the State and Federal levels.

Many of these substances can be designed to produce a desired pharmacological effect and have the potential for abuse similar to or greater than that of controlled substances.

City authorities have encountered these substances in products being sold and used in the City limits; and the uncontrolled importation, manufacture, distribution, possession, and use of these substances have a substantial and detrimental impact on the health and safety of the residents and visitors of the City of Mountain Iron.

These substances can be created more rapidly than they can be identified and controlled by action of the Federal and State Legislature; and, these substances are sold in many different forms including loose, leafy, granular, powder, crystalline, tablet, and/or liquid forms.,

Such products are known under many names in order to avoid detection and identification, and are labeled as incense, herbal incense, herbal potpourri, psychoactive herbal incense, herbal blends, bath salts, psychoactive bath salts, bath additives, synthetic marijuana, synthetic drug, synthetic hallucinogens, and other names and purchased by consumers for the purpose of ingestion notwithstanding any markings on the packaging to the contrary.

Such products may be as or more dangerous to humans than controlled substances according to the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) due to the unapproved, unknown, and ever-changing nature of the chemical compounds they contain.

It is therefore the will of the Mountain Iron City Council to provide for a prohibition on the sale, possession, transfer, manufacture, and use of these substances as defined by these ordinances and to provide for the enforcement thereof and in the best interest of the public’s health, safety, and general welfare.

131.03  PROHIBITIONS

A person is guilty of a violation of this ordinance if they sell, possess, transfer, or manufacture any substance or product containing any quantity of synthetic or alternative drug as defined under this ordinance. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
All substances made unlawful by this ordinance shall constitute contraband, subject to immediate seizure by law enforcement and shall be destroyed upon a conviction for a violation of this ordinance. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
The substances defined in this ordinance shall not include medications or substances for which the possessing party holds a valid prescription or beer, wine, or intoxicating liquors as defined by local, State, and Federal laws. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Products commercially available and sold which have common, proven, and lawful uses under local, State, and Federal law shall not be deemed unlawful by this ordinance. Such examples are prescription and over the counter medications, health supplements where the ingredients are listed on the packaging, food and drink products, etc. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
In addition to the definitions provided in this ordinance, the following additional factors shall be considered in making the determination if a substance is unlawful under this ordinance: (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Scope of legitimate uses of the product.
Physical and testimonial evidence provided by officers and prosecutors regarding known uses of the product.
Statements made by persons selling, possessing, and using the product.
Availability of the product to include types and number of area businesses selling it.
The ratio of the price of the product compared to the quantity sold.
The proximity of the product in relation to devices used to ingest or consume controlled substances.
131.05  DEFINITIONS

Sale/Transfer: to offer for sale, to advertise for sale, to sell, to distribute, to furnish, to transfer, to barter, or to exchange to any person or entity with or without an exchange of compensation or service. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Possession: to possess on one’s own person or possession by a person exercising dominion or control over the immediate area where contraband is found whether in a vehicle, vessel, container, dwelling, building, or other structure, whether upon public or private property. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Manufacture: to complete, blend, formulate, package, repackage, or develop by any means any substance made unlawful by this ordinance. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic / Alternative Drug means: Any of the following:
Any substance containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant, psychedelic, depressant, or hallucinogenic; or(03-13, December 16, 2013)
Salvia Divinorum or any substance known by this name or any version of this name; or(03-13, December 16, 2013)
Substances described as herbal blends, botanical blends, botanical sachet, herbal sachet, herbal potpourri, herbal incense, spice, salts, or any blend or combination of these, regardless of it the substance is marketed as “not for human consumption” which if ingested causes intoxication, euphoria, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any manner changes, distorts, or disturbs the auditory, visual, or mental process; or(03-13, December 16, 2013)
Any substance defined in subsequent portions of this ordinance; or(03-13, December 16, 2013)
Any substance which has a stimulant, depressant, psychedelic, psychotropic, or hallucinogenic effect on the body that is substantially similar to or greater than that of any controlled substance or unlawful drug; or(03-13, December 16, 2013)
Any substance marked or packaged under any name listed in Appendix A of this ordinance. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic Stimulant means:
A product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that elicits psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects, especially where those products are in a powder, crystal, or granular form, including but not limited to the following: (03-13, December 16, 2013)
3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (Methylone)
3,4-Methyenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinone (Mephedrone)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (Methedrone)
4-Fluoromethcathinone (Flephedrone)
3-Fluoromethcathinone (3-FMC)
Naphthylpyrovalerone
2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone (Cathinone)
Synthetic Stimulants, despite their labeling, are commonly identified by being sold in small packets, tubs, and vials, packaged under various retail names, often identified as bath salts, plant food, fertilizer, insect repellant, etc, and are usually powder or granular in form, sold without a listing of ingredients, and sold with disclaimers warning against ingestion and stating they are free of controlled substances. By virtue of this ordinance, such products are unlawful. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic Stimulants, often referred to as “Bath Salts” are commonly marketed under various commercial trade names, which change often, and contain a common disclaimer that the products are “not safe for human consumption”, “novelty item”, or similar disclaimer. Refer to Appendix A for a listing of commercial names commonly used to advertise and portray these substances.
Synthetic Stimulants, as defined in this ordinance, shall exclude normal, typical bath salts and bath additives which do not contain synthetic chemical compounds listed herein that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. Standard bath salts primarily contain magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts), sodium chloride (table salt), sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), sodium hexametaphosphate (Calgon), amorphous/glassy sodium metaphosphate, sodium sesquicarbonate, and borax. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic Marijuana / Synthetic Cannabanoids / Herbal Smoking Product means:
A natural or man-made substance that elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects, or, a natural or man-made compound that functions similar to the active ingredient in Marijuana (tetrachydrocannabinol “THC”) including, but not limited to any quantity of a synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance, and their analogs (including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being consumed, including any of the following: (03-13, December 16, 2013)
2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol with substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by alkyl or alkenyl, whether or not substituted on the cyclohexyl ring to any extent.
3-(1-naphthoyl)indole or 3-(1-naphthylmethane)indole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted on the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl or naphthyl ring to any extent.
3-(1-naphthoyl)pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the pyrrole ring, whether or not further substituted in the pyrrole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthoyl ring to any extent.
1-(1-naphthylmethylene)indene by substitution of the 3-position of the indene ring, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the naphthyl ring to any extent.
3-phenylacetylindole or 3-benzoylindole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted on the phenyl ring to any extent.
5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (CP-47,497)
5-(1,1-dimethyloctyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phenol (cannabicyclohexanol or CP-47,497 C8-homolog)
1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-018 and AM678)
1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-073)
1-hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-019)
1-[2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl]-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-200)
1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (JWH-250)
1-pentyl-3-[1-(4-methoxynaphthoyl)]indole (JWH-081)
1-pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-122)
1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole (JWH-398)
1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (AM2201)
1-(5-fluoropentyl)-3-(2-iodobenzoyl)indole (AM694)
1-pentyl-3-[(4-methoxy)-benzoyl]indole (SR-19 and RCS-4)
1-cyclohexylethyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (SR-18 and RCS-8)
1-pentyl-3-(2-chlorophenylacetyl)indole (JWH-203)
Herbal Smoking Products, despite their labeling, are commonly identified by being sold in small packets containing natural or man-made substances, packaged under various retail names, identified as herbal potpourri, herbal sachet, herbal aromatherapy, etc., sold without a listing of ingredients, and sold with disclaimers warning against ingestion and stating they are free of controlled substances. By virtue of this ordinance, such products are unlawful. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic Marijuana / Synthetic Cannabanoids / Herbal Smoking Product are commonly marketed under various commercial trade names, which change often, and contain a common disclaimer that the products are “not safe for human consumption”, “novelty item”, or similar disclaimer. Refer to Appendix A for a listing of commercial names commonly used to advertise and portray these substances. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic Marijuana / Synthetic Cannabanoids / Herbal Smoking Product shall exclude typical, standard incense and potpourri that is sold as incense sticks, oils, or cones that is commonly used for their aromatic qualities and do not contain any synthetic chemical compounds, do not provide a prohibition against ingestion, and do not elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic Psychedelics / Hallucinogens means:
A substance that mimics the effects of any Federally or State controlled substance, including but not limited to, any natural or man-made substance, compound, mixture, preparation, or is laced with a synthetic chemical compound that elicits a psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect including but not limited to the following: (03-13, December 16, 2013)
         2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E)
         2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D)
        2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C)
        2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I)
        2-[4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine (2C-T-2)
         2-[4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl]ethanamine (2C-T-4)
        2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H)
        2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N)
         2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P)
Synthetic Psychedelics / Hallucinogens, despite their labeling, are commonly identified by being sold in small packets, tubs, or vials and are often in tablet, capsule, and liquid form and packaged under various retail names, sold without a listing of ingredients, and often sold with disclaimers warning against ingestion and stating they are free of controlled substances. By virtue of this ordinance, such products are unlawful. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Synthetic Psychedelics / Hallucinogens are commonly marketed under various commercial trade names, which change often, and contain a common disclaimer that the products are “not safe for human consumption”, “novelty item”, or similar disclaimer. They may also be marked in a consumable pill form under various names.  Refer to Appendix A for a listing of commercial names commonly used to advertise and portray these substances. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
Salvia Divinorum / Salvinorum means: all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or extracts. (03-13, December 16, 2013)
131.07 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY. 

 The City of Mountain Iron deems synthetic and alternative drugs dangerous and detrimental to the citizens, guests and fabric of the community of Mountain Iron.  It bans the sale, possession, transfer and or manufacturing of synthetic drugs or alternative drugs.  Penalties shall be accordance with Section 10.99 of the Mountain Iron City Code. (03-13, December 16, 2013)

Appendix A

Substances described in this ordinance and distributed under the commercial/retail names contained in this Appendix shall be deemed to be unlawful and a synthetic drug, especially if they are packaged in a manner that indicates the product is “not for human consumption” or if it fails to disclose the products ingredients. Products commercially sold under similar or like names which have common, proven and lawful uses and which list their ingredients and directions for use shall not be deemed unlawful under this ordinance.

Numbers:       8-Ball, 251, 2C-1

A:        Afgan Black, Am-Hi-Co (All Types), Aphrodisia, Atomic Bomb, Aztec Gold, Aztec Midnight Wind Tezcatlipoca

B:        Back Draft, Bad 2 The Bone, Banana Cream Nuke, Bath Salt, Bayou Blaster, Bigdaddy, Black Diamond, Black Magic Salvia, Black Mamba, Bliss (All Types), Blizzard, Blue Silk, Blueberry Hayze, Blueberry Haze, Bombay Blue, Bonzai, Bromo-Dragonfly, Buzz

C:        C3, C4, C4 Herbal Incense, Caneff, Charge Plus, Cherry Bomb, Chill X, Chronic Spice, Cill Out, Citrus, Cloud 9, Colorado Chronic

D:        Da Block, Dark Night Ii, Demon, Devil Eye, Dex, Diamond Spirit, Doves, Dragon Spice, D-Rail, Dream, Dynatmite N-R-G

E:        Earthquake, Eruption Spice, Euphoria, Exotic Ultra, Exses, Ex-Ses Platinum (All Types), Ex-Ses Gold Plus, Extreme Spice

F:        Fake Weed, Fertilizer, Fire Bird Ultimate Strength Cinnamon, Forest Humus, Freedom, Fully Loaded, Funky Monkey XXXX

G:       G Four, G Greenies Caramel Crunch, Genie (All Types), Glass Cleaner, Genie, Gold Spirit Spice, Green Monkey Chronic Salvia, Greenies Strawberry, Grow

H:       Head Rush Ultra, Heaven Improved, Heavenscent Suave, Herbal Ecstasy, Hioctane, Humboldt Gold, Hurricane, Hush, Hyper X Ultra

I:         Ice Bud, Ivory (All Types)

J:         Jamaican Gold, Joker

K:       K Royal, K1 (All Types), K2 (All Types), K3 (All Types), K4 (All Types), Kind Spice, Kw Orisha Max, Kush

L:        Legal Eagle (All Types), Legal Phunk, Love Potion 69, Legal (All Types), Legan Ecstasy, Legal Meth, Love Strawberry, Lunar Diamond, Lunar Wave

M:       Magic Dragon Platinum, Magic Gold, Magic Silver, Magic Spice, Maya Blue, Mega Bomb, Melloman, Mellow Madness 1a, Methoxetamine, Mid-Atlantic Exemplar (All Types), Midnight Chill, Mind Bliss, Mngb Almond/Vanilla, Mngb (All Types), Moe Joe Fire, Mojo (All Types), Mr. Smiley’s, Mtn-787, Mystery

N:        Natural Ecstasy, Natural Lsd, Naughty Nights, Neutronium, New Improved K3 (All Types), New K3 (All Types), New-Kron Bomb, Nitro, Number One Choice (All Types)

O:       Ocean Blue, Ocean Burst (All Types)

P:        P.E.P. Potpourri (All Types), Paradise, Pink Lotus, Pink Tiger, Pixie Dust, Plant Food, Posh, Potpourri (All Types), Pow, Pulse, Pump It Powder, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave

Q:      Quick Silver

R:        Radioactive, Rasta Citrus Spice, Rebel Spice, Recharge (All Types), Red, Red Bird, Red Dove, Red Doves

S:        S1. Swerve, Samurai Spirit, Sativah, Scarface, Scope (All Types), Sence, Serenity (All Types), Sex Intense, Sextacy (All Types), Shamantrance, Shanti Spice (All Types), Silent Black, Skink, Smoke, Smoke Plus,Snow Leopard, Solar Star Gold, Space (All Types), Spacetrips, Speed Freak, Spice (All Types), Spicery (All Types), Spicey Xxx (All Types), Spicylicious, Spice 99 (All Types), Spike 99 (All Types), Spike (All Types), Stardust, Starry Night, Stinger, Summer Skyy, Super Kush, Super Summit, Swagger Grape, Syn (All Types)

T:        Texas Gold, Time Warp, Tnt, Tribal Warrior (All Types), Tranquility

U:        Ultra Cloud 10, Unknown Cigarette, Utopia (All Types)

V:        V8, Vanilla Sky, Voo Doo (All Types)

W:       White (All Types), Who Dat (All Types), Wicked X, Wild Opium, Winder Boost, Window Cleaner, Wood Stock

X:        Xtc, X-Tracy Ultra

Y:        Yucantan Fire, Yucatan Fire

Z:        Zombie World, Zoom

CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS

Section

            General Provisions

            150.01 State Building Code

            150.02 Vacation of streets, alleys and public grounds

            Uniform Addressing

            150.20 Purpose

            150.21 Building numbers

            150.22 Location, size, shape

            150.23 Multiple dwelling numbering

            150.24 Maintenance of building numbers

            150.25 Time for compliance

            150.26 Violations

GENERAL PROVISIONS

150.01 STATE BUILDING CODE.
            (A)      Codes adopted by reference.  The Minnesota State Building Code, as adopted by the Commissioner of Administration pursuant to M.S. Chapter 16B.59 to 16B75, as it may be amended from time to time, including all of the amendments, rules and regulations established, adopted and published from time to time by the Minnesota Commissioner of Administration, through the Building Codes and Standards Division is hereby adopted by reference with the exception of the optional chapters, unless specifically adopted in this section.  The Minnesota State Building Code is hereby incorporated in the section as if fully set out herein.

            (B)       Application, administration and enforcement. 

                        (1)       The application, administration, and enforcement of the code shall be in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.  The code shall be enforced within the extraterritorial limits permitted by M.S. § 16B.62, subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time, when so established by this section.

                        (2)       The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the _____.

                        (3)       This code shall be enforced by the Minnesota Certified Building Official designated by this municipality to administer the code (M.S. § 16B.65, subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time).

            (C)       Permits and fees.

                        (1)       The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as authorized in M.S. § 16B.62, subdivision 1, as it may be amended from time to time.

                        (2)       Permit fees shall be assessed for work governed by this code in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the municipality.  In addition, a surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. § 16B.70, as it may be amended from time to time.

            (D)      Violations and penalties.  A violation of the code is a misdemeanor (M.S. § 16B.69, as it may be amended from time to time).

            (E)       Building Code optional chapters.  The Minnesota State Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§ 16B.59 to 16B.75, as they may be amended from time to time, allows the municipality to adopt by reference and enforce certain optional chapters of the most current edition of the Minnesota State Building Code.

150.02 VACATION OF STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS.
            (A)      The City Council may vacate public grounds, streets or alleys or any part thereof on its own motion.  When the vacation is by the motion of the Council rather than by petition, the resolution may be adopted by a four-fifths vote of the Council.  No such vacation may be accomplished unless it appears in the interest of the public to do so and until after a hearing is held which is preceded by a two week published and posted notice.  After a notice of vacation is adopted, the Administrator shall prepare and present to the proper county officials a notice of completion of the proceedings.

            (B)       The Council may by resolution vacate any street upon the petition of a majority of the owners of land abutting on the street, alley, public ground, public way or any part thereof to be vacated. A resolution shall be upon hearing as provided for in division (A) of this section and the vacation upon a petition of property owners may be adopted by a majority vote.

            (C)       M.S. § 412.851, as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted by reference and specifically made a part hereof and incorporated herein.

(Prior Code, Chapter 26)

UNIFORM ADDRESSING

150.20 PURPOSE.
           The City Council finds that for the purpose of providing proper protection of public and private property in the city it is essential to require visible approved addressing or identification for each separate public, residential, commercial or industrial building.

(Ord. 05-01, passed 11-5-2001)

150.21 BUILDING NUMBERS.
            Each primary structure within the city limits shall be assigned an address. The list of addresses of all primary structures within the city shall be held at the office of the City Administrator.

(Ord. 05-01, passed 11-5-2001)

150.22 LOCATION, SIZE, SHAPE.
            (A)      All owners or occupants of residential, commercial and industrial structures within the city shall display their assigned address numbers on the outside of their primary structures, near the front door, for emergency purposes. The address number must be located on a primary structure surface facing the public road clearly visible from the road, address numbers shall be no smaller than four inches and colors should be in strong contrast with background. No self-adhesive number appliques shall be used.

            (B)       In those cases where the principal building’s address is obscured from view from the street of address by accessory buildings, trees, shrubbery or other visual obstruction, the numbers shall be displayed on the mailbox in numerals not less than two inches high, of a light reflective material and of a contrasting color to the background. In those cases where the principal building is obscured from the view from the street address and the residence does not have a mailbox, the numbers shall be displayed from a permanent mounting on the property, clearly visible from the street, displayed prominently in numerals not less than four inches high of contrasting color to the background. The post should be within 50 feet of the road and ten feet of the driveway. The bottom of the address sign shall be placed at a height that is no less than four feet above the level of the surface of the road.

(Ord. 05-01, passed 11-5-2001)

150.23 MULTIPLE DWELLING NUMBERING.
            It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of every multiple dwelling building containing five or more rental units, and the owner or occupant of every individually owned dwelling unit in any such multiple unit building to properly identify each dwelling unit by attaching identification numbers on or adjacent to each entrance to the individual units. The owner or manager of any multiple dwelling building with common entrances containing five units or more, whether the units are rental or individually owned, shall provide signs, including directional arrows, easily identifying the location of each dwelling unit in the building. The signs shall be placed in an obvious location inside each entrance to the building as approved by the Fire Chief.

(Ord. 05-01, passed 11-5-2001)

150.24 MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING NUMBERS.
            The occupant of the primary structure shall be responsible for keeping its address numbers in good repair and clear of snow, dirt, debris or other obstructions.

(Ord. 05-01, passed 11-5-2001)

150.25 TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.
            All owners of primary structures in the city shall comply with this chapter within 45 days. All city licenses, applications and permits may be withheld from the owners or occupants of primary structures if the address is not placed or maintained in conformance with this chapter.

(Ord. 05-01, passed 11-5-2001)

150.26 VIOLATIONS.
 

            Failure to comply with any section of this subchapter shall constitute a petty misdemeanor.

(Ord. 05-01, passed 11-5-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99

CHAPTER 151:  FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT

Section

            General Provisions

            151.01 Statutory authorization, findings of fact and purpose

            151.02 Adoption of flood hazard boundary map

            151.03 Lands to which chapter applies

            151.04 Interpretation

            151.05 Definitions

            151.06 Conflict with zoning regulations and general compliance

            Flood Plain Management Regulations

            151.20 Permitted uses, standards and flood plain evaluation criteria

            151.21 Utilities, railroads, roads and bridges in the Flood Plain District

            151.22 Subdivisions

            151.23 Travel trailers and travel vehicles

            Administration and Enforcement

            151.35 Administration

            151.36 Variances

            151.37 Nonconformities

            151.38 Amendments

            151.99 Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS

151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE.
            (A)      Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in M.S. Chapters 103E and 462, as they may be amended from time to time, delegated the authority to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. M.S. Chapter 103E, as it may be amended from time to time, further stipulates that communities subject to recurrent flooding must participate and maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.

            (B)       Statement of purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program and to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding, including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

            (C)       Warning of disclaimer of liability. This chapter does not imply that areas outside of the Flood Plain District or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding and flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decisions lawfully made hereunder.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.02 ADOPTION OF FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP.
            The Flood Hazard Boundary Map for the City of Mountain Iron, dated February 23, 1979, and those portions of Flood Insurance Rate Map Panel Number 2704160800C, Panel Number 2704160825C, Panel Number 2704160925C and Panel Number 2704160950C, all dated February 19, 1992, that are within the City of Mountain Iron are hereby adopted by reference as the Official Flood Plain Zoning District Map and made a part of this Chapter.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001; Am. Ord. 05-02, passed 5-6-2002; Am. Ord. 02-04, passed 4-1-2004)

151.03 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.
            This chapter shall apply to all lands designated as flood plain within the jurisdiction of the City of Mountain Iron.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.04 INTERPRETATION.
            (A)      Scaling distances on the Official Flood Plain Zoning District Map shall determine the boundaries of the Flood Plain District. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Flood Plain District, the City of Mountain Iron/Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall make the necessary interpretation based on elevations on the regional (100-year) flood profile, if available.

            (B)       If 100-year flood elevations are not available, the community shall:

                        (1)       Require a flood plain evaluation consistent with § 151.20 to determine a 100-year flood elevation for the site; or

                        (2)       Base its decision on available hydraulic/hydrologic or site elevation survey data that demonstrates the likelihood the site is within or outside of the flood plain.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.05 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE. A use or structure on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure.

            BASEMENT. Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base sub grade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.

            FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway.

            FLOOD PLAIN. The channel or beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse that has been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood. Flood plain areas within the city shall encompass all areas designated as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.

            FLOODWAY. The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.

            OBSTRUCTION. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, dredged spoil, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, stockpile of sand or gravel or other material or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse, lake bed or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard or change the direction of flow, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by floodwater.

            REGIONAL FLOOD. A flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. REGIONAL FLOOD is synonymous with the term BASE FLOOD used in the Flood Hazard Boundary Map.

            REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. An elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood, plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.

            STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, travel trailers/vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in § 151.23 and other similar items.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.06 CONFLICT WITH ZONING REGULATIONS AND GENERAL COMPLIANCE.
           (A)      The Flood Plain District as Overlay Zoning District. The Flood Plain Zoning District shall be considered an Overlay Zoning District to all existing land use regulations of the community. The uses permitted in §§ 151.20 and 151.21 shall be permitted only if not prohibited by any established underlying zoning district. The requirements of this chapter shall apply in addition to other legally established regulations of the community, and where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall apply.

            (B)       Compliance. No new structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations that apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Within the Floodway and Flood Fringe all uses not listed as a permitted use in § 151.20 shall be prohibited. In addition, a caution is provided here that:

                        (1)       New manufactured homes, replacement manufactured homes and certain travel trailers and travel vehicles are subject to the general provisions of this chapter and specifically §§ 151.20 and 151.23; and

                        (2)       Modifications, additions, structural alterations or repair after damage to existing nonconforming structures and nonconforming uses of structures or land are regulated by the general provisions of this chapter and specifically § 151.37; and

                        (3)       As-built elevations for elevated structures must be certified by ground surveys as stated in § 151.35.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS

151.20 PERMITTED USES, STANDARDS AND FLOOD PLAIN EVALUATION CRITERIA.
            (A)      Permitted uses in the flood plain. The following uses of land are permitted uses in the Flood Plain District:

                        (1)       Any use of land which does not involve a structure, an addition to the outside dimensions to an existing structure or an obstruction to flood flows such as fill, excavation or storage of materials or equipment;

                        (2)       Any use of land involving the construction of new structures, the placement or replacement of manufactured homes, the addition to the outside dimensions of an existing structure or obstructions such as fill or storage of materials or equipment, provided these activities are located in the flood fringe portion of the flood plain. These uses shall be subject to the development standards in division (B) of this section and the flood plain evaluation criteria in § 151.01 for determining floodway and flood fringe boundaries;

                        (3)       Travel trailers and travel vehicles are regulated by § 151.23.

            (B)       Standards for flood plain permitted uses.

                        (1)       Fill shall be properly compacted and the slopes shall be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100 year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.

                        (2)       Storage of materials and equipment:

                                    (a)       The storage or processing of materials that are, in times of flooding, flammable, explosive or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.

                                    (b)       Storage of other materials or equipment may be allowed if readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning or if placed on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.

                        (3)       No use shall be permitted which will adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, of any drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system.

                        (4)       All structures, including accessory structures, additions to existing structures and manufactured homes, shall be constructed on fill so that the basement floor, or first floor if there is no basement, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and shall extend at such elevation at least 15 feet beyond the limits of the structure constructed thereon.

                        (5)       Uses that do not have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation to lands outside of the flood plain shall not be permitted unless granted a variance by the Board of Adjustment. In granting a variance, the Board shall specify limitations on the period of use or occupancy of the use and only after determining that adequate flood warning time and local emergency response and recovery procedures exist.

                        (6)       Accessory land uses, such as yards, railroad tracks and parking lots may be at elevations lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, a permit for such facilities to be used by the employees or the general public shall not be granted in the absence of a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area would be inundated to a depth greater than two feet or be subject to flood velocities greater than four feet per second upon occurrence of the regional flood.

                        (7)       Where public utilities are not provided:

                                    (a)       On-site water supply systems must be designated to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

                                    (b)       New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters and they shall not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding.  Any sewage treatment system designed in accordance with Chapter 52.22 shall be determined to be in compliance with this Section. (Ord. 02-04, passed 3-1-2004)

                        (8)       All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

            (C)       Flood plain evaluation.

                        (1)       Upon receipt of an application for a permit, manufactured home park development or subdivision approval within the Flood Plain District, the Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall require the applicant to furnish sufficient site development plans and a hydrologic/hydraulic analysis by a qualified engineer or hydrologist specifying the nature of the development and whether the proposed use is located in the floodway or flood fringe and the regulatory flood protection elevation for the site. Procedures consistent with Minn. Rules parts 6120.5600 (Technical Standards and Requirements for Floodplain Evaluation) and 6120.5700 (Minimum Floodplain Management Standards for Local Chapters), as they may be amended from time to time, shall be followed during the technical evaluation and review of the development proposal.

                        (2)       The Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit one copy of all information required by subsection (C)(1) to the respective Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist for review and comment at least 20 days prior to the granting of a permit or manufactured home park development/subdivision approval by the community. The Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify the respective Department of Natural Resources Area Hydrologist within ten days after a permit or manufactured home park development/subdivision approval is granted.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.21 UTILITIES, RAILROADS, ROADS AND BRIDGES IN THE FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT.
            All utilities and transportation facilities, including railroad tracks, roads and bridges, shall be constructed in accordance with state flood plain management standards contained in Minn. Rules, parts 6120.5000 through 6120.6200, as they may be amended from time to time.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.22 SUBDIVISIONS.
            (A)      No land shall be subdivided and no manufactured home park shall be developed or expanded where the site is determined to be unsuitable by the City of Mountain Iron/Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission for reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. The City of Mountain Iron/Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the subdivision/development proposal to insure that each lot or parcel contains sufficient area outside of the floodway for fill placement for elevating structures, sewage systems and related activities.

            (B)       In the Flood Plain District, applicants for subdivision approval or development of a manufactured home park or manufactured home park expansion shall provide the information required in § 151.20(A). The Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the proposed subdivision or mobile home park development in accordance with the standards established in § 151.20(B) and (C) and § 151.21.

            (C)       For all subdivisions in the flood plain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads shall be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.

            (D)      The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has established criteria for removing the special flood hazard area designation for certain structures properly elevated on fill above the 100-year flood elevation. FEMA’s requirements incorporate specific fill compaction and side slope protection standards for multi-structure or multi-lot developments. These standards should be investigated prior to the initiation of site preparation if a change of special flood hazard area designation will be requested.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.23 TRAVEL TRAILERS AND TRAVEL VEHICLES.
            (A)      Travel trailers and travel vehicles that do not meet the exemption criteria specified in division (B) of this section shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and as specifically spelled out in divisions (D) and (E) below.

            (B)       Travel trailers and travel vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this chapter if they are placed in any of the areas listed in division (C) of this section and further they meet the following criteria:

                        (1)       Have current licenses required for highway use;

                        (2)       Are highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, are attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and trailer parks and the travel trailer/travel vehicle has no permanent structural type additions added to it;

                        (3)       The travel trailer or travel vehicle and associated use must be permissible in any pre- existing, underlying zoning use district.

            (C)       Areas exempted for placement of travel/recreational vehicles:

                        (1)       Individual lots or parcels of record;

                        (2)       Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds;

                        (3)       Existing condominium type associations.

            (D)      Travel trailers and travel vehicles exempted in division (B) of this section lose this exemption when development occurs on the parcel exceeding $500 for a structural addition to the travel trailer/travel vehicle or an accessory structure such as a garage or storage building. The travel trailer/travel vehicle and all additions and accessory structures will then be treated as a new structure and shall be subject to the elevation requirements and the use of land restrictions specified in § 151.20.

            (E)       New commercial travel trailer or travel vehicle parks or campgrounds and new residential type subdivisions and condominium associations and the expansion of any existing similar use exceeding five units or dwelling sites shall be subject to the following:

                        (1)       Any new or replacement travel trailer or travel vehicle will be allowed in the Floodway or Flood Fringe Districts, provided the trailer or vehicle and its contents are placed on fill above the regulatory flood protection elevation determined in accordance with the provisions of § 151.20(C) and proper elevated road access to the site exists in accordance with § 151.20. No fill placed in the floodway to meet the requirements of this section shall increase flood stages of the 100-year or regional flood;

                        (2)       All new or replacement travel trailers or travel vehicles not meeting the criteria of subsection (1) above may, as an alternative, be allowed if in accordance with the following provisions. The applicant must submit an emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the 100-year flood. The plan shall be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual and shall demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation. All attendant sewage and water facilities for new or replacement travel trailers or other recreational vehicles must be protected or constructed so as to not be impaired or contaminated during times of flooding in accordance with § 151.20(B).

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

151.35 ADMINISTRATION.
(A)      Permit required.

A Zoning Permit issued by the City of Mountain Iron shall be secured prior to the construction, addition, or alteration of any building or structure that changes its footprint on the land or its heights; prior to the erection of a fence or sign; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to excavation or the placement of an obstruction within the flood plain.
A Building Permit issued by the City of Mountain Iron shall be secured prior to the construction, addition, or alteration of any building or structure except when such construction, addition, or alteration is not subject to the provisions of the State Building Code and when the total value of materials and labor does not exceed $2,000.
Prior to the occupation of a dwelling or addition, a Certificate of Occupancy must be issued by the City of Mountain Iron.
(B)       State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a variance, the Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits.

(C)       Certificate Survey.  For any structure to be constructed on a permanent foundation, the applicant shall submit a certificate of survey of the subject property prepared by a registered land surveyor.  The original markers identified on the survey must be located and marked on the site.  If the original markers cannot be located, the survey must be updated by a registered land surveyor.  Properties located within the boundaries of the mineral mining classification are exempt from this requirement.

(D)      Certification of lowest floor elevations. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) for all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the Flood Plain District.

 (Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001, Ord. 01-08, passed May 19, 2008, Ord. 03-09 passed 04/6/2009)

151.36 VARIANCES.
            (A)      A variance means a modification of a specific permitted development standard required in an official control, including this chapter, to allow an alternative development standard not stated as acceptable in the official control, but only as applied to a particular property for the purpose of alleviating a hardship, practical difficulty or unique circumstance as defined and elaborated upon in a community’s respective planning and zoning enabling legislation.

            (B)       The Planning and Zoning Commission may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such relief or variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest and only for those circumstances such as hardship, practical difficulties or circumstances unique to the property under consideration, as provided for in the respective enabling legislation for planning and zoning for cities or counties as appropriate. In the granting of such variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall clearly identify in writing the specific conditions that existed consistent with the criteria specified in the respective enabling legislation that justified the granting of the variance.

            (C)       Variances from the provisions of this chapter may be authorized where the Planning and Zoning Commission has determined the variance will not be contrary to the public interest and the spirit and intent of this chapter. No variance shall allow in any district a use prohibited in that district or permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation. Variances may be used to modify permissible methods of flood protection.

            (D)      The Board shall submit by mail to the Commission of Natural Resources a copy of the application for proposed variance sufficiently in advance so that the Commissioner will receive at least ten days notice of the hearing. A copy of all decisions granting a variance shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of Natural Resources within ten days of such action.

            (E)       Appeals from any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be made and as specified in this community’s official controls and also Minnesota Statutes.

            (F)       The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant for a variance that:

                        (1)       The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and

                        (2)       Such construction below the 100-year or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. A community shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its annual or biennial report submitted to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.37 NONCONFORMITIES.
            (A)      A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this chapter but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter may be continued subject to the following conditions:

                        (1)       No such use shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity;

                       (2)       An alteration within the inside dimensions of a nonconforming use or structure is permissible provided it will not result in increasing the flood damage potential of that use or structure;

                        (3)       The cost of all structural alterations or additions both inside and outside of a structure to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall not exceed 50% of the market value of the structure unless the conditions of this section are satisfied. The cost of all structural alterations and additions constructed since the adoption of the community’s initial flood plain controls must be calculated into today’s current cost which will include all costs such as construction materials and a reasonable cost placed on all manpower or labor. If the current cost of all previous and proposed alterations or additions exceeds 50% of the current market value of the structure, then the structure must meet the standards of § 151.20 for new structures;

                        (4)       If any nonconforming use of a structure or land or nonconforming structure is destroyed by any means, including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its market value at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission may issue a permit for reconstruction if the use is located outside the floodway and, upon reconstruction, is adequately elevated on fill in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

 

151.38 AMENDMENTS.
           All amendments to this chapter, including revisions to the Official Flood Plain Zoning District Map, shall be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of Natural Resources prior to adoption. The flood plain designation on the Official Flood Plain Zoning District Map shall not be removed unless the area is filled to an elevation at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside of the flood plain. Changes in the Official Zoning Map must meet the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Technical Conditions and Criteria and must receive prior FEMA approval before adoption. The Commissioner of Natural Resources must be given ten days written notice of all hearings to consider an amendment to this chapter and the notice shall include a draft of the chapter amendment or technical study under consideration.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

151.99 PENALTY.
            (A)      A violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance) shall constitute a misdemeanor.

            (B)       In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and the City of Mountain Iron may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it, including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The community must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct chapter violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.

            (C)       When a chapter violation is either discovered by or brought to the attention of the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator shall immediately investigate the situation and document the nature and extent of the violation of the official control. As soon as is reasonably possible, this information will be submitted to the appropriate Department of Natural Resources and Federal Emergency Management Agency Regional Office along with the community’s plan of action to correct the violation to the degree possible.

            (D)      The Zoning Administrator shall notify the suspected party of the requirements of this chapter and all other official controls and the nature and extent of the suspected violation of these controls. If the structure and/or use is under construction or development, the Zoning Administrator may order the construction or development immediately halted until a proper permit or the community grants approval. If the construction or development is already completed, then the Zoning Administrator may either:

                        (1)       Issue an order identifying the corrective actions that must be made within a specified time period to bring the use or structure into compliance with the official controls; or

                        (2)       Notify the responsible party to apply for an after-the-fact permit/development approval within a specified period of time not to exceed 30 days.

            (E)       If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter and shall be prosecuted accordingly. The Zoning Administrator shall also upon the lapse of the specified response period notify the landowner to restore the land to the condition that existed prior to the violation of this chapter.

            (F)       Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99 of this code.

(Ord. 04-01, passed 10-1-2001)

CHAPTER 152:  WETLAND CONSERVATION

Section

            152.01 Purpose

            152.02 Incorporation by reference

            152.03 Scope

            152.04 Procedures

            152.05 High priority areas

            152.06 Delegation

152.01 PURPOSE.
            This section is adopted to implement the Wetland Conservation Act of 1991 (Minnesota Laws 1991, Chapter 354, as amended) and the accompanying rules of the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources (Minn. Rules, Chapter 8420, as it may be amended from time to time).

(Prior Code, § 29.01)

152.02 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
            This chapter incorporates by reference the Act and the Rules. Terms used in this chapter which are defined in the Act or the Rules have the meanings given there.

(Prior Code, § 29.02)

152.03 SCOPE.
            This chapter regulates the draining and filling of wetlands and parts of wetlands within the city.  It is part of the official controls of the city. Conflicts with other official controls must be resolved in favor of providing the most wetland protection.

(Prior Code, § 29.03)

152.04 PROCEDURES.
            (A)      Exemption and no-loss determinations.  Exemption and no-loss determinations under Minn. Rules, parts 8420.0210 and 8420.0220, as they may be amended from time to time, shall be made by the Zoning Administrator. The Administrator should seek the advice of the technical evaluation panel on questions of wetland delineation and type.  The Administrator’s decision is final unless appealed to the Board of Adjustment within 30 days.

            (B)       Sequencing and replacement plan decisions. Sequencing and replacement plan decisions under Minn. Rules, part 8420.0520 through 8420.0550, as they may be amended from time to time, shall be made following the same procedures as for conditional use permits, plus the additional notice and time requirements of Minn. Rules, part 8420.0230, as it may be amended from time to time. If the amount of wetland to be drained or filled is less than one-tenth of an acre, the sequencing determination under Minn. Rules, part 8420.0520, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be made by the Zoning Administrator.

            (C)       Monitoring. The Zoning Administrator shall assure that the replacement plan monitoring and enforcement requirements of Minn. Rules, parts 8420.0600 through 8420.0630, as they may be amended from time to time, are fulfilled.

            (D)      Wetland banking. Wetlands may be restored or created within the city for purposes of deposit in the wetland bank in accordance with Minn. Rules, parts 8420.0700 through 8420.0760, as they may be amended from time to time. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for approving bank plans, certifying deposits and monitoring of banked wetlands and enforcement under the rules.

            (E)       Appeals. Decisions made under this section may be appealed to the Board of Water and Soil Resources under Minn. Rules, part 8420.0250, as it may be amended from time to time, after administrative appeal rights under the official controls have been exhausted.

            (F)       Variances. The Board of Adjustment may issue variances from the official controls of the city so long as the variances do not vary requirements of the Act or the Rules.

            (G)      Technical evaluation panel. The City Council shall appoint a person to serve on the technical evaluation panel. The person must be a technical professional with expertise in water resources management.

            (H)      Determination of technical evaluation panel. Decisions under this section must not be made until after receiving the determination of the technical evaluation panel regarding wetland public values, location, size and/or type if the decision-maker, the landowner or a member of the technical panel asks for such determinations. This requirement does not apply to wetlands for which such data is included in an approved comprehensive wetland management plan per Minn. Rules, part 8420.0240, as it may be amended from time to time.

            (I)        Recommendations of technical evaluation panel. The Planning Commission may seek and shall consider recommendations, if any, made by the technical evaluation panel in making replacement plan decisions.

(Prior Code, § 29.04)

152.05 HIGH PRIORITY AREAS.
            Decisions regarding sequencing, replacement plans and banking shall particularly favor preservation, restoration and creation of wetlands in high priority areas as identified in water management plans pursuant to Minn. Rules, part 8420.0350, as it may be amended from time to time.

(Prior Code, § 29.05)

152.06 DELEGATION.
            The City Council may by joint powers agreement delegate to the soil and water conservation district under M.S. §§ 471.59 and 103C.331, Subd. 19, as it may be amended from time to time, the authority to administer all or any part of this section.

(Prior Code, § 29.06)

CHAPTER 153:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS

Section

            General Provisions

            153.01 Purpose

            153.02 Definitions

            153.03 Variances

            153.04 Enforcement

            153.05 Fees

            Preliminary Plan and Final Plat

            153.20 Procedure for submitting preliminary plan

            153.21 Final plat

            153.22 Data required for preliminary plan

            153.23 Data required for final plat

            153.24 Subdivision improvements

            Subdivision Design Standards

            153.35 Streets

            153.36 Intersections

            153.37 Alleys

            153.38 Easements

            153.39 Blocks

            153.40 Lots

            153.41 Open space and natural features

            153.99 Penalty

GENERAL PROVISIONS

153.01 PURPOSE.
            (A)      The Subdivision and Platting Section of the city sets forth the minimum requirements deemed necessary to insure and protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 

            (B)       More specifically, the provisions of this chapter are designed to:

                        (1)       Assure that to the maximum extent possible all lands will be developed for the best possible use with adequate protection against deterioration and obsolescence;

                        (2)       Encourage well-planned subdivisions through the establishment of adequate design standards;

                        (3)       Create neighborhoods which will be of lasting credit to the community;

                        (4)       Facilitate adequate provisions for transportation and other public facilities;

                        (5)       Secure the rights of the public with respect to public lands and waters;

                        (6)       Improve land records by the establishment of standards for surveys and plats;

                        (7)       Safeguard the interest of the public, the homeowner, the subdivider and units of local government;

                        (8)       Provide common ground for understanding between developers and local units of government;

                        (9)       Prevent, where possible, excessive governmental operating and maintenance costs;

                        (10)                 Provide for the safe and orderly flow of traffic.

(Prior Code, § 24.01)

153.02 DEFINITIONS.
            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

            ATTORNEY. The City Attorney of Mountain Iron, Minnesota or his or her authorized representative.

            BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision or a combination of the above with a river, lake or rail line.

            COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE. Compilation of policy statements, objectives, standards and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development, both public and private of the municipality and its environs, as defined in the Minnesota Municipal Planning Act.

            ENGINEER (CITY ENGINEER). The City Engineer of Mountain Iron, Minnesota or his or her authorized representative.

            LOT. A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage in area and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are therein required; provided that in no case of subdivision shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this chapter. Such lot shall have frontage on a dedicated street and it shall consist of:

                        (1)       A single lot of record, or a portion of a lot of record; or

                       (2)       A combination of complete lots of record and/or portions of lots of record; or

                       (3)       A parcel of land described by metes and bounds.

            LOT (BUTT). A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots.

            LOT (WIDTH). The width of a lot is its own mean width measured at right angles to its mean depth.

            OWNER. An owner is any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation trust or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under these regulations.

            PEDESTRIAN WAY. The right-of-way across or within a block for use by pedestrian traffic whether designated as a pedestrian way, crosswalk or however otherwise designated.

           PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity.

            PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of Mountain Iron, St. Louis County, Minnesota.

            SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a building and a street or lot line.

            STREETS and ALLEYS.

                        (1)       STREET. A public way for vehicular travel, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road or arterial, land place or however otherwise designated.

                        (2)       ARTERIAL STREET. A street which is a principal route through the city or between two parts of the city and includes thoroughfares, freeways, highways and the like.

                        (3)       COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to thoroughfares, freeways, highways and the like, it includes the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development.

                        (4)       MINOR STREET. A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to the abutting properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.

                        (5)       ALLEY. A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back or the side of properties abutting on a street.

                        (6)       CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street with only one outlet and having a turnaround.

                        (7)       HALF-STREET. A public right-of-way having only half the required width as specified in § 153.35.

                        (8)       PRIVATE STREET. A way for vehicular traffic which is not owned and maintained by the municipality.

                        (9)       STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street.

            SUBDIVISION. The division of a lot into two or more lots for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a lot, provided that the following shall not be deemed a subdivision:

                        (1)       The division of a lot into lots of five acres or more with a minimum width of 300 feet and not involving a new street;

                        (2)       One division of a lot into lots in any 12 month period of time, provided that said lots shall meet the minimum area and width requirements of the sewage disposal regulations of the zoning ordinance regulations applying to the area in which said lots are located;

                        (3)       Transfers of interest in land pursuant to court order.

            SUBDIVIDER. The owner, agent or person having control of such land as the term is used in this chapter.

            SURVEYOR. A land surveyor duly registered by the State of Minnesota.

(Prior Code, § 24.02)

153.03 VARIANCES.
            (A)      The Planning Commission may recommend a variation to the City Council from the requirements of subdivision planning procedures or public improvements in specific cases when the track to be subdivided is of such unusual size, shape or character or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in substantial hardship or injustice or when a group housing or cluster development is proposed.

            (B)       The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the City Council in the case of plans which in the judgement of the Council achieve substantially the objectives of this chapter and which are further protected by such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan.

            (C)       In recommending any variation, the Commission shall take into account the following:

                        (1)       The location of the proposed subdivision, proposed land use and existing use of the land in the vicinity;

                        (2)       The number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity;

                        (3)       Those variations that will allow the subdivider to develop his or her property in a reasonable manner and at the same time preserve the general intent and spirit of this chapter and protect the public welfare and interests of the city;

                        (4)       In granting variances and modifications, the Council may impose such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.

            (D)      Application for any variation shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider at the time the preliminary plat is filed and shall state fully the grounds for the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner.  The request for the variance shall be noted in the notice of public hearing regarding the preliminary plan.  The Commission shall consider such application at the meeting on the preliminary plan and give its written recommendations thereon, with the reasons therefor, at the time of its approval or disapproval of said plan.  The Council shall consider the variance application concurrently with the preliminary plan and within the same time framework.

            (E)       Attention is called to the Planned Unit Development procedure set forth in § 154.030. The Planned Unit Development procedure is basically a development procedure that is a variance to the entire subdivision process.

(Prior Code, § 24.09)

153.04 ENFORCEMENT.
            Unless approved as a final plat as provided herein, no subdivider shall be entitled to record in the County Register of Deed’s office or have any validity and the City Administrator shall not issue building permits for any structure on a lot in any proposed subdivision.  The Council shall not permit any public improvements to be installed unless the preliminary plat is approved and shall not permit any services until approval of the final plat and recording of same.

(Prior Code, § 24.10(1))

153.05 FEES.
            The fees for submission of plans and estimated legal and engineering costs and the like shall be established by the City Council by resolution.

(Prior Code, § 24.11)

PRELIMINARY PLAN AND FINAL PLAT

153.20 PROCEDURE FOR SUBMITTING PRELIMINARY PLAN.
            (A)      Sketch plan. The subdividers should meet with the City Planning Commission, the City Administrator and other appropriate officials (the City Engineer and the like) in order to become fully aware of all applicable ordinances, regulations and plans in regards to the proposed subdivision.  Subdividers are also invited to prepare for review with the Planning Commission and other appropriate officials a proposed subdivision sketch plan which, in order to be most useful, should contain the following information:

                        (1)       Site map showing streets, schools, commercial centers and other significant developments;

                        (2)       Subdivision boundaries;

                        (3)       North arrow and scale;

                        (4)       Streets within, adjacent and servicing the tract;

                        (5)       Topography and physical features;

                        (6)       Proposed general street design;

                        (7)       Proposed lot size and orientation.

                       (B)       Submission of such sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of a preliminary plan.  The intent of the sketch plan is to allow the Planning Commission to point out any deficiencies in the plan and to recommend any modification necessary to bring the plan into conformance with the applicable ordinances and regulations.

            (C)       Preliminary plan.

                        (1)       Filing. Before subdividing any tract of land, the subdivider shall file with the City Administrator:

                                    (a)       Fifteen copies of the preliminary plan, said plan being in compliance with § 153.22;

                                    (b)       Applicable fee pursuant to § 153.05;

                                    (c)       The sum required to prepay all planning, engineering and legal expenses incurred by the city for the review of the proposed plan, based upon the estimate of the Council.

                        (2)       Distribution to other agencies. The City Administrator shall refer one copy of the preliminary plan to each of the following agencies:

                                    (a)       County Highway Engineer, County Board of Health if septic systems are to re utilized, Mountain Iron School Board, City Engineer and the Mountain Iron Department of Public Utilities, and to the Commissioner of Transportation for review if the plat includes or borders on a trunk highway,  for review and report;

                                    (b)       If within 30 days any agency fails to submit a report, the city may proceed on the assumption that the agency has approved the plat.

                        (3)       Hearing.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and shall submit a recommendation to the City Council within 60 days of the date of receipt by the City Administrator of the preliminary plan.  The public hearing shall be conducted after notice of time, place and purpose thereof has been published in the official newspaper at least ten days before the day of the hearing.

                        (4)       Scope of review.  The Planning Commission shall determine whether such preliminary plan conforms to the design standards set forth in this section and conforms to the adopted comprehensive city plan.

                        (5)       Council approval.  Within 30 days after receipt of the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall act to approve or disapprove the preliminary plan.  If disapproved, the reason for disapproval shall be set forth in the minutes of the Council.

                        (6)       Approval.  Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Approval of a preliminary plan is hereby limited to a period of 12 months.

(Prior Code, § 24.03)

153.21 FINAL PLAT.
            (A)      Final submitted.  The subdivider shall file three hard shell and two linen copies of the final plat for consideration by the Planning Commission and the City Council incorporating all changes or modifications required as conditions of approval of the preliminary plat as approved.  The plat shall be complete as to the information required pursuant to this section.

            (B)       Evidence of ownership.  The subdivider shall also submit an up to date and certified abstract of title or registered property certificate or such other evidence of title as required by the City Attorney.

            (C)       Review.  The City Administrator shall submit the final plat to the Planning Commission who shall consider the same within 30 days of the time of this receipt by the City Administrator. The Planning Commission shall give its recommendation to the City Council and the City Council shall act on the final plat within 60 days from the time of receipt of the final plat, unless a longer time is agreed to by the subdivider.

            (D)      Standards for review.  A final plat shall not be approved unless it:

                        (1)       Conforms to the preliminary plan approved by the Council;

                        (2)       Meets the minimum design standards and engineering specifications set forth in this section;

                        (3)       Conforms to the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city;

                        (4)       Meets the requirements of the applicable laws of the State of Minnesota;

                        (5)       Has been reviewed by those responsible for the provision of gas, electric and telephone service and evidence has been presented that the plat has been approved by those entities.

(Prior Code, § 24.04)

153.22 DATA REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY PLAN.
            The following information shall be included on or submitted with the preliminary plan, the scale shall not be greater than 100 feet per inch:

            (A)      Identification and description:

                        (1)       Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or be alike in pronunciation of the name of any plat theretofore recorded in the city.  Short names are preferable;

                        (2)       Location of subdivision by section, town, range or by other legal description, together with small-scale sketch showing location within the section;

                        (3)       Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, surveyor and designer of the plat;

                        (4)       Graphic scale and north arrow;

                        (5)       Date of preparation.

            (B)       Existing conditions in the tract and in a reasonable area surrounding the tract:

                        (1)       Property lines;

                        (2)       Areas proposed for non-residential use;

                        (3)       Total acreage of proposed plat; (Acreage of individual lots in preliminary plat only.)

                        (4)       Platted streets, railroad right-of-way and utility easements;

                        (5)       Permanent buildings or other structures;

                        (6)       Location of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other underground facilities.

            (C)       Wooded areas in outline only.

            (D)      Subdivision design features:

                        (1)       Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths and names of streets;

                        (2)       Location and widths of proposed pedestrian ways and utility easements;

                        (3)       Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots;

                        (4)       Areas, other than streets, pedestrian ways and utility easements intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the size of such area or areas in acres;

                        (5)       Minimum front and side street building setback lines indicating dimensions;

                        (6)       If a replat, the original lot and block arrangements shown in dotted or dash lines;

                        (7)       The location of all monuments.

            (E)       In addition to the plat, the following information shall be required and filed with the preliminary plat:

                        (1)       A topographic map at the same scale as the preliminary plat showing proposed lot lines existing and proposed topography, street center line grades, water courses, marshes, vegetation and other significant features;

                        (2)       Soil absorption tests where septic tanks are proposed in accord with the city sewer and water ordinance;

                        (3)       A schematic utility plan for water, sanitary and storm sewers and drainage and including the proposed location, gradient and size of such proposed sewer and waterlines;

                        (4)       A map indicating plans for the development of the entire area if the proposed plat is a portion of a larger holding intended for subsequent development;

                        (5)       Proposed restrictive covenants and a copy of any restrictive covenants pertaining to adjacent properties;

                        (6)       Other reasonable information as requested by the Planning Commission.

(Prior Code, § 24.05)

153.23 DATA REQUIRED FOR FINAL PLAT.
            (A)      The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable provisions of M.S. Chapter 505, §§ 505.02, 505.03, 505.04, 505.08 and 505.32, as they may be amended from time to time, or other applicable provisions of the statute as from time to time provided.

            (B)       The final plat shall include certification by the owner and surveyor and certificate of approval by the city and certificates regarding taxes by the County Treasurer and County Auditor and the certificate of filing by the Register of Deeds.

            (C)       The final plat shall incorporate an identification system for all lots and blocks, which shall perpetuate the existing numbering system within the city.

(Prior Code, § 24.06)

153.24 SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
            (A)      Conformity with construction plans. Prior to the approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have agreed in the manner set forth below to install in conformity with construction plans, approved by the City Engineer and in conformity with all applicable standards and ordinances, the following on the site.

                        (1)       Monuments.  Monuments of a permanent character as required by M.S. § 505.02, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be placed at each corner or angle on the outside boundary of the subdivision.  Pipes or steel rods shall be placed at each corner of each lot and at each intersection of street centerlines.

                        (2)       Streets and alleys.  All streets and alleys shall be graded to their full width except in areas where tree cover and topography can and should be preserved.  All streets and alleys shall have an adequate subbase and shall be improved with an all-weather surface in accordance with city design standards.

                        (3)       Curb and gutter.  Permanent curb and gutter shall be installed on both sides of each improved street dedicated in the plat, except in those areas zoned RR and UR 108.9.

                        (4)       Water supply.  When a proposed subdivision is located adjacent to or reasonably near the existing service area of a public water system, water lines shall be extended and service connections shall be stubbed into the property line of each lot.  Fire hydrants should also be provided.

                        (5)       Sewage disposal.  Sanitary sewer mains and service connections shall be installed to service all lots less than two and one-half  acres in size and shall be connected to the public system.

                        (6)       Storm drainage.  A system that will adequately take care of the surface water runoff within the subdivision shall be provided.  Such system shall include those items of design as the City Engineer requires and may include storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, culverts and the like.

                        (7)       Street signs.  Street signs of a standard design approved by the City Engineer shall be installed at each street intersection.

                        (8)       Public utilities.  All utility lines for telephone and electrical services shall be placed underground.

                        (9)       Street lighting.  Street lighting shall be required in all subdivisions and plans shall be approved by the City Engineer, except RR and UR 108.9.

                        (10)     Pedestrian ways.  All walkways adjacent to streets or otherwise defined by easement shall be improved to adequately accommodate pedestrian traffic.

                        (11)     Street trees.  Street trees shall be planted by the developer in accordance with the standards of the city.

                        (12)     Boulevard sodding.  Boulevard strips shall be sodded.

            (B)       Financial guarantees.

                        (1)       Payment.  The required improvements to be furnished and installed by the subdivider, which are listed and described above, are to be furnished and installed at the sole expense of the subdivider and at no expense to the public.  If any improvements installed within the subdivision will be of substantial benefit to lands beyond the boundaries of the subdivision, the City Council may make provision for causing a portion of the cost of the improvement representing the benefit to such lands to be assessed against the same and in such case the subdivider will be required only to pay for such portions of the whole cost of said improvements as will represent the benefit to the property within the subdivision.

                        (2)       Required improvement contract.  Prior to installation of required improvements and prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall enter into a contract with the city requiring that the subdivider furnish and construct said improvements at his or her expense and in accordance with plans and specifications to be approved by the City Engineer and that said improvements will be dedicated to the public. The contract shall stipulate the type and extent of the improvements to be constructed, the cost of construction, the construction time schedule, the city’s authority to inspect the construction and the amount of the escrow deposit or performance bond to be furnished in accordance with subsection (3) below.  Alternatively, the city in its discretion may require that, or at the request of the subdivider may agree to, undertake the installation of the required improvements, in which event, the subdivider shall enter into a contract with the city agreeing to pay the expense thereof, including all construction, engineering, legal, financing and administrative costs incurred by the city by reason thereof; by such contract the developer shall agree to the method and schedule of payment to the city as determined by the city, and, if required, shall agree to furnish the escrow deposit or surety bond described in subsection (3) below.

                        (3)       Financial guarantee.  Prior to the approval of the final plat, if the subdivider is to undertake the installation of the required improvements, he or she shall make escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, furnish a performance bond equal to the total construction cost of the improvements as estimated by the City Engineer, and including the cost of inspection by the city, or, if the city undertakes the installation of the improvements, and if requested by the city, the subdivider shall make an escrow deposit or, in lieu thereof, furnish a surety bond in the amount of the sum he or she has agreed to pay the city for the installation of said improvements.  Any such deposit or bond shall accrue to the city in case of default of the subdivider.  In case of default the city shall appropriate any such deposit and pursue its remedies provided by any such bond.  The term of any deposit or bond shall be specified by the city.  Any bond must be subject to approval by the city.  Deposits shall be made with the Treasurer of the city or with a responsible escrow agent acceptable to the city.  The city may agree to provide for reduction of the amount of any bond or deposit by reason of completion of, or payment for, the improvements for which said bond or deposit has been made.  Nothing herein shall preclude the city from making special assessments against benefitted property for improvements made on it.

            (C)       Construction plans and as-builts.

                        (1)       Construction plans.  Construction plans for the required improvements conforming in all respects to the standards of the city and the applicable ordinances shall be prepared at the subdividers expense by a professional engineer who is registered in the State of Minnesota and said plans shall contain his or her seal.  Such plans together with the quantity of construction items shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his or her approval.

                        (2)       As-builts.  Upon City Engineer’s certificate of compliance, the subdivider shall furnish the city with as-built drawings prepared by a registered engineer showing the improvements as-built or in place.

(Prior Code, § 24.08)

SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS

153.35 STREETS.
            (A)      Widths.  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the Comprehensive Guide Plan and, where applicable, shall conform to county and state standards for trunk highways.  In general, minimum widths should be as follows: 

                        (1)       Freeways, 300 feet;

                        (2)       Arterials, 100 feet;

                        (3)       Collectors, 75 feet;

                        (4)       Minor streets, 66 feet.

            (B)       Horizontal alignment.  Bends in horizontal street alignment shall be platted in simple curves.  The centerline radius of these curves shall be a minimum of 300 feet for collector streets and 100 feet for minor streets.

            (C)       Vertical alignment.  Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical curves.  Minimum sight distance shall be 250 feet for minor streets and 300 feet for collector streets measured from points five feet above the street centerline.

            (D)      Minimum and maximum grades.  Minimum 0.5%; maximum 4% for collector streets, 7% for minor streets.

            (E)       Minimum carrying capacity.  Seven-ton axle loading for minor streets, nine-ton axle-loading base on traffic volumes for arterial and collector streets.

            (F)       Local streets.  Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged.

            (G)      Culs-de-sac.  Maximum length: 500 feet. Minimum radius of turnaround (right-of-way): 60 feet.  Where certain topographic features or other unusual circumstances dictate, special consideration may be given to longer culs-de-sac.

            (H)      Direct access to major thoroughfares.  In the case where a proposed plat is adjacent to a freeway, arterial or collector street, there shall be no direct access from individual lots to such major thoroughfares except where the lands to be platted are zoned rural residential or UR-108.9.  In the platting of small tracts of land fronting on major thoroughfares, where no other access is available, a temporary entrance permit may be granted by the State or County Highway Department.  Provision shall be made in such plats for the connection of roads to neighboring land.  As the neighboring land is platted and developed, and alternate means of access becomes possible, such temporary entrance permits shall become void.

            (I)        Half-streets.  Half-streets shall be prohibited except where it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, in which case, the dedication of a half street may be permitted.  The probable length of time elapsing before dedication of the remainder shall be considered in this decision.

            (J)        Private streets.  Private streets shall not be permitted nor shall public improvements be approved for private reasons.

            (K)      Stub streets.  Where adjoining lands are not subdivided, some of the streets in the new subdivision shall be required to be extended to the boundary line of the tract to make provision for future access into adjacent areas.

            (L)       Street continuation and extension.  The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into new subdivisions where appropriate.

            (M)      Street location and dedication. All subdivisions shall be required to conform to the Comprehensive Guide Plan.  Arterial and collector streets shown on the Guide Plan shall be dedicated, in the locations and widths shown, to the city as a condition of plat approval.

(Prior Code, § 24.07(1))

153.36 INTERSECTIONS.
            (A)      Angle of intersection.  Street shall intersect as nearly to 90 degrees as possible.  In no case shall streets intersect at less than 75 degrees.

            (B)       Number of streets.  No more than two streets shall cross at any one intersection.

            (C)       Centerline offsets.  The minimum distance between the centerline of offset intersections shall be 150 feet.

(Prior Code, § 24.07(2))

153.37 ALLEYS.
            (A)      Alleys should have a minimum right-of-way width of 30 feet and shall conform to the gradient requirements of minor streets.

            (B)       Alleys should be provided to the rear or side of all lots to be used for commercial or industrial use.

(Prior Code, § 24.07(3))

153.38 EASEMENTS.
            (A)      Utilities.  Easements at least ten feet wide centered on the rear and side lots lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be dedicated to the public by appropriate language in the plat dedication.  They shall have continuity of alignment from lot to lot and block to block.

            (B)       Drainage.  Easements shall be provided along each side of any watercourse to establish a storm sewer, drainage or floodway right-of-way.  Its boundaries shall conform substantially with the center line alignment of such watercourse.  The easements shall be dedicated to the public by appropriate language in the plat dedication.

            (C)       Protection.  Protective or scenic easements shall be provided to a depth of 100 feet from the high water line of all lakes, ponds and streams or to such logical natural ecological boundary as can be agreed upon by the owner and the city. The easements shall be dedicated to the public by appropriate language in the plat dedication.

(Prior Code, § 24.07(4))

153.39 BLOCKS.
            (A)      Arrangement.  A block shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of lots except where lots back onto a major street, natural feature, railroad or subdivision boundary, in which case, it may have a single tier of lots.

            (B)       Length.  The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,500 feet and the minimum length 600 feet.  Blocks over 900 feet long may require pedestrian ways at least ten feet wide at their approximate center.

            (C)       Commercial and industrial areas. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use requires other treatment.  In such cases, off-street parking for employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street loading shall also be provided with similar access.  Extension of streets, railroad access right-of-way and utilities shall be provided as necessary.

(Prior Code, § 24.07(5))

153.40 LOTS.
            (A)      Location. All lots shall abut for their full frontage on a publicly dedicated street.

            (B)       Size.  The lot dimensions shall be such as to comply with the minimum lot areas specified in the zoning ordinance.

            (C)       Butt lots.  Butt lots shall be prohibited.

            (D)      Side lot lines.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines.

            (E)       Water courses.  Lots abutting upon a water course, drainageway, channel or stream shall have sufficient depth and width to provide a minimum area of land not subject to flooding equal to the minimum lot dimensions specified in the zoning ordinance for the district in which the lots are located.

            (F)       Drainage.  Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away from building locations.

            (G)      Width related to depth.  To prevent narrow deep lots, the depth of a lot should not exceed two and one-half times the width as measured at the building line.

            (H)      Double frontage lots.  Double frontage lots (lots with frontage on two parallel streets) shall not be permitted except where lots back to a major thoroughfare street.  Such lots shall have an additional depth of at least ten feet in order to allow for screen planting along the back lot line.

            (I)        Corner lots.  Corner lots shall be platted at least 15 feet wider than the minimum width required by the zoning ordinance.

(Prior Code, § 24.07(6))

153.41 OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL FEATURES.
            (A)      Public open spaces. Where a proposed highway, school, park, recreation area or public access to water frontage shown on the Comprehensive Guide Plan is located in whole or in part in the applicants subdivision the Council shall require as a condition of final approval that such space within the subdivision be dedicated or reserved.  Such land shall not be developed for a period of two years from the date of such final approval so that within said period the appropriate public agency may acquire said land in the manner provided by law and before it is developed for some purpose not conforming to the official plan.  It if is not so acquired and no legal action is filed by such public agency within such period said reservation shall be of no further effect and such lands may be used for other purposes.

            (B)       Action of the city.  At the time of preliminary plan approval by the City Council, after consultation with the Joint Recreation Commission, the Council shall determine as a part of such approval whether to require a dedication of land within the subdivision for park or recreation purposes payment of a fee in lieu thereof or a combination of both.  In making this determination, the Council shall include in its consideration the following factors:

                        (1)       The topography, soils, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication;

                        (2)       The size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication;

                        (3)       How much land consisting of school playgrounds is available for combination with dedicated lands in the formation of local parks and recreational facilities; and

                        (4)       The open space or local recreation facilities to be privately owned and maintained by future residents of the subdivision.

            (C)       Amount of land to be dedicated.  The subdivider or owner shall dedicate 5% of the total acreage proposed for subdivision for local parks. The location(s) of said parkland within the proposed subdivision is subject to the approval of the City Council at the time of their consideration of the preliminary plan.

            (D)      Fees in lieu of land.  At the time of filing a preliminary plan for approval, the subdivider of the property may, as a part of such filing, include a petition to the City Council indicating that he or she desires to pay a fee in lieu of dedicating 5% of the area proposed for platting or indicating that he or she desires to dedicate a smaller portion of land and also to pay certain fees in lieu of dedicating land.  The petition shall state which lands are proposed for dedication and shall indicate the reasons for the petition being submitted.  The City Council shall consider the petition along with the preliminary plan and its approval of the preliminary plan shall indicate whether or not the petition is approved or disapproved.  If the Council approves payment of certain monies in lieu of dedication of land then the subdivider shall pay a sum equal to the difference between 5% of the area proposed for subdivision minus the acreage actually being dedicated times the full cash value per acre of the property to be subdivided as determined by the latest market value as determined by an independent appraiser mutually acceptable to both the city and the subdivider.  The cost of the appraisal, if any, shall be borne by the subdivider.

            (E)       Prerequisite for approval of final plat.  When land is to be dedicated, it shall be offered for such dedication in substantially the same manner as for streets and easements.  When a fee is required, it shall be deposited with the City Administrator prior to approval of the final subdivision map.  The land and fees shall be held in trust by the city and administered by the Joint Recreation Commission until the Council delegate’s responsibility to a special commission or association.

            (F)       Credit for open space or local recreational facilities. The City Council, after recommendation by the Planning Commission, may grant credit for open space or local recreational facilities to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision.  Such credit, if granted in acres (or comparable amounts in in-lieu fees), shall be subtracted from the requirements for dedication or fees or both, as required above, provided:

                        (1)       Yards, court areas, setback and other open areas required to be maintained by other regulations shall not be included in the private open space and recreation credit;

                        (2)       Provision by written agreement is made that the areas shall be maintained adequately;

                        (3)       Use of the private open space or recreation facilities is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of the property within the tract and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the City Council.  Covenants for private park or recreational facilities which are claimed for credit shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map and shall be recorded contemporaneously with the final subdivision map;

                        (4)       Land which may be considered by the Council for credit toward required land dedication for local parks and recreational facilities or in-lieu fees includes but is not to be limited to the following:

                                   (a)       Areas of scenic or natural reality;

                                    (b)       Historic sites;

                                    (c)       Existing or planned hiking, riding or motorless-type bicycle trails, including pedestrian walkways separated from public roads;

                                    (d)       Existing or planned planting strips;

                                    (e)       Landscaped portions of road parkways which are in excess of required road right-of-way widths for the road in question;

                                    (f)        Lakeside or river reaches;

                                    (g)       Private recreational facilities such as golf courses and swimming pools which are available to all of the owners or occupants of the lots located within the subdivision;

                                    (h)       In the case of apartment and planned unit developments, open areas on the site of 20,000 square feet or more (exclusive of open areas required to be maintained by other regulations);

                                    (i)        Parks and parkway areas, ornamental parks, extensive areas with tree cover, low lands along streams or areas of rough terrain when such areas are extensive and have natural features worthy of scenic preservation;

                                    (j)        Other purposes or purposes recommended by the Council.

            (G)      Access to local parks. All lands offered in dedication for local park or recreational purposes shall have access on at least one existing or proposed public street.  This requirement may be waived by the City Council if the Council determines that public street access is unnecessary for the maintenance of the park area or use thereof by the residents.

            (H)      Planting strips.  Planting strips shall be placed along highways and railroad lines to screen the view and reduce noise levels in residential areas.

(Prior Code, § 24.07(7))

153.99 PENALTY.
            (A)      Any person, firm or corporation who violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of these regulations or who sells or offers for sale or lease any lot or block of land herewith regulated before all the requirements of these regulations have been complied with shall be penalized as provided in § 10.99. The city may enjoin such penalty by action for injunction or may recover such penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction.

(Prior Code, § 24.10(2))

            (B)       Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in § 10.99 of this code.

CHAPTER 154:  ZONING CODE

Section

            General Provisions

            154.001           Applicability and purpose

            154.002           Definitions

            154.003           Designation of types of land use; shoreland management classification

            Zoning Districts and Zoning Map

            154.020           Establishment of Zoning Districts

            154.021           Zoning Map

            154.022           Rural Residential District (RR)

            154.023           Urban Residential District, Non-Sewered (UR/NS)

            154.024           Urban Residential District, Sewered (UR/S)

            154.025           Multi-Family Residential District No. 1 (MF-1)

            154.026           Multi-Family Residential District No. 2 (MF-2)

            154.027           Commercial District (CD)

            154.028           General Industrial District (I)

            154.029           Mineral Mining District (MM)

            154.030           Planned Unit Development District (PUD)

            154.031           Special Zoning District No. 1

            Shoreland Overlay District

            154.045           Administration

            154.046           Shoreland classification system and land use district

            154.047           Zoning and water supply/sanitary provisions

            154.048           Nonconformities

            154.049           Subdivision/platting provisions

            154.050           Planned Unit Developments

            Regulations

            154.065           Compliance

            154.066           Limitation on issuance of permits

            154.067           Building requirements

            154.068           Foundations

            154.069           Area requirements

            154.070           Minimum requirements

            154.071           Dwelling on any lot of record

            154.072           Height limitations not applicable

            154.073           Yard and frontage limitations not applicable

            154.074           Yard space

            154.075           Placement of single and two family residential structures on large lots

            154.076           Yard space encroachments; projections into yards

            154.077           Yard space exception, steep slopes

            154.078           Erection of more than one principal structure on a lot

            154.079           Housing developments with single open side yards

            154.080           Accessory buildings

            154.081           Fences, walls, trees and hedges in residential districts

            154.082           Pole buildings

            154.083           Off-street parking and loading spaces

            154.084           Enclosures

            Signs

            154.095           Permits required

            154.096           Exemption

            154.097           Prohibited signs

            154.098           General regulations

            154.099           On-site sign regulations

            154.100           Off-site sign regulations

            154.101           Political posters

            Extensive Excavation/Fill or Borrow Pit Operations

            154.120           Permits required

            154.121           Extensive excavation/fill defined

            154.122           Exempt operations

            154.123           Required information

            154.124           Safety precautions

            154.125           Bonding

            154.126           Review of application

            154.127           Declaration of public nuisance

            Conditional Uses

            154.140           Authority

            154.141           Standards and conditions for conditional uses

            154.142           Procedure

            154.143           Required submissions

            154.144           Duration

            154.145           Filing of permit

            Nonconforming Lots, Land Uses and Structures

            154.160           Intent

            154.161           Nonconforming lots of record

            154.162           Nonconforming uses of land

            154.163           Nonconforming structures

            154.164           Repairs and maintenance

            Administration and Enforcement

            154.175           Generally

            154.176           Variances

            154.177           Board of Adjustment and Appeals

            154.178           Amendments

            154.179           Hearings and hearing notices

            154.180           Permits and fees

           154.181      Consistency with state law

           154.182      Applications

          154.183      Final actions

          154.184      Additional extensions of time

         154.185      Applications for subdivision approval and building permits

           154.998           Violations

GENERAL PROVISIONS

154.001 APPLICABILITY AND PURPOSE.
            (A)      Preamble. This chapter establishes city regulatory powers to the end that adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other dangers may be secured; that the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the city may be conserved; that congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided; that wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters be practiced; and that the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare may otherwise be promoted; and to insure and facilitate the appropriate location for and use of structures and facilities in accord with the Comprehensive Guide Plan for the city.

            (B)       Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of this chapter shall be:

 

                        (1)       To regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings hereafter to be erected;

 

                        (2)       To establish, regulate and limit the building or setback lines on or along any street, traffic-way, drive or parkway;

 

                        (3)       To regulate and limit the intensity of use of lot areas and to regulate and determine the area of open spaces within and surrounding buildings hereafter erected;

 

                        (4)       To classify, regulate and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings designed for specified industrial, business, residential and other uses;

 

                        (5)       To divide the entire city into districts of such number, shape and area and of such different classes according to use of land and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of use of lot areas, areas of open spaces and other classifications as may be deemed best suited to regulate development;

 

                        (6)       To fix standards to which buildings or structures therein shall conform;

 

                        (7)       To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character of established districts;

 

                        (8)       To prevent additions to and alteration or remodeling of existing buildings or structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations lawfully imposed;

 

                        (9)       To classify, regulate and restrict the use of property on the basis of land use relationships;

 

                        (10)     To provide for conditional uses, including planned development, with the established districts;

 

                        (11)     To provide administrative bodies and procedures as necessary to the implementation and enforcement of the various provisions of this chapter; and

 

                        (12)     To provide regulations pertaining to pre-existing lots, structures and uses which do not conform to the regulations, standards, restrictions and limitations established by this chapter.

 

            (C)       Shoreland management.

 

                        (1)       Statutory authorization. The shoreland provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in M.S. Chs. 103F.201 through 103F.221, as they may be amended from time to time, Minn. Regs., parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, as they may be amended from time to time, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in M.S. Chapter 394 (for counties) or Chapter 462 (for municipalities), as they may be amended from time to time.

 

                        (2)       Policy. The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the city affects the public health, safety and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters. The Legislature of Minnesota has delegated responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by the city.

 

                        (3)       Jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in §§ 154.045 et seq. Pursuant to Minn. Regs., parts 6120.2500 through 6120.3900, as they may be amended from time to time, no lake, pond or flowage less than ten acres in size in municipalities or 25 acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated in a local government’s shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the governing body, be exempt from this chapter.

 

            (D)      Scope; qualifications.

 

                        (1)       Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare. Where the provisions of the chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other provision of the city code or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where any use or uses are not listed in the provisions of this chapter as permitted uses and/or conditional uses, they shall be considered as prohibited uses. Where the provisions of any statute, other provision of the city code or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions or such statute, other provisions or the city code or regulation shall be controlling.

 

                        (2)       Compliance. All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter, all structural alteration or relocation of existing buildings occurring hereafter and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter which are applicable to the zoning districts in which buildings and uses of land shall be located. However, where a building permit for building or structure has been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this chapter, which has not by its terms expired to such effective date and provided that construction is begun before the permit’s expiration and within one year of its effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, the building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued; and further, may upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of this chapter relating to nonconformities.

 

                        (3)       Enforcement. The city is responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as defined by law. Violations of this chapter can occur regardless of whether or not a permit is required for a regulated activity pursuant to § 154.998.

 

                        (4)       Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected thereby.

 

            (E)       Abrogation and greater restrictions. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

(Prior Code, § 22.01)

 

154.002 DEFINITIONS.
 

            For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

 

            ACCESSORY USE or ACCESSORY BUILDING. A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of land or a building on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use of a structure that can reasonably be located at or below normal structure setbacks.

 

            AFFECTED PROPERTY OWNER. Person owning property affected by the zoning regulations in this chapter.

 

            AGRICULTURE.  Cultivation of the soil and all activities included thereto, including the raising and feeding of livestock, poultry and fur-bearing animals.

 

            AIRPORT. Any locality, either of land or water, which is regularly used or intended to be used for the landing and take off, storage or servicing of one or more aircraft.

 

            ALLEY. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of accessing abutting property.

 

            APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family or multi-use building arranged and intended as a place of residence for a single family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit.

 

            AUTO SERVICE STATION. Any building or premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing of sales of automobile fuel, which activity may be accompanied by accessory uses such as sales of lubricants, tires, accessories or supplies or minor repairing of automobiles.

 

            AUTO OR TRAILER SALES LOT. An open area other than a street used for display, sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition.

 

            BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly underground but having less than half its clear floor to ceiling height below grade. (See CELLAR).

 

BED AND BREAKFAST. A single family dwelling in which transient guest rooms are rented on a nightly basis for periods of seven (7) days or less and where at least one (1) meal is offered in connection with the provision of sleeping accommodations only.  (Ord. 04-04, Adopted 7-19-04)

 

            BIOSOLIDS. A nutrient-rich organic material resulting from the treatment of wastewater.

 

            BLOCK.  An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bordered by streets or by streets and the exterior boundary of the subdivision or a combination of the above with a river, lake or rail line.

 

            BLUFF. A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff or embankment having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18% over a distance of 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff):

 

                        (1)       Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;

 

                        (2)       The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the waterbody;

 

                        (3)       The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30% or greater; and

 

                        (4)       The slope must drain toward the waterbody.

 

            BLUFF IMPACT ZONE. A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff.

 

            BOARDING HOUSE. A dwelling where meals or lodging, or both, are provided for compensation to three or more persons, who are not transients, by prearrangement for definite periods, in contradiction to hotels and motels as herein defined.

 

            BOATHOUSE. A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.

 

            BORROW PIT. A land use involving the excavation or digging of material for use as fill at another site. Also, an excavated area where earth material has been dug for use as fill at another site.

 

            BUFFER. The use of land, topography (difference in elevation), space, fences or landscape plantings to screen or partially screen a tract of property from another tract or property and thus reduce undesirable influences, such as sight, noise, dust and other external effect, which a land use may have upon other adjacent or nearby land uses.

 

            BUILDING. Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property. When a structure is completely divided into parts by an unpierced wall or walls extending from the ground to the top of such structure, each part shall be deemed a separate building.

 

            BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to a lot line or the ordinary high water level at the required setback beyond which a structure may not extend.

 

            BUNKHOUSE. Residential accessory structure used for sleeping quarters with no sanitation, cooking facilities or water under pressure.

 

            CABIN, SEASONAL OR RECREATIONAL.  A residence occupied only on a part-time basis, not to exceed eight consecutive months, and not requiring public services such as a school bus.

 

            CELLAR.  Portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having half or more than half its clean floor to ceiling height below grade.

 

            CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The certificate issued by the Building Official indicating that the construction of a principal multi-family, commercial or industrial building has complied with the provisions of the building permit and can be legally occupied.

 

            CLINIC. An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more of a group of physicians, medical specialists or dentists or a combination thereof practicing together.

 

            COMMERCIAL PLANNED USE DEVELOPMENTS. Commercial planned unit developments are typically uses that provide transient short-term lodging spaces, rooms or parcels and their operations are essentially service-oriented. For example hotel/motel accommodations, resorts, recreational vehicle and camping parks and other primarily service-oriented activities are commercial planned unit developments.

 

            COMMERCIAL USE. The principal use of land or buildings for the sale, lease, rental or trade of products, goods and services.

 

            COMMISSIONER. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.

 

            COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE PLAN. Compilation of policy statements, objectives, standards and maps for guiding the physical, social and economic development, both public and private, of the municipality and its environs, as defined in the Minnesota Municipal Planning Act.

 

            CONDITIONAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zone district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to neighborhood, would not be injurious to the public health, safety, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in listed zone districts only after approval of a conditional use permit by the City Council.

 

            CONDOMINIUM. An apartment building as defined herein in which the units are owned separately by the individual or family which occupies them and not by a corporation or cooperative. Refers to the building as a whole or any apartment unit within the building.

 

            CORNER LOT.  A lot situated at the junction of and fronting on two or more streets.

 

            DAY CARE FACILITY. A residential facility which provides foster care, supervision and training to pre-school and school age children out of their own home with no overnight accommodations for such children and which meets all state and county licensing requirements.

 

            DECK. A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site and at any point extending more than three feet above ground.

 

            DEPTH OF LOT. The mean horizontal distance between the front street right-of-way and the rear lot line. The greater frontage of a corner lot is its depth and its lesser frontage is its width.

 

            DEPTH OF REAR YARD. The mean horizontal distance between the rear line of the principal building and the rear lot line.

 

            DISTRICT. A section or sections of the city for which the provisions of this chapter are uniform.

 

            DOG KENNEL.  A place, including a veterinary clinic, where three or more dogs over four months old are boarded, bred and/or offered for sale.

 

            DRAINAGE AREA. The official determination of the size and physical limits of drainage areas of lakes and streams as made by the Commissioner of Natural Resources and as listed in the Division of Waters, Bulletin 25, An Inventory of Minnesota Lakes. If not listed therein, the official determination of size and physical limits shall be made by the Commissioner of Natural Resources in cooperation with the municipality.

 

            DUPLEX, TRIPLEX and QUAD. A dwelling structure on a single lot, having two, three and four units, respectively, being attached by common walls and each unit equipped with separate sleeping, cooking, eating, living and sanitation facilities.

 

            DWELLING.

 

                        (1)       DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY.  A detached building designed for and occupied by not more than one family including a manufactured home.

 

                        (2)       DWELLING, TWO FAMILY.  A structure containing two independent residential units (dwelling) which is designed for or occupied by two families and which units are separated by a common wall or floor.

 

                        (3)       DWELLING, CLUSTER OR GROUP. A group of two or more detached dwellings located on a parcel of land in one ownership and having any yard or court in common.

 

                        (4)       DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A structure containing three or more independent residential units (dwellings) which are designed for or occupied by three or more families and which units are separated by common walls or a floor.

 

            DWELLING SITE. A designated location for residential use by one or more persons using temporary or movable shelter, including camping and recreational vehicle sites.

 

            DWELLING UNIT. A residential building or portion thereof intended for occupancy by a family but not including nursing homes, boarding or rooming house or tourist homes.

 

            ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Overhead or underground electrical, telephone, gas, steam or water transmission or distribution systems and structures for collection, communication, supply or disposal systems and structures operated by public and quasi-public utilities or governmental departments or as are required for protection of the public health, safety or general welfare, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes and accessories in connection therewith, but not including buildings. For the purpose of this chapter, the word building does not include structures for essential services.

 

            EXTRACTIVE USE. The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals and peat not regulated under M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended from time to time.

 

            FAMILY.  One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, including foster children, or a group composed of members of a common housekeeping management unit all of the members of which have common use and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation and serving areas and which is based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability.

 

            FLOOR AREA. The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls or from the centerline or a wall separating two buildings. The FLOOR AREA of a building shall include basement floor area but shall not include cellar floor area.

 

            FOREST LAND CONVERSION. The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than re-establishment of a subsequent forest stand.

 

            FRONTAGE. All the property fronting on one side of a street, measured along such a street, between an intersecting or intercepting street and another intersecting or intercepting street, right-of-way, waterway, end of a dead-end street or a municipal boundary.

 

            GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building, or one attached to or part of a principal building, used primarily for the parking and storage of automobiles owned or operated by the residents of dwellings located on the lot on which such garage is located.

 

            GARAGE, REPAIR. Any facilities equipped for the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, but not including factory assembly of such vehicles, auto wrecking establishments or junk yards.

 

            GOVERNING BODY. The City Council by whatever name known.

 

            GRADE. 

 

                        (1)       For buildings more than five feet from any street line, the average level of the finished surface adjacent to the exterior walls of the building; and

 

                        (2)       For buildings having one or more exterior walls within five feet of a street line or lines, the average of the elevations of the sidewalk or sidewalks or their equivalent established ground surface adjacent to such street line or lines.

 

            GROUP HOME. A residential facility licensed by the State of Minnesota or the St. Louis County Social Services Department which serves mentally retarded, physically handicapped or socially maladjusted individuals.

 

            GROUP USEABLE OPEN SPACE.  Land area and facilities specifically designated and developed for recreational or social activities of individuals or groups, excluding required setback areas, in addition to those areas and facilities designated and developed for the private use of residents of individual dwelling units.

 

            GUEST COTTAGE. A structure used as a dwelling unit that may contain sleeping spaces and kitchen and bathroom facilities in addition to those provided in the primary dwelling unit on a lot.

 

            HALF STORY. That portion of a building under a sloping gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall platers of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than three feet above the floor of such story. No such half story shall be used for occupancy except in conjunction with and by the occupants of the floor immediately below it.

 

            HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance between the highest adjoining ground level at the building or ten feet above the lowest ground level, whichever is lower, and the highest point of a flat roof or average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof.

 

            HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL USES. Those uses which by their nature customarily relate to, depend upon or provide essential services to the highway traveling public, including but not limited to gasoline service and light automotive repair stations, drive-in food service facilities, motels or truck stops and which do not include operational activities that are or may be a nuisance to or otherwise incompatible with the existing or intended development pattern of the area.

 

            HOME BUSINESS. A commercial or minor industrial business use conducted on the same property on which the owner’s home is situated, which is of a type or character consistent with the surrounding residential lifestyle, and which is established and operated under such conditions that the use may not be a nuisance to or otherwise incompatible with the surrounding area.

 

            HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation of a service character which is clearly secondary to the main use of the premises as a dwelling and does not change the character thereof or have any exterior evidence of such secondary use. This occupation shall be carried on or conducted only by members of the family residing in the dwelling and in connection with which there is kept no stock in trade or commodity for sale upon the premises.

 

            HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and which is opened to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house as herein defined.

 

            INDUSTRIAL USE. The use of land or buildings for the production, manufacture, warehousing, storage or transfer of goods, products, commodities or other wholesale items.

 

            INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING or CLEAR CUTTING. The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row or block.

 

            JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD. Any place where two or more motor vehicles not containing current license plates, or not in operable condition, are stored in the open. Also, any place where the salvaging or scavenging of any other goods, articles or merchandise not contained entirely within an enclosed building is conducted.

 

            LIVESTOCK. Farm animals such as horses, cows, sheep, goats or poultry kept for use or profit, excluding poultry and rabbits kept as pets or raised for personal use.

 

            LOADING SPACE. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than street or public right-of-way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of trucks and trailers.

 

            LOT. A parcel of land designated by metes and bounds description, registered land survey, auditors plot or other accepted means and separated from other parcels or portions by said description for the purpose of sale, lease or separation thereof. For the purposes of these regulations, a lot shall be considered to be an individual building site which shall be occupied by no more than one principal structure equipped with sanitary facilities.

 

            LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane within the lot lines.

 

            LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or junction, or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street where it is possible to draw two intersecting chords, one each commencing at each of the two points of intersection of the lot lines and street line which intersect with each other from an interior angle of less than 120 degrees.

 

            LOT COVERAGE. The area of a lot occupied by the principal and accessory building.

 

            LOT, DEPTH OF. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

 

            LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.

 

            LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.

 

            LOT LINE. The line bounding a lot as defined herein.

 

            LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land legally recorded with St. Louis County as of the effective date of or later than the adoption of this chapter which is occupied by or intended to be occupied by a principal use or building and such accessory buildings and open spaces required by this chapter and having access to a dedicated public right-of-way.

 

            LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured at the building set back line.

 

            MAJOR AND MINOR COLLECTORS. A road that serves short trips, provides access to minor traffic generators and collects and distributes trips between adjacent land uses and the arterial street system.

 

            MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in it, and which complies with the manufactured home building code established by M.S. § 327.31, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.

 

            MINOR ARTERIAL. A road that connects major activity areas, provides some access to adjacent land and maintains continuous operating conditions.

 

            MINING. The excavation of earth materials for the purpose of sale. 

 

            MOTEL. A series of sleeping or living units, for the lodging of transient guests, offered to the public for compensation and with convenient access to off-street parking spaces for the exclusive use of the guest or occupants.

 

            NONCONFORMING USE. Any legal use, structure or parcel of land already in existence, recorded or authorized before the adoption of official controls or amendments thereto that would not have been permitted to become established under the terms of the official controls as now written, if the official controls had been in effect prior to the date it was established, recorded or authorized.

 

            NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure lawfully existing at the time of the approval of this chapter or any amendment to it, rendering such building or structure nonconforming, which:

 

                        (1)       Does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter, or any amendment hereto, governing bulk, height and yard requirements for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located; or

 

                        (2)       Is designed or intended for a use neither permitted nor conditionally permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.

 

            NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD. An unimproved lot which was legally recorded on or before the effective date of this chapter which does not comply with the lot size requirements for any permitted use in the district in which it is located.

 

            NURSING HOME. An establishment which provides full-time convalescent or chronic care, or both, which is licensed by the State of Minnesota as a nursing home. No care for the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such an establishment. A hospital shall not be construed to be included in this definition.

 

            ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL. The boundary of public waters and wetlands and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowage, the ORDINARY HIGH WATER LEVEL is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.

 

            PARKING LOT. A parcel of land containing one or more unenclosed parking spaces whose use is principal to the lot as differentiated from an accessory use as on a residential lot.

 

            PARKING SPACE. An improved surface area, enclosed or unenclosed with a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of 19 feet to store one motor vehicle, together with a street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of such motor vehicle.

 

            PERMITTED USE. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts without specific approval, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards (if any) of such districts.

 

            PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A type of development characterized by a unified site design for a number of dwelling units or dwelling sites on a parcel, whether for sale, rent or lease, and also usually involving clustering of these units or sites to provide areas of common open space, density increases and a mix of structure types and land uses. These developments may be organized and operated as condominiums, time-share condominiums, cooperatives, full fee ownership, commercial enterprises or any combination of these or cluster subdivisions of dwelling units, residential condominiums, townhouses, apartment buildings, campgrounds, recreational vehicle parks, resorts, hotels, motels and conversions of structures and land uses to these uses.

 

PREFABRICATED UTILITY ENCLOSURE.  Structure consisting of a tubular framework covered with fabric or sheet metal panels or constructed entirely of sheet metal panels. (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

            PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL. A road that connects major traffic generators, offers minimum access to adjacent land and serves large traffic volumes at a high level of service.

 

            PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.

 

            PRINCIPAL USE. The purpose for which land or a building or structure thereon is designed, arranged, intended or maintained or for which it is or may be used or occupied.

 

            PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE. A building and related facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association or group of persons for social, educational or recreational purposes or members regularly paying dues, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.

 

            PUBLIC WATERS. Any waters as defined in M.S. § 1036.005, Subd. 15 and 18, as it may be amended from time to time.

 

            RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A use where the nature of residency is nontransient and the major or primary focus of the development is not service-oriented. For example, residential apartments, manufactured home parks, time-share condominiums, townhouses, cooperatives and full fee ownership residences would be considered as residential planned unit developments.

 

            RESTAURANT. An establishment where food is available to the general public for consumption on the premises.

 

            SATELLITE DISHES. Equipment used to receive microwave signals from distant satellites for conversion into standard television signals.

 

            SCHOOL, PRIMARY, SECONDARY, COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY. Any educational facility accredited by the state or supported by public funds.

 

            SCREENING. The use of land, topography (difference in elevation) space, fences, walls, plant materials or other methods to screen or buffer view, lights, noise or emanating from a site or use.

 

            SEASONAL DWELLING. A residence occupied only on a part time basis and not requiring public services such as school buses and snow plowing of roads.

 

            SEMI-PUBLIC USE. The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization.

 

 

 

            SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT. The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection.

 

            SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line or other facility.

 

            SEWER SYSTEM. Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations and force main and all other construction, devices, appliances or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.

 

            SEWERED AREA. Any lot within 165 feet of an existing sanitary sewer.

 

            SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM.  Means a septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as regulated by St. Louis County Ordinance.  (Ord. 01-04 March 1, 2004, Am Ord. 03-10, 5-3-10)

 

            SHORE IMPACT ZONE. Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50% of the structure setback.

 

            SHORELAND. All lands located within the following distance from the high water mark of public water:

 

                        (1)       One-thousand feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond or flowage;

 

                        (2)       Three-hundred feet from the normal high water mark of a river or stream or the landward extent of a flood plain designated by ordinance on such a river or stream, whichever is greater.

 

                        (3)       The practical limits of shorelands may be less than the statutory limits where such limits are designated by natural drainage divides at lesser distances as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the city and when approved by the Commissioner.

 

            SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, institution, organization, idea or business. A SIGN inside a building is not included unless its face is visible only from the exterior of a building. Each display surface of a sign shall be considered to be a SIGN.

 

            SIGN, OFF-SITE. A sign not located on the same premises or lot as the establishment it advertises.

 

            SIGN, ON-SITE. A sign located on the same premises or lot as the establishment it advertises.

 

            SIGN, SURFACE AREA. The surface area of a sign is the total area that will contain the sign. For signs which are not rectangular in shape, the area shall be calculated upon the area of the smallest polygon which completely encloses the sign. For multi-faced signs, each display face shall be measured.

 

            SIGN, WALL. A wall sign shall consist of any sign which is attached flat against or represented on the surface of a building wall.

 

            SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE. Any archaeological site, standing structure or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of M.S. § 307.08, as it may be amended from time to time. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota state archaeologist or the Director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.

 

            SOLAR COLLECTORS OR PANELS. A device designed to absorb incidental solar radiation and convert it to thermal energy and transfer the thermal energy to a fluid passing through or in contact with the device or generate electricity.

 

            STEEP SLOPE. Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12%, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, that are not bluffs.

 

            STORY. That portion of the building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement designed or used for dwelling purposes for other than a janitor, maintenance man or watchman or for commercial purposes other than storage shall be counted as one half story. No other basement or cellar shall be counted as a story. Any level or deck used exclusively for parking purposes shall be counted as one-half story.

 

            STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property.

 

            STREET WALL. The main wall of a building nearest to and facing on a street, including sun parlors and bays but not including bay windows.

 

            STREET WIDTH. The width of a street is measured between right-of-way lines.

 

            STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the roof.

 

            STRUCTURE. Anything more than 30 inches high placed, constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, including portable buildings, manufactured housing, signs and swimming pools, except that fences, utility poles, lawn lights, antennae and related minor equipment shall not be considered structures.

 

            SUBDIVISION. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels, for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development. The term includes RESUBDIVISION and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.

 

            SUBSTANDARD USE. Any use existing prior to the date of enactment of this chapter which is permitted within the applicable zoning district but does not meet the minimum lot area, length, width, structure setbacks or other dimensional standards of the chapter.

 

            SURFACE WATER ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE. The use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use.

 

            TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure used no longer than 180 consecutive days as a construction office, retail sales stand or other non-permanent facility.

 

            TERRACE. A level plane or surfaced patio, directly adjacent to the principal building on the surface of the land or on the roof of a building.

 

            TOE OF THE BLUFF. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope from gentler to steeper slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the toe of bluff shall be determined to be the lower end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.

 

            TOP OF THE BLUFF. The point on a bluff where there is, as visually observed, a clearly identifiable break in the slope from steeper to gentler slope above. If no break in the slope is apparent, the top of bluff shall be determined to be the upper end of a 50-foot segment, measured on the ground, with an average slope exceeding 18%.

 

            TOWNHOUSE. A group of attached single family dwelling units on a common lot.

 

            UNDUE HARDSHIP.  The same as the term is defined in M.S. § 462.357, as it may be amended from time to time.

 

            USE. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.

 

            VARIANCE. The modification or variance of the provisions of this chapter as applied to a specific piece of property, except that modification of allowable uses within a district shall not be considered a variance.

 

            VETERINARY CLINIC. A commercial activity caring for the medical needs of animals having no outside runs.

 

            WATER ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. A small, above ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship

of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Permitted structures are boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, detached decks and saunas.

 

            WETLAND. A surface water feature classified as a wetland in the United States Fish and Wildlife Circular No. 39 (1987 Edition).

 

            WIDTH, MINIMUM.  The horizontal distance between the outside walls measured perpendicular to the longest dimension of the structure. The qualifying width for structures of varying dimension will be the shortest dimension unless at least 75% of the structure’s length qualifies for a wider determination. To qualify all areas of the structure must contain customary heated and occupied living spaces constructed in accordance with the Building Code, or if manufactured housing, certified by the Building Code Division of the Minnesota Department of Administration.

 

            WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS). An aggregation of parts, including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy wires and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks and the like in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical energy; for example, wind charger, windmill or wind turbine.

 

            YARD. An open space between a building and any lot line which is open to the sky from 30 inches above the ground except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.

 

            YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the entire front of the lot and measured between the front line of the lot and the front line of the building or any projection thereof other than steps, balconies, paved terraces, porches or bay windows.

 

            YARD, OPEN. A yard in addition to front, side and rear setbacks in which no structure, driveway or parking space shall be located.

 

            YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the entire rear of a lot measured between the rear lot line and the rear of the building or any projection thereof other than steps, balconies, paved terraces, porches or bay windows. On corner lots and interior lots, the REAR YARD shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.

 

            YARD, SIDE. A yard between the building and the side line of the lot extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured between the side line of the lot and the side of the building or any projection thereof other than steps, balconies, paved terraces, porches or bay windows.

 

            ZERO LOT LINE. Any instance in which a minimum yard setback of zero feet is permitted or allowed by reason of a wall common to two or more dwellings being situated on a lot line.

 

            ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. Official designated by the city to administer and enforce this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.02)  (Am. Ord. 01-98, passed 4-6-1998; Am. Ord. 02-99, passed 11-1-1999)

 

154.003 DESIGNATION OF TYPES OF LAND USE; SHORELAND MANAGEMENT CLASSIFICATION.
 

            (A)      In order to guide the wise development and utilization of shorelands of protected waters for the preservation of water quality, natural characteristics, economic values and the general health, safety and welfare, certain public waters in the city have been given a shoreland management classification consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Regs., part 6120.3300, as it may be amended from time to time, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for St. Louis County, Minnesota.

 

            (B)       The protected waters of the city have been classified as follows.

 

                        (1)       Rivers/streams.

 

 

From

To

Name

SEC

Comments

TWP

RNG

Sec

Comments

TWP

RNG

SL Class

East Two Rivers

26

Basin 726

58

18W

34

 

58

18W

Tr

*Unnamed to ETR

12

 

58

18W

26

 

58

18W

Tr

West Two Rivers

31

Basin 994

58

18W

31

 

58

18W

Tr

Parkville Creek

11

No sec lin

58

18W

15

Basin 994

58

18W

Tr

Kinross Creek

19

 

58

18W

30

Basin 994

58

18W

Tr

Sandy River:

2

 

59

18W

1

 

59

18W

Tr

Unnamed Tributary to Sandy River:

24

 

59

18W

1

 

59

18W

Tr

Unnamed Tributary to Unnamed Tributary (to Sandy River):

12

 

59

18W

12

 

59

18W

Tr

Unnamed Tributary to Little Sandy Lake:

15

 

59

18W

11

 

59

18W

Tr

Unnamed Tributary to Sandy Lake:

2

 

59

18W

2

 

59

18W

Tr

*Also called Silver Creek

 

                        (2)       Lakes/wetlands.

 

PWI ID

PWI Name

Alternate Name

PWI Class

Acreage

Type

69-0721

Majestic

Haenke

P

57

5

69-0723

Mud

 

W

20

4

69-0724

Unnamed

 

W

19

4

69-0725

Mashkenode

Four-Mile

P

119

5

69-0726

Manganika

Three-Mile

P

181

5

69-0727

Kendall

 

P

53

5

69-0763

Doherty

 

P

71

5

69-0994

West Two Rivers Reservoir

 

P

700

5

69-1270

Unnamed

 

W

3

4

69-1271

Unnamed

 

W

5

4

69-1272

Unnamed

 

W

3

4

69-0729

Sandy

 

P

121

5

69-0730

Little Sandy

 

P

89

5

 

(Prior Code, § 22.02) (Ord. 01-04 March 1, 2004)

 

ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP

 

154.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
 

            (A)      For the purposes of this chapter, the city is divided into districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereof, is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.

            (B)       The Districts shall be known as:

 

                        (1)       Rural Residential District (RR);

 

                        (2)       Urban Residential District (UR/NS);

 

                        (3)       Urban Residential District (UR/S);

 

                        (4)       Multi-Family Residential District No. 1 (MF-1);

 

                        (5)       Multi-Family Residential District No. 2 (MF-2);

 

                        (6)       Commercial District (CD);

 

                        (7)       General Industrial District (I);

 

                        (8)       Mineral Mining District (MM);

 

                        (9)       Shoreland Overlay District (SO);

 

                        (10)     Planned Unit Development District (PUD).

 

            (C)       District regulations shall be set forth in sections of this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.03)

 

154.021 ZONING MAP.
 

            (A)      The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested to by the Administrator and bearing the seal of the city under the following words:

 

                        “This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in § 154.020 of the City Code of the City of Mt. Iron,” together with the date of adoption of this chapter. The zoning chapter and Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the office of the City Administrator.

 

            (B)       If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes will be made on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Council, together with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: “By Ordinance Number             adopted    (date)    by the City of Mt. Iron, the following change or changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: (Description of change),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested to by the Administrator. In any event, the Official Map shall be redrawn to incorporate all changes each year and shall be completed by March 1 of each year. All amendments to the Zoning Map are generally described in Chapter 154 of the City Code.

 

            (C)       Any unauthorized change of the Official Zoning Map of whatever kind by person or persons shall be considered a violation of this chapter.

 

            (D)      Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the Council, the zoning districts adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.

 

            (E)       Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:

 

                        (1)       Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines or right-of-way lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;

 

                        (2)       Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;

 

                        (3)       Boundaries indicated approximately following city limits shall be construed as following the city limits;

 

                        (4)       Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks;

 

                        (5)       Boundaries indicated as following rivers and streams should be construed to follow the approximate center line of such river or stream and should be construed as moving with the actual center line;

 

                        (6)       Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features indicated in subsection (a) through (e) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map;

 

                        (7)       Where the street or property layout existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (a) through (f) above, the Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries in accordance with the city code.

(Prior Code, § 22.04)  (Am. Ord. 02-98, passed 9-8-1998; Am. Ord. 03-98, passed 9-8-1998; Am. Ord. 01-02, passed February 4, 2002; Am. Ord. 07-02, passed July 1, 2002; Am. Ord. 03-04, passed April 5, 2004; Am. Ord. 01-06, passed March 20, 2006; Am. Ord. 02-06, passed February 6, 2006)

 

154.022 RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RR).
 

            (A)      Purpose. To permit the conduct of certain agricultural pursuits on land in the city, to provide adequate separation between dwellings and facilities for housing animals, to maintain and promote the character of rural areas in the city, to protect the functional integrity of roads and to limit suburban style development in a manner consistent with planning objectives.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)        Farming activities of all types.

 

                        (2)        The raising or keeping of livestock and fowl, dairy farming, kennels, horses and fur-bearing animals.

 

                        (3)        Commercial greenhouses and nurseries.

 

                        (4)        Single-family dwellings served by a domestic water supply and sanitary sewerage disposal system approved by St. Louis County. (Ord. 01-04 March 1, 2004, Am Ord 03-10, 5-3-10)

 

                        (5)        Seasonal cabin.

 

                        (6)        Accessory uses clearly incidental to principal use.

 

                        (7)        Accessory structures, including solar collectors or panels, communication towers and one wind energy conversion systems shall be permitted as an accessory use, provided that any tower shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to or greater than the tower height as measured from the base of the tower, but in no case shall tower height exceed 130 feet. (Amd 06-15, 09-08-15)

 

                        (8)        Home occupation.

 

                        (9)        Licensed day care centers accommodating up to ten children.

 

                        (10)      Public recreational uses, including trails, parks, playfields, beaches, wayside rests and the like.

 

(11)      Prefabricated utility enclosure. (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following may be permitted as conditional uses in this District.

 

                        (1)        Veterinary clinic.

 

                        (2)        Riding stable.

 

                        (3)        Public and semi-public uses, including, but not limited to the following: public and private schools, churches, community buildings, private parks and recreational areas, hospitals, rest homes, fire and police stations, public maintenance repair or storage buildings.

 

                        (4)        Utility corridors and necessary related facilities, including, but not limited to transmission towers and lines, microwave relay towers, substations and pipelines.

 

                        (5)        Necessary facilities for the production of electric power, including, but not limited to dams, reservoirs and power plants. Projects including mandatory review of the Minnesota Environmental Quality Council shall be exempt from conditional use review.

 

 

 

                        (6)       Group homes.

 

                        (7)       Airports.

 

                        (8)       Mineral exploration.

 

                        (9)       Commercial or private recreational uses which, by their nature, require large land areas to buffer them from adjoining uses, such as race tracks, gun clubs and POW amphitheaters.

 

                        (10)     Home business.

 

                        (11)     Extensive excavation/fill or borrow pit operations.

 

                        (12)     Application of biosolids.

 

                        (13)     Bed and Breakfast Homes

 

            (D)      Requirements. The following requirements shall be observed:

 

                        
 

                        (2)       Minimum lot width:                                                    300 feet;

 

                        (3)       Minimum depth:                                                         300 feet;

 

                        (4)       Maximum lot coverage;                                             10%;

 

                        (5)       Dwelling height limit:                                                35 feet;

(1)       Minimum lot area:                                                      5.0 acres;


 

                        (6)       Lot line setbacks:

 

                                    (a)       Side yard setbacks:                

 

Principal structure:                             50 feet;
 

Accessory structure:                           50 feet;
 

                                    (b)       Rear yard setback:

 

Principal structure:                             50 feet;
 

Accessory structure:                           50 feet;
 

 

 

                        (7)        Road setback (from centerline of driving surface or 50 feet from right-of-way line, whichever distance is greater):

 

                                    (a)        Principal and minor arterial:                110 feet;

 

                                    (b)        Major collectors:                                  85 feet;

 

                                    (c)        Minor collectors and local roads:         68 feet.

(Prior Code, § 22.05)  (Am. Ord. 02-99, passed 11-1-1999)

 

154.023 URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, NON-SEWERED (UR/NS).
 

            (A)       Purpose. To provide for low density, semi-rural living in areas neither requiring nor anticipating the provision of public water and sewer services, while allowing limited development compatible with the principal residential use.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted.

 

                        (1)        Single-family dwellings served by a domestic water supply and sanitary sewerage disposal system approved by St. Louis County. (Ord. 01-04 March 1, 2004, Am Ord 03-10, 5-3-10)

 

                        (2)        Seasonal cabin.

 

                        (3)        Accessory uses clearly incidental to principal use.

 

                        (4)        Accessory structures, including solar collectors or panels and one wind energy conversion system meeting the requirements specified in Section 154.022 (B) (7). Communication towers are not a permitted use. (Amd 06-15, 09-08-15)

 

                        (5)        Home occupation.

 

                        (6)        Public, recreational uses, including trails, parks, beaches, wayside rest and the like.

 

(7)        Prefabricated utility enclosure up to 400 square feet in area. (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following may be permitted as conditional uses in this District.

 

                        (1)        Two-family dwelling.

 

                        (2)        Public and semi-public uses as identified in § 154.022(C)(3).

 

                        (3)        Utility corridors and necessary related facilities.

 

                        (4)        Home business.

 

                        (5)        Extensive excavation/fill or borrow pit operations.

 

                        (6)        The raising or keeping of livestock and fowl, dairy farming, kennels, horses and fur-bearing animals, provided compliance with Chapter 93 of this code is also achieved.

 

                        (7)        Bed and Breakfast Homes

 

(8)        Prefabricated utility enclosure over 400 square feet in area. (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

            (D)       Requirements. The following requirements shall be observed:

 

                        

 

                        (2)        Minimum lot width:                             200 feet;

 

                        (3)        Minimum lot depth:                             300 feet;

 

                        (4)        Maximum lot coverage:                       20 feet;

 

                        (5)        Dwelling height limit:                          35 feet;

                       (1)        Minimum lot area:                               2.5 acres (108,900 square feet);

 

                        (6)        Lot line setbacks:

 

                                    (a)        Side yard setbacks:

 

Principal structure:                              50 feet;
 

Accessory structure:                            25 feet;
 

Prefabricated utility enclosure 25 feet; (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)
 

                                    (b)        Rear yard setback:

 

Principal structure:                   50 feet;
 

Accessory structure:                 25 feet;
 

                        (7)        Road setback (from centerline of driving surface or 50 feet from right-of-way line, whichever distance is greater):

 

                                    (a)        Principal and minor arterial:                110 feet;

 

                                    (b)        Major collectors:                                  85 feet;

 

                                    (c)        Minor collectors and local roads:         68 feet.

(Prior Code, § 22.06)  (Am. Ord. 02-02, passed 4-1-2002)

 

(8)        Front Setback Prefabricated utility enclosure   150 feet.

(Prior Code, § 22.06)  (Am. Ord. 02-02, passed 4-1-2002) (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

154.024 URBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT, SEWERED (UR/S).
 

            (A)       Purpose. To provide areas primarily for single-family residential uses on larger parcels of land in accord with the City Comprehensive Guide Plan.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)        Single-family dwellings.

 

                        (2)        Accessory uses clearly incidental to principal use.

 

                        (3)        Accessory structures, including solar collectors or panels, providing the maximum floor area per structure does not exceed 900 square feet.  Communication towers are not a permitted use. (Amd 06-15, 09-08-15)

 

                        (4)        Home occupation.

 

                        (5)        Public recreational uses and other public and semi-public uses, including those identified in § 154.022(C)(3).

 

                        (6)        Churches.

 

(7)        Prefabricated utility enclosure up to 400 square feet provided lot size and setbacks meet the requirements of 154.023 (D). (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following may be permitted as conditional uses in this District.

 

                        (1)        Two family residence.

 

                        (2)        Libraries, museums and art exhibition centers.

 

                        (3)        Licensed day care centers.

 

                        (4)        Accessory structures, the floor area of which exceeds 900 square feet per structure.

 

                        (5)        Extensive excavation/fill or borrow pit operations.

 

                        (6)        Bed and Breakfast Homes

 

(7)        Prefabricated utility enclosure over 400 square feet provided lot size and setbacks meet the requirements of 154.023 (D). (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

            (D)       Requirements. The following requirements shall be observed:

 

                        (1)        Minimum lot area:                                             10,200 square feet;

 

                        (2)        Minimum lot width:                                          75 feet;

 

                        (3)        Minimum lot depth:                                           110 feet;

 

                        (4)        Maximum lot coverage:                                     35%;

 

                        (5)       Dwelling height limit:                                    35 feet;

 

                        (6)       Accessory building:                                        15 feet;

 

                        (7)       Minimum width of dwelling units:                 20 feet;

 

                        (8)       Lot line setbacks:

 

                                    (a)       Front yard setback:

 

Principal structure:                             25 feet;
 

Accessory structure:                           25 feet;
 

                                    (b)       Side yard setbacks:

 

Principal structure, each side:             5 feet;
 

Detached accessory structures:          5 feet;
 

                                    (c)       Rear yard setback:

 

Principal structure:                             25 feet;
 

Detached accessory structures:          5 feet;
 

                                    (d)       Corner lot setbacks: front yard setback required for both yards abutting streets.

(Prior Code, § 22.07)  (Am. Ord. 01-98, passed 4-6-1998; Am. Ord. 05-00, passed 12-18-2000; Am. Ord. 01-01, passed 1-16-2001)

 

154.025 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT NO. 1 (MF-1).
 

            (A)      Purpose. To provide suitable areas within the community for a mixture of single, two, three and four family dwellings which retain the character and amenities  of exclusive single-family residential areas.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)       Single-family dwellings.

 

                        (2)       Two, three or four-family dwellings.

 

                        (3)       Accessory uses clearly incidental to principal use.

 

                        (4)       Accessory structures, including solar collectors or panel, with a maximum floor area per structure of 900 square feet and garage structures sufficient to house one vehicle for each dwelling unit for multiple dwellings.  Communication towers are not a permitted use. (Amd 06-15, 09-08-15)

 

                        (5)       Home occupation.

 

                        (6)       Public or semi-public uses listed in § 154.022(C)(3).

 

                        (7)       Licensed day care center accommodating up to ten children.

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following may be permitted as conditional uses in this District.

 

                        (1)       Private clubs, provided that no permanent liquor, food or entertainment license shall be issued in conjunction with such operation.

 

                        (2)       Boarding and lodging houses, subject to a maximum of eight accommodation units.

 

                        (3)       Offices and quasi-public facilities of philanthropic or charitable and non-profit institutions.

 

                        (4)       Accessory structures which exceed a floor area of 900 square feet per structure for single family dwellings or more than one garage unit per dwelling for multiple family dwellings.

 

                        (5)       Mortuary or funeral home.

 

                        (6)       Extensive excavation/fill or borrow pit operations.

 

            (D)      Requirements. The following requirements shall be observed:

 

                                                                                                                       

 

                                                                                                                        (2)            Minimum lot width:                                                  100 feet;

 

                                                                                                                        (3)            Minimum lot depth:                                                  110 feet;

 

                                                                                                                        (4)            Maximum lot coverage allowed:                      35%;

 

                                                                                                                        (5)            Dwelling height limit:                            30 feet;

 

                                                                                                                        (6)            Accessory building:                                              15 feet;

 

                                                                                                                        (7)            Minimum width of dwelling units:               20 feet;

 (1)            Minimum lot area:                                        3,000 square feet minimum lot area per dwelling unit, for lots containing more than one dwelling unit, 5,000 square feet;

 

                        (8)       Lot line setbacks:

 

                                    (a)       Front yard setback:

 

            Principal structure:                     25 feet;
 

Accessory structure:                                 25 feet;
 

                                    (b)       Side yard setback:

 

            Principal structure, one side:                          5 feet;
                                                                                                                                                            total:                                                              20 feet;

 

            Detached accessory structure, one side:          5 feet;
                                                                                                                                                            total:                                                                          20 feet;

                                    (c)       Rear yard setback:

 

            Principal structure:                                 25 feet;
 

            Detached accessory structures:              5 feet;
 

                                    (d)       Corner lot setbacks, front yard setback required for both yards abutting streets.

(Prior Code, § 22.08)  (Am. Ord. 01-98, passed 4-6-1998)

 

 

154.026 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT NO. 2 (MF-2).
 

            (A)      Purpose. To provide areas for a mixture of single, two, three and four family dwelling units and medium density multi-apartment family structures.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)       Single-family dwellings.

 

                        (2)       Two, three or four family dwellings.

 

                        (3)       Apartments, townhouses or condominiums, with a maximum density of 16 units per acre.

 

                        (4)       Accessory uses clearly incidental to principal use.

 

                        (5)       Accessory structures as listed in Section 154.022 (B) (7), except communication towers are not permitted. (Amd 06-15, 09-08-15)

 

                        (6)       Home occupation.

 

                        (7)       Public or semi-public uses permitted in § 154.022(C)(3).

 

                        (8)       Licensed day care centers accommodating up to ten children.

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following may be permitted as conditional uses in this District.

 

                        (1)       Boarding and lodging houses, subject to a maximum of ten accommodation units.

 

                        (2)       Residence apartment-hotels catering to non-transient guests.

 

                        (3)       Accessory structures which exceed a floor area of 900 square feet per structure for single dwellings or non-residential uses or more than one garage unit per dwelling for multiple family dwellings.

 

                        (4)       Extensive excavation/fill or borrow pit operations.

 

            (D)      Requirements. The following requirements shall be observed:

 

                       

 

                        (2)       Minimum lot width:                                                    All uses: 150 feet;

 

                        (3)       Minimum lot depth:                                                    All uses: 150 feet;

 

                        (4)       Maximum lot coverage allowed:                                45%;

 

                        (5)       Principal structure, height limit:                                45 feet;

                                    Accessory building, height limit:                               15 feet;

 

                         (1)       Minimum lot area:                                                      25,000 square feet;

                                    Minimum lot area per dwelling unit:                          2,700 square feet;                                                                       (6)       Minimum width of dwelling units:                20 feet;

 

                        (7)       Lot line setbacks:

 

                                    (a)       Front yard setback:

 

Principal structure:                             30 feet;
 

Accessory structure:                           30 feet;
 

                                    (b)       Side yard setbacks:

 

Principal structure:                 one side 10 feet, total 30 feet;
 

Detached accessory structures: one side 10 feet, total 30 feet;
 

                                    (c)       Rear yard setback:

 

Principal structure:                             30 feet;
 

Detached accessory structures:          5 feet;
 

                                    (d)       Corner lot setbacks, front yard setback required for both yards abutting streets.

(Prior Code, § 22.09)  (Am. Ord. 01-98, passed 4-6-1998)

 

154.027 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (CD).
 

            (A)      Purpose. To provide commercial areas for the location of retail and service activities.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)       Retail and service establishments.

 

                        (2)       Eating and drinking places.

 

                        (3)       Banks, business and professional offices and clinics.

 

                        (4)       Self-service laundries, dry cleaners, car washes and similar uses.

 

                        (5)       Entertainment, cultural, recreational and amusement establishments.

 

                        (6)       Studios, including art, telephone, radio, music and dance studios and/or conservatories.

 

                        (7)       Mortuary or funeral homes.

 

                        (8)       Auto service stations, major auto repair operations and exclusive tire repair or sales shops, excluding retread shops.

 

                        (9)       Auto, trailer and truck dealers, new or used, including sales lots and service shops.

 

                        (10)     Marine, boat, snowmobile and ATV dealer.

 

                        (11)     Nurseries, landscape and garden stores.

 

                        (12)     Motel and hotel.

 

                        (13)     Accessory uses or structures incidental to the principal use, not including communication towers. (Amd 06-15, 09-08-15)

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following may be permitted conditional uses in this District.

 

                        (1)       Public and semi-public uses listed in § 154.022, except home business shall not be a conditional use in this district.

 

                        (2)       Off-site signs.

 

            (D)      Requirements. The following requirements shall be observed:

 

                        (1)       Minimum lot area:                                          22,500 square feet;

 

                        (2)       Minimum lot width:                                        150 feet;

 

                        (3)       Minimum lot depth:                                        150 feet;

 

                        (4)       Maximum lot coverage allowed:                    60%;

 

                        (5)       Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the principal structures.

 

                        (6)       Lot line setbacks:

 

                                    (a)       Front yard setback:                             30 feet;

 

                                    (b)       Side yard setback:                               30 feet;

 

                                    (c)       Rear yard setback:

 

Principal structure:                             30 feet;
 

Detached accessory structure:            30 feet;
 

                                                                                                            (d)       Corner lot setbacks:                        Front yard setbacks are required for both yards abutting streets;

 

                                    (e)       Setbacks from any “R” District boundary:                 30 feet.

 

 

 

            (E)       Special provisions, storage/displays. All materials, supplies, merchandise or other similar matter not on display for direct sale, rental or lease to the ultimate consumer or user shall be stored within a completely enclosed building within the Commercial District or within the confines of a 100% opaque wall or fence not less than five feet height. Merchandise offered for sale as described heretofore may be temporarily displayed beyond the confines of a building in the Commercial District, but the area occupied by such outdoor display shall not constitute a greater number of square feet than 5% of the gross main floor area of building housing the principal use, unless such merchandise is of a type customarily displayed outdoors such as garden supplies.

(Prior Code, § 22.11) 

 

154.0271 ENTERPRISE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (ECD)
 

(A)       Purpose.  To provide retail and non-retail commercial areas for which highway access is beneficial.

(B)       Permitted Uses.  Same as 154.027 Commercial District

(C)       Conditional Uses.  The following may be permitted conditional uses in this District:

(1)        Public and semi-public uses listed in 154.022 except home business shall not be a conditional use in this District.

(2)        Off-site signs.

(3)        Other commercial uses which do not require the external storage of materials, supplies or finished product (not for sale at the site).

(D)       Requirements.  Same as 154.027 Commercial District

(E)       Special Provisions, storage displays.  Same as 154.027 Commercial District.

(Ord 04-10, Passed 9-7-10)

 

154.028 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I).
 

            (A)       Purpose. To provide suitable space separated from residential or commercial areas for light industrial and manufacturing uses.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)        Rail and trucking terminals and maintenance facilities.

 

                        (2)        Warehousing, wholesaling, open and outdoor storage.

 

                        (3)        Machine, sheet metal, metal fabrication, welding shops.

 

                        (4)        Motor vehicle, tire, parts repair and service shops.

 

                        (5)        Food processing, bottling, storage.

 

                        (6)        Manufacturing, assembly, packaging or treatment of previously prepared products, including plastic, paper, metals, stone, wood, glass and the like.

 

                        (7)        Accessory uses or structures clearly incidental to the principal use.

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following may be permitted as conditional uses in this District.

 

                        (1)        Junk yard.

 

                        (2)        Storage tanks for oil, gasoline, liquid fertilizer, other chemicals.

 

                        (3)        Manufacture of acid, creosote, chemicals, fuel briquettes and fertilizer.

 

                        (4)        Manufacture, storage, utilization of explosive materials or products.

 

                        (5)        Extensive excavation/fill or borrow pit operations.

 

                        (6)        Other light industrial or manufacturing activities or uses requiring permits from the State Pollution Control Agency.

 

                        (7)        Off-site signs.

 

                        (8)        Accessory structures as listed in 154.022 (B) (7). (06-15, 09-08-15)

 

 

            (D)       Requirements. The following requirements shall be observed.

 

                        (1)        Minimum lot area:                                             0.5 acre.

 

                        (2)        Minimum lot width:                                          150 feet.

 

                        (3)        Minimum lot depth:                                           150 feet.

 

                        (4)        Maximum lot coverage allowed:                        80%. (Amd 07-15, 09-21-15)

 

                        (5)        Repealed (07-15, 09-21-15)

 

                        (6)        Lot line setbacks:

 

                                    (a)        Front yard setback:                                40 feet.

 

                                    (b)        Side yard setbacks:                                20 feet each side.

                                                Detached accessory structures:  5 feet.

 

                                    (c)        Rear yard setback:                    

 

Principal structure:                    20 feet.
 

Detached accessory structures:   12 feet
 

                                                                                                            (d)        Corner lot setbacks:             Front yard setback required for both yards abutting streets.

 

                                    (e)        Setbacks from Residential District

                                                or Commercial District boundary:                      100 feet.

 

            (E)       Special district provisions.

 

                        (1)        Grading, landscaping and maintenance. All open areas of any industrially used sites shall be graded to provide proper drainage except for areas used for parking, drives or storage, industrial used sites adjoining a residential district shall be landscaped with appropriate plant materials. It shall be the owner’s responsibility to see that the lot area is maintained in an attractive and well-kept condition.  All adjacent vacant lots, tracts or parcels under the same ownership shall also be properly maintained.

 

                        (2)       Storage. All raw materials, supplies, finished or semi-finished products and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building or within the confines of a fence not less than five feet high.

 

                        (3)       Screening. All principal and accessory uses, which are situated within 75 feet of any Residential District, shall be screened and buffered from such district by a separation of open space which shall have a minimum depth of 30 feet and shall include a required fence or vegetative screening.

(Prior Code, § 22.12)

 

154.029 MINERAL MINING DISTRICT (MM).
 

            (A)      Purpose. To provide areas for active mining use and to protect from urban development those areas which have minerals, timber or other potentially marketable natural resources.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)       Mining, processing, storage and transportation of taconite and other metallic ores.

 

                        (2)       Mineral exploration.

 

                        (3)       Rail and trucking facilities, including repair and storage.

 

                        (4)       Tree farming, logging.

 

                        (5)       Extensive excavation/fill or borrow pit operations.

 

                        (6)       Accessory uses or structures clearly incidental to the principal use.

 

            (C)       Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted as a conditional use in this District.

 

                        (1)       Storage facilities for oil, gasoline, solvents, other flammable chemicals or explosives.

 

                        (2)       Storage of toxic or hazardous wastes resulting from mining operations.

 

                        (3)       Off-site signs.

 

            (D)      Requirements. All active mining operations and conditional uses in the Mineral Mining District shall maintain a buffer zone, at least one-forth mile in depth, between the active mining operation and conditional use and any adjoining Residential or Commercial Zoning District. (Prior Code, § 22.13)

 

154.030 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PUD).
 

            (A)      Purpose.  To provide for higher residential densities, mixed land uses, planned shopping and office centers and industrial parks by encouraging innovative design and development. PUDs may be permitted in any zoning district.

 

            (B)       Permitted uses.

 

                        (1)       Dwelling units, including mobile home parks, in any combination of single or multiple units or stories.

 

                        (2)       Nonresidential uses intended to serve the planned development and such other uses as exist or may be expected to exist in the future.

 

                        (3)       Public and private education facilities.

 

                        (4)       Commercial or Industrial Planned Unit Developments in districts permitted said uses.

 

            (C)       Requirements.

 

                        (1)       Ownership. The tract shall be under unified control at the time of application and planned and scheduled to be developed as a whole. No authorizations or permits shall be granted for such ownership of or executed a binding sales contract for all of the property comprising such tract. For purposes of this section, ownership shall include a lease of not less than 50 years duration. The term “single ownership” shall include ownership of portions of such development by two or more wholly owned subsidiaries of a single owner or by such single owner and one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries.

 

                        (2)       Minimum size. The minimum size is five acres.

 

                        (3)       Maximum coverage. The maximum coverage is 50% of the gross land area.

 

                        (4)       Financing. The financing for the project should be proved to be available to the applicant on conditions and in an amount which is sufficient to assure completion of the PUD.

                        (5)       Open space. A minimum of 20% for open air recreational uses and other useable and landscaped open spaces shall be made an integral part of the plan. Such space should be effectively separated from automobile traffic and parking and be readily accessible; the term open space shall not include space devoted to streets and parking.

 

                        (6)       Density. For planned residential PUDs proposed in existing residential zones, a maximum increase in density of 100% may be allowed based on Planning Commission and staff evaluation of design excellence, landscaping and distinctiveness in siting. The actual amount of density increase shall be a matter of negotiation between the city and landowner following review of the preliminary plan in which an initial density is proposed. In recognizing that the PUD process is designed to encourage flexibility and innovative planning and design exercises, it becomes a matter of benefit to both landowner and community to agree upon an appropriate density having economic, aesthetic and practical value. It is intended that the city be the arbiter in all cases where density increase is proposed.

 

            (D)      Procedure.

 

                        (1)       Preliminary development plan; filing.

 

                                    (a)       An applicant for a PUD shall submit a preliminary development plan to the Planning Commission, with a written statement and a fee, for costs incurred by the city in checking and processing such plans. Such application shall be signed by the owner(s) of every property within the boundaries of the proposed PUD.

 

                                    (b)       The drawings which are part of the preliminary development plan may be in general, schematic form and must contain the following information:

 

Location and size of the site and nature of the landowner’s interest in the land to be developed;
 

The density of the land use to be allocated to the several parts of the site to be developed;
 

The location and size of any common open space and the form of organization proposed to own and maintain such space;
 

The use and approximate height, bulk and location of buildings and other structures;
 

Proposals for the distribution of sanitary wastes and storm water;
 

Provisions for parking of vehicles and location and width of proposed streets and public ways;
 

In case of plans which call for development over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed times within which applications for final approval of all sections of the PUD are intended to be filed;
 

A topographic map of the subject property or properties, prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, covering the entire tract proposed for development and indicating existing conditions and development for an additional area, including at least 300 feet from tract boundaries. Such map shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than ten feet to one inch, shall indicate topography at two-foot contour intervals and show in accurate detail the topography, existing buildings and existing land features and trees.
 

                                    (c)       The written statement which is a part of such application shall include:

 

A description of the character of the PUD and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the PUD regulations;
 

A statement of proposed financing with supporting documentation sufficient to provide evidence that financial resources have been committed to complete the stage(s) of the PUD currently under consideration;
 

Economic feasibility analysis of any commercial uses, if the property is not zoned for similar commercial uses at the time of submittal of the preliminary development plans;
 

A statement of provisions for ultimate ownership and maintenance of all parts of the development, including streets, structures and open spaces;
 

Total anticipated population to occupy the planned unit development, with breakdowns as to the number of school-age children, adults and families.
 

                        (2)       The preliminary development plan:  approval.

 

                                    (a)       After the receipts of the PUD application by the Planning Commission, a public hearing upon the application shall be held by the Planning Commission. The Commission may continue the hearing from time to time and refer the matter back to the planning staff of the city for a further report.

 

                                    (b)       The city shall forward a copy of the preliminary PUD plans to the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources for review prior to city action.

 

                                    (c)       After the conclusion of public hearings, the Planning Commission shall forward the PUD plan to the Council with a written staff report recommending that the plan be disapproved, approved or approved with modifications and giving the reasons for these recommendations.

 

                                    (d)       In the event tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner shall, within 45 days after receiving a copy of written resolution of the Council, notify the Council of the acceptance or refusal to accept all said conditions. Refusal of the landowner shall constitute denial of the plans by the Council. Failure of the landowner to notify the Council of his or her acceptance or denial of the conditions to the plan constitutes acceptance of the conditions.

 

                                    (e)       The granting or denial of tentative approval by written resolution shall be based on findings as set forth below and shall state in full in what respects the PUD would or would not be in the public interest, including but not limited to the findings of facts and conclusions on the following:

 

The PUD plan is consistent with the stated objectives of planned unit developments;
 

The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed PUD to the area in which it is proposed to be developed;
 

That authorized distribution of buildings, streets and open space will permit better site planning and thus benefit both the residents of the development and the community as a whole;
 

That such distribution or location will not unduly increase the bulk of buildings, density of population or intensity of use to the detriment of areas outside the PUD by restricting access to light and air by creating traffic congestion.
 

                        (3)       Final development plan; approval.

 

                                    (a)       Within six months following the approval of the preliminary PUD plan, the applicant shall file with the Planning Commission a final PUD plan containing in its final form the information required in the preliminary plan. In its discretion, and for good cause, the Planning Commission may extend for six months the period of filing of the final PUD development plan. A public hearing on an application for a final approval of the PUD plan or part thereof shall not be required, providing the plan, or the part thereof submitted for final approval, is in substantial compliance with the PUD plan given tentative approval.

 

                                    (b)       In the event the PUD plan as submitted for final approval is not in substantial compliance with the preliminary PUD plan, the Planning Commission shall, within 15 days of the date the application for final approval is filed, so notify the landowner, setting forth the particular ways in which the plan is not in substantial compliance. The landowner may:

 

Treat such notification as denial of the final approval;
 

Refine his or her PUD plan so that it does substantially comply with the preliminary plan;
 

File a written request with the Planning Commission that it hold a public hearing on its application for final approval. After either such hearing or refiling the Planning Commission shall recommend and the Council shall by resolution either grant final approval or deny final approval of the PUD plan.
 

                                    (c)       If any zoning change is approved by the Council as a part of the PUD, the PUD plan is attached to and is part of the ordinance establishing the zoning change. The Zoning Administrator shall then change the zoning classification on the Official Zoning Map, if a zoning change was made, and further designate the district or portion of a district as a PUD District, whether or not a zoning change was made. A number shall be assigned each PUD District in sequence through each year (such as ‘89-1 …). The final PUD plan and all supporting documents will be filed with the preliminary plan and together they will form the ordinance establishing the PUD District.

 

                                    (d)        Building permits shall not be issued for any of the structures or land alterations shall not be made until the following conditions are met:

 

Public open space has been dedicated to the city and officially recorded;
 

A cash payment in lieu of land donation has been made to coincide with construction of each building according to the negotiated agreement;
 

The design and construction specifications for all utilities, street improvements and mass grading have been approved by the city engineers;
 

The Homeowner’s Association by-laws, covenants and deed restrictions have been approved by the City Attorney;
 

The construction plans for proposed structures have been approved by the Building Inspector;
 

The final plat has been approved by the city and recorded with appropriate governmental agencies as required by law. Such recorded plats shall contain a statement indicating that such plat is a part of Planned Development No.         , City of Mountain Iron, Minnesota.
(Prior Code, § 22.15)

 

154.031 SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICT NO. 1.
 

            (A)       Creation. A Special Zoning District is created and described as the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 14, Township 58 North, Range 18 West of the 4th Principal Meridian.

 

            (B)       Other provisions.  All other applicable provisions of this chapter must be complied with in Special Zoning District No. 1.

 

            (C)       Special provisions. The following special provisions must be complied with in Special Zoning District No. 1:

 

                        (1)        New construction with earth tone natural or muted colors;

 

                        (2)        Minimum 1,400 square feet living space (not garage) foot print;

 

                        (3)        Up to three stall garage;

 

                        (4)        Accessory buildings of same style and appearance as house, no larger than a total of 300 square feet;

 

                        (5)        Fencing must be wood and left natural or stained earth tones;

 

                        (6)        No double lots;

 

                        (7)        30 months from purchase of lot to substantial completion of structure;

 

                        (8)        No commercial or home businesses;

 

                        (9)        Poured (asphalt, concrete, brick paved) driveways.

(Ord. 04-98, passed 12-21-1998; Am. Ord. 05-98, passed 12-21-1998; Am. Ord. 04-99, passed 10-4-1999)

 

154.032 BED AND BREAKFAST HOMES.
 

(A)       Bed and Breakfast homes may be allowed by conditional use, subject to the following standards:

 

(1)        The owner shall reside in the Bed and Breakfast Homes and manage the premises.

 

(2)        The establishment shall comply with State Health and Building Code requirements.

 

(3)        Meals may be served to guests only

 

(4)        No cooking or cooking facilities shall be allowed or provided in the guest rooms.

 

(5)        The establishment shall be limited to four (4) guest rooms.

 

(6)        Each guest shall be limited to staying not more than seven (7) days within any thirty (30) day period.

 

(7)        The owner shall maintain a guest register showing the name, address, motor vehicle license number, and inclusive dates of visits of all guests.

 

(8)        The owner shall supply a parking plan with the application for a Conditional Use Permit

 

(9)        Signage for each Bed and Breakfast property shall be limited to one non-illuminate sign per property, flaying a maximum sign area of four (4) square feet and a height not exceeding five (5) feet.  Signs must run parallel with the Bed and Breakfast.

 

(10)      There shall be no external vending machines.

 

(11)      Sales of souvenirs and items representative of the area shall be accessory to the B&B and shall be restricted to sales to overnight guests only.

 

(12)      Residential Appearance and Character.  Each property shall maintain an exterior residential appearance and character, meaning an exterior façade that is compatible with the surrounding single family or duplex houses, and is, of an appearance that would be found in a structure designed for and occupied by a family as detached single or two-family residence.

 

(13)      The initial conditional use permit for a Bed and Breakfast shall be valid from the date of issuance until January 31 of the following year.  All conditional use permits for Bed and Breakfast’s shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission on the date of the first regularly scheduled January Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.

 

(14)      All conditional use permits granted for a Bed and Breakfast are non-transferable.

 

154.033 SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICT NUMBER 2.
 

 A special Zoning District is hereby created and described as the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 14, Township 58N, Range 18 West of the 4th Principal Meridian.
 

 All other applicable provisions of Chapter 154 of the Mountain Iron City Code must be complied with in Special Zoning District Number 2.
 

 The following special provisions must be complied within Special Zoning District Number 2:
 

new construction with earth tone natural or muted colors.
minimum 1400 square feet living space (not garage) foot print.
up to 3 stall garage.
accessory buildings of same style and appearance as house, no larger than a total
      of 300 square feet.

fencing must be wood and left natural or stained earth tones.
no double lots.
30 months from purchase of lot to substantial completion of structure.
no commercial or home businesses.
poured (asphalt, concrete, brick paved) driveways.
(Ord. 03-07, Adopted 7-2-07)

 

154.034 SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICT NUMBER 3.
 

(A)       A special Zoning District Number 3 is hereby created and described as the South Half of the Northwest Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 15, Township 58N, Range 18 West of the 4th Principal Meridian.

 

(B)       All other applicable provisions of Chapter 154 of the Mountain Iron City Code must be complied with in Special Zoning District Number 3.

 

(C)       Special Provisions.  The following special provisions must be complied within Special Zoning District Number 3:

 

(1)       new construction with earth tone natural or muted colors.

(2)       minimum 1200 square feet living space (not garage) foot print.

(3)       up to 3 stall attached garage not to exceed 1000 square feet.

(4)       accessory buildings of same style and appearance as house, no larger than a total of 150 percent of the square footage of the living space of the primary structure not to exceed a maximum height of 25 feet.

(5)       fencing must be wood/simulated wood and left natural or stained earth tones or chain link or decorative iron.

(6)       no double lots.

(7)       30 months from purchase of lot to substantial completion of structure.

(8)       no commercial or home businesses.

(9)       solid surface (asphalt, concrete, brick pavers) driveways.

 (Ord. 02-10, Adopted 4-19-10) (01-13, July 1, 2013)

 

SHORELAND OVERLAY DISTRICT

 

154.045 ADMINISTRATION.
 

            (A)       Permits required.

 

                        (1)        A permit is required for the construction of buildings or building additions (and including such related activities as construction of decks and signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems and those grading and filling activities not exempted by § 154.047. Application for a permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator on the forms provided. The application shall include the necessary information so that the Zoning Administrator can determine the site’s suitability for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided.

 

                        (2)        A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system, as defined by §154.047, shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance

 

            (B)       Variances.

 

                        (1)        Variances may only be granted in accordance with M.S. Chapter 394 (for counties) or 462 (for municipalities), as they may be amended from time to time, as applicable. A variance may not circumvent the general purposes and intent of this chapter. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. Conditions may be imposed in the granting of a variance to ensure compliance and to protect adjacent properties and the public interest. In considering a variance request, the Board of Adjustment must also consider whether the property owner has reasonable use of the land without the variance, whether the property is used seasonally or year-round, whether the variance is being requested solely on the basis of economic considerations and the characteristics of development on adjacent properties.

 

                        (2)        The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with the rules that it has adopted for the conduct of business. When a variance is approved after the Department of Natural Resources has formally recommended denial in the hearing record, the notification of the approved variance required in § 154.176 shall also include the Board of Adjustment’s summary of the public record/testimony and the findings of facts and conclusions which supported the issuance of the variance.

(Prior Code, § 22.14(3.0)

 

154.046 SHORELAND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM AND LAND USE DISTRICT.
 

            (A)       Shoreland classification system.  The public waters of the city have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minn. Regs., part 6120.3300, as it may be amended from time to time, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for St. Louis County, Minnesota.

 

                        (1)        General. The shoreland area for the waterbodies listed in subsections (2) and (3) shall be as defined in this chapter and as shown on the Official Zoning Map.

 

                        (2)        Lakes.

 

(a)        Natural Environment Lakes                  Protected Waters

                                                                                                            Inventory I.D. #

                                                            Majestic                                   69-0721

                                                            Mud                                         69-0723

                                                            Unnamed                                 69-0724

                                                            Kendall                        69-0727

                                                            Doherty                                    69-0763

                                                            Unnamed                                 69-1270

                                                            Unnamed                                 69-1272

                                                            Mashkenode                             69-0725P

                                                            Manganika                               69-0726P

                                                            Little Sandy Lake                      69-0729P

                                                            Sandy Lake                               69-0730P

                                    (b)        Recreational development lakes.

 

                                    Recreational Development Lakes                      Protected Waters

 Inventory I.D. #

 

                                    West Two Rivers Reservoir                               69-0994

 

                                    (c)        General development lakes.

 

                                    General Development Lakes                             Protected Waters

 Inventory I.D.#

 

                        (3)        Rivers and streams.

 

                                    (a)        Remote rivers, none listed.

                                    (b)        Forested rivers, none listed.

                                    (c)        Transition rivers, none listed.

                                    (d)        Agricultural rivers, none listed.

                                    (e)        Urban rivers, none listed.

                                    (f)        Tributary streams:

 

                        Tributary Streams                                                        Legal Description

 

                        East Two Rivers                                                            See Section 154.003(B)(1)

                        Silver Creek                                                                  See Section 154.003(B)(1)

                        West Two Rivers                                                          See Section 154.003(B)(1)

                        Parkville Creek                                                See Section 154.003(B)(1)                                    Kinross Creek                                                               See Section 154.003(B)(1)

Sandy River                                                                  See Section 154.003(B)(1)

Unnamed Tributary to Sandy Lake                                 See Section 154.003(B)(1)

Unnamed Tributary to Sandy River                                See Section 154.003(B)(1)

Unnamed Tributary to Little Sandy Lake            See Section 154.003(B)(1)

                        Unnamed Tributary to Unnamed Tributary

(to Sandy River)                                                            See Section 154.003(B)(1)

                        (Ord. 01-04, March 1, 2004)

 

  *All protected watercourses in the city shown on the Protected Waters Inventory Map for St. Louis County, a copy of which is adopted by reference, not given a classification in subsections (a) through (e) above shall be considered “Tributary.”

 

 

 

            (B)       Land use district descriptions.

 

                        (1)        Criteria for designation. The land use districts in subsection (2), and the delineation of a land use district’s boundaries on the Official Zoning Map, must be consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan (when available) and the following criteria, considerations and objectives.

 

                                    (a)        General considerations and criteria for all land uses.

 

Preservation of natural areas;
 

Present ownership and development of shoreland areas;
 

Shoreland soil types and their engineering capabilities;
 

Topographic characteristics;
 

Vegetative cover;
 

In-water physical characteristics, values and constraints;
 

Recreational use of the surface water;
 

Road and service center accessibility;
 

Socioeconomic development needs and plans as they involve water and related land resources;
 

Requirements of industry which by its nature requires location in shoreland areas; and
 

The necessity to preserve and restore certain areas having significant historical or ecological value.
 

                                    (b)        Factors and criteria for Planned Unit Developments.

 

Existing recreational use of the surface waters and likely increases in use associated with planned unit developments;
 

Physical and aesthetic impacts of increased density;
 

Suitability of lands for the planned unit development approach;
 

Level of current development in the area; and
 

 

 

Amounts and types of ownership of undeveloped lands.
 

                        (2)       Land use district descriptions. The land use districts provided below and the allowable land uses therein for the given classifications of waterbodies shall be properly delineated on the Official Zoning Map for the shorelands of this community. These land use districts are in conformance with the criteria specified in Minn. Regs., part 6120.3200, Subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time.

 

                                    (a)       Land use districts for lakes.

 

 

General Development Lakes

Recreational Development Lakes

Natural Environment Lakes

Special Protection District – Uses

– Forest management

– Sensitive resource management

– Agricultural: cropland and pasture

– Agricultural feedlots

– Parks and historic sites

– Extractive use

– Single residential

– Mining of metallic minerals and peat

 

P

P

P

C

C

C

C

P

 

P

P

P

C

C

C

C

P

 

P

P

P

C

C

C

C

P

Residential District – Uses

– Single residential

– Semipublic

– Parks and historic sites

– Extractive use

– Duplex, triplex and residential

– Forest management

– Mining of metallic minerals and peat

 

P

C

C

C

P

P

P

 

P

C

C

C

P

P

P

 

P

C

C

C

C

P

P

High Density Residential District – Uses

– Residential planned unit developments

– Single residential

– Surface water oriented commercial*

– Semipublic

– Parks and historic sites

– Duplex, triplex, quad residential

– Forest management

 

C

P

C

C

C

P

P

 

C

P

C

C

C

P

P

 

C

P

C

C

C

P

P

Water Oriented Commercial District – Uses

– Surface water-oriented commercial

– Commercial planned unit development**

– Public, semipublic

– Parks and historic sites

– Forest management

 

 

P

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

P

 

 

C

C

C

C

P

General Use District – Uses

– Commercial

– Commercial planned unit development**

– Industrial

– Public, semipublic

– Extractive use

– Parks and historic sites

– Forest management

– Mining of metallic minerals and peat

 

P

C

C

P

C

C

P

P

 

P

C

C

P

C

C

P

P

 

C

C

N

C

C

C

P

P

* As accessory to a residential planned unit development

** Limited expansion of a commercial planned unit development involving up to six additional dwelling units or sites may be allowed as a permitted use, provided the provisions of § 154.050 are satisfied.

 

                                    (b)       Land use districts for rivers and streams.

 

 

Remote

Forested

Transition

Agricultural

Urban

Tributary

Special Protection District – Uses

– Forest management

– Sensitive resource management

– Agricultural: cropland and pasture

– Agricultural feedlots

– Parks and historic sites

– Extractive use

– Single residential

– Mining of metallic minerals and peat

 

 

P

P

 

P

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

P

 

P

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

P

 

P

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

P

 

P

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

P

 

P

 

C

C

C

C

P

 

 

P

P

 

P

 

C

C

C

C

P

Residential District – Uses

– Single residential

– Semipublic

– Parks and historic sites

– Extractive use

– Duplex, triplex, quad residential

– Forest management

– Mining of metallic minerals and peat

 

 

P

C

C

C

C

 

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

C

 

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

C

 

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

C

 

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

C

 

P

P

 

 

P

C

C

C

C

 

P

P

High Density Residential – Uses

– Residential planned unit developments

– Single residential

– Surface water-oriented commercial*

– Semipublic

– Parks and historic sites

– Duplex, triplex, quad residential

– Forest management

 

 

C

 

P

C

 

C

C

P

 

P

 

 

C

 

P

C

 

C

C

P

 

P

 

 

C

 

P

C

 

C

C

P

 

P

 

 

C

 

P

C

 

C

C

P

 

P

 

 

C

 

P

C

 

C

C

P

 

P

 

 

C

 

P

C

 

C

C

P

 

P

Water Oriented Commercial – Uses

– Surface water-oriented commercial

– Commercial planned unit development*

– Public, semipublic

– Parks and historic sites

– Forest management

 

 

C

 

C

 

C

C

P

 

 

C

 

C

 

C

C

P

 

 

C

 

C

 

C

C

P

 

 

C

 

C

 

P

C

P

 

 

C

 

C

 

P

C

P

 

 

C

 

C

 

P

C

P

General Use District – Uses

– Commercial

– Commercial planned unit development**

– Industrial

– Public, semipublic

– Extractive use

– Parks and historic sites

– Forest management

– Mining of metallic minerals and peat

 

 

C

C

 

N

C

C

C

P

P

 

 

C

C

 

C

C

C

C

P

P

 

 

C

C

 

N

C

C

C

P

P

 

 

 

C

C

 

N

C

C

C

P

P

 

 

P

C

 

C

P

C

C

P

P

 

 

C

C

 

C

C

C

C

P

P

* As accessory to a residential planned unit development

** Limited expansion of a commercial planned unit development involving up to six additional dwelling units or sites may be allowed as a permitted use, provided the provisions of § 154.050 are satisfied.

 

            (C)       Use and upgrading of inconsistent land use districts.

 

                        (1)       The land use districts adopted in § 154.020 as they apply to shoreland areas and their delineated boundaries on the Official Zoning Map are not consistent with the land use district designation criteria specified in division (B) of this section. These inconsistent land use district designations may continue until revisions are proposed to change either the land use district designation within an existing land use district boundary shown on the Official Zoning Map or to modify the boundary of an existing land use district shown on the Official Zoning Map.

 

                        (2)       When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent land use district provision, the following additional criteria and procedures shall apply.

 

                                    (a)       For lakes. When a revision to a land use district designation on a lake is considered, the land use district boundaries and use provisions therein for all the shoreland areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter on the lake must be revised to make them substantially compatible with the framework in divisions (A) and (B) of this section.

 

                                    (b)       For rivers and streams. When a revision to a land use district designation on a river or stream is proposed, the land use district boundaries and the use provisions therein for all shoreland on both sides of the river or stream within the same classification within the jurisdiction of this chapter must be revised to make them substantially compatible with the framework in divisions (B) and (C) of this section. If the same river classification is contiguous for more than a five-mile segment, only the shoreland for a distance of 2.5 miles upstream and downstream, or to the class boundary if closer, need be evaluated and revised.

 

                        (3)       When an interpretation question arises about whether a specific land use fits within a given use category, the interpretation shall be made by the Board of Adjustment. When a question arises as to whether a land use district’s boundaries are properly delineated on the Official Zoning Map, this decision shall be made by the city.

 

                        (4)       When a revision is proposed to an inconsistent land use district provision by an individual party or landowner, this individual party or landowner will only be responsible to provide the supporting and/or substantiating information for the specific parcel in question. The city will direct the Zoning Administrator to provide such additional information for this waterbody as is necessary to satisfy subsections (1) and (2).

 

                        (5)       The city must make a detailed finding of fact and conclusion when taking final action that this revision, and the upgrading of any inconsistent land use district designations on said waterbody, are consistent with the enumerated criteria and use provisions of division (B) of this section.

(Prior Code, § 22.14(4.0))

 

154.047 ZONING AND WATER SUPPLY/SANITARY PROVISIONS.
 

            (A)      Lot area and width standards. The lot area (in square feet) and lot width standards (in feet) for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential lots created after the date of enactment of this chapter for the lake and river/stream classifications are the following.

 

 

 

                        (1)       Unsewered lakes.

 

                                    (a)       Natural environment.

 

 

Riparian Lots

Nonriparian Lots

Area

Width

Area

Width

Single

80,000

200

80,000

200

Duplex

120,000

300

160,000

400

Triplex

160,000

400

240,000

600

Quad

200,000

500

320,000

800

 

                                    (b)       Recreational development.

 

 

Riparian Lots

Nonriparian Lots

Area

Width

Area

Width

Single

40,000

150

40,000

150

Duplex

80,000

225

80,000

265

Triplex

120,000

300

120,000

375

Quad

160,000

375

160,000

490

 

                                    (c)       General development.

 

 

Riparian Lots

Nonriparian Lots

Area

Width

Area

Width

Single

20,000

100

40,000

150

Duplex

40,000

180

80,000

265

Triplex

60,000

260

120,000

375

Quad

80,000

340

160,000

490

 

                        (2)       Sanitary system setback and standards.

 

                                    (a)       On-site system limiting factor.  The Individual Sewage Treatment Construction Standards, as outlined in Section 52.22, relating to lot area, setback and width standards shall also be complied with.  These standards may result in lot area and widths larger than required by the specific dimensional standards listed in the above table.  In those situations where the sanitary system limiting factors result in a larger lot size those standards shall be the applicable standards. (Ord. 01-04, March 1, 2004)

 

                                    (b)       Structure setback from sanitary system. All occupied structures, including bunkhouses, shall be set back 20 feet from an on-site sewage treatment system drainfield and all accessory structures shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from the system drainfield.

 

 

                                    (c)       Sanitary checkoff. Sanitary Check off: All land use permits issued within the shoreland area and parcels of less than 2.5 acres outside the shoreland area shall have the sanitary system reviewed to determine if the system is failing or if the proposed land use permit would adversely impact the existing sewage system or the expansion area for the sewage system.  No land use permit will be issued if there is such an adverse impact or the system is failing unless the sanitary system is upgraded according to County standards with final approval given to the system by the County.  The County shall develop administrative guidelines relating to the implementation of this procedure including provisions for not undertaking the check off when a system has been recently approved or reviewed by the County. (Ord. 01-04, March 1, 2004, Am Ord 03-10, 5-3-10)

 

                        (3)       Sewered lakes.

 

                                    (a)       Natural environment.

 

 

Riparian Lots

Nonriparian Lots

Area

Width

Area

Width

Single

40,000

125

20,000

125

Duplex

70,000

225

35,000

220

Triplex

100,000

325

52,000

315

Quad

130,000

425

65,000

410

 

                                    (b)       Recreational development.

 

 

Riparian Lots

Nonriparian Lots

Area

Width

Area

Width

Single

20,000

75

15,000

75

Duplex

35,000

135

26,000

135

Triplex

50,000

195

38,000

190

Quad

65,000

255

49,000

245

 

                                    (c)       General development.

 

 

Riparian Lots

Nonriparian Lots

Area

Width

Area

Width

Single

15,000

75

10,000

75

Duplex

26,000

135

17,500

135

Triplex

38,000

195

25,000

190

Quad

49,000

255

32,500

245

 

                        (4)       River/stream lot width standards. There are no minimum lot size requirements for rivers and streams other than imposed elsewhere by ordinance. The lot width standards for single, duplex, triplex and quad residential developments for the six river/stream classifications are as follows.

 

 

Remote

Forested

Transition

Agricultural

Urban & Tributary

No Sewer

Sewer

Single

300

200

250

150

100

75

Duplex

450

300

375

225

150

115

Triplex

600

400

500

300

200

150

Quad

750

500

625

375

250

190

 

                        (5)       Additional special provisions.

 

                                    (a)       Residential subdivisions with dwelling unit densities exceeding those in the tables in subsections (2) and (3) can only be allowed if designed and approved as residential planned unit developments under § 154.050. Only land above the ordinary high water level of public waters can be used to meet lot area standards, and lot width standards must be met at both the ordinary high water level and at the building line. The sewer lot area dimensions in subsection (2) can only be used if a publicly owned sewer system service is available to the property.

 

                                    (b)       Subdivisions of duplexes, triplexes and quads on natural environment lakes must also meet the following standards:

 

Each building must be set back at least 200 feet from the ordinary high water level;
 

Each building must have common sewage treatment and water systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building;
 

Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and
 

No more than 25% of a lake’s shoreline can be in duplex, triplex or quad developments.
 

                                    (c)       One guest cottage may be allowed on lots meeting or exceeding the duplex lot area and width dimensions presented in subsections (1) through (3) of this division, provided the following standards are met:

 

For lots exceeding the minimum lot dimensions of duplex lots, the guest cottage must be located within the smallest duplex-sized lot that could be created, including the principal dwelling unit;
 

A guest cottage or bunkhouse must not cover more than 700 square feet of land surface and must not exceed 15 feet in height; and
 

A guest cottage must be located or designed to reduce its visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer leaf-on conditions.
 

                                    (d)       Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or as recreation areas for use by owners of nonriparian lots within subdivisions are permissible and must meet or exceed the following standards:

 

They must meet the width and size requirements for residential lots and be suitable
for the intended uses of controlled access lots;

 

If docking, mooring or over-water storage of more than six watercraft is to be allowed at a controlled access lot, then the width of the lot (keeping the same lot depth) must be increased by the percent of the requirements for riparian residential lots for each watercraft beyond six, consistent with the following table:
 

            Controlled Access Lot Frontage Requirements:

 

Ratio of Lake Size to Shore Length (acres/mile)

Required Increase in Frontage (Percent)

Less than 100

25

100-200

20

301-300

15

301-400

10

Greater than 400

5

 

They must be jointly owned by all purchasers of lots in the subdivision or by all purchasers of nonriparian lots in the subdivision who are provided riparian access rights on the access lot; and
 

Covenants or other equally effective legal instruments must be developed that specify which lot owners have authority to use the access lot and what activities are allowed. The activities may include watercraft launching, loading, storage, beaching, mooring or docking. They must also include other outdoor recreational activities that do not significantly conflict with general public use of the public water or the enjoyment of normal property rights by adjacent property owners. Examples of the nonsignificant conflict activities include swimming, sunbathing or picnicking. The covenants must limit the total number of vehicles allowed to be parked and the total number of watercraft allowed to be continuously moored, docked or stored over water and must require centralization of all common facilities and activities in the most suitable locations on the lot to minimize topographic and vegetation alterations. They must also require all parking areas, storage buildings and other facilities to be screened by vegetation or topography as much as practical from view from the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
 

 

            (B)       Placement, design and height of structures.

 

                        (1)        Placement of structures on lots. When more than one setback applies to a site, structures and facilities must be located to meet all setbacks. Where structures exist on adjoining lots on both sides of a proposed building site, structure setbacks may be altered without a variance to conform to adjoining setbacks from the ordinary high water level, provided the proposed building site is not located in a shore impact zone or not in a bluff impact zone. Structures shall be located as follows.

 

                                    (a)        Structure and on-site sewage system setbacks (in feet) from ordinary high water level.*

 

            Setbacks*

 

Classes of Public Waters

Structures

Sewage Treatment System

Unsewered

Sewered

Lakes

Natural environment

150

150

150

    Except Mashkenode Lake

100

n/a

100

Recreational development

100

75

75

General development

75

50

50

Rivers

Remote

200

200

150

Forested and transition

150

150

100

Agriculture, urban and tributary

100

50

75

* One water-oriented accessory structure designed in accordance with subsection (B)(2) of this section may be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from the ordinary high water level.

(Amd by Ord. 02-05, February 7, 2005)

 

                                    (b)        Additional structure setbacks. The following additional structure setbacks apply, regardless of the classification of the waterbody:

 

Setback From:

Setback (in feet)

Top of bluff

30

Unplatted cemetery

50

Right-of-way line of federal, state or county highway

20

Right-of-way line of town road, public street or other roads or streets not classified.

20

 

                                    (c)        Bluff impact zones. Structures and accessory facilities, except stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.

                                    (d)       Uses without water-oriented needs. Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.

 

                        (e)       All structures in residential districts, except churches and nonresidential agricultural structures, must not exceed 25 feet in height. (Ord. 01-04, March 1, 2004)

 

                        (2)       Design criteria for structures.

 

                                    (a)       High water elevations. Structures must be placed in accordance with any floodplain

regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or flood-proofed must be determined as follows:

 

For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher;
 

For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the flood of record, if data is available. If data is not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary high water level or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical evaluations must be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the management of flood plain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined must be used for placing structures and other facilities; and
 

Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the structure is constructed of flood resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris.
 

                                    (b)       Water-oriented accessory structures. Each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback in subsection (B)(1) if this water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions:

 

The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point;
 

The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must be at least ten feet;
 

The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
 

         The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area;
 

The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain sewage treatment facilities; and
 

As an alternative for general development and recreational development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage and including storage of related boating and water-oriented sporting equipment may occupy an area up to 400 square feet, provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
 

                                    (c)       Stairways, lifts and landings. Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:

 

Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width on residential lots. Wider stairways may be used for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties and planned unit developments;
 

Landings for stairways and lifts on residential lots must not exceed 32 square feet in area. Landings larger than 32 square feet may be used for commercial properties, public open-space recreational properties and planned unit developments;
 

Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts or landings;
 

Stairways, lifts and landings may be either constructed above the ground on posts or pilings or placed into the ground, provided they are designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion;
 

Stairways, lifts and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
 

Facilities such as ramps, lifts or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of subsections 1. to 5. above are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minn. Regs., Chapter 1340, as it may be amended from time to time.
 

                                    (d)       Significant historic sites. No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that affects the values of the site unless adequate information about the site has been removed and documented in a public repository.

 

                                    (e)       Steep slopes. The Zoning Administrator must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.

 

            (C)       Shoreland alterations. Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping and protect fish and wildlife habitat.

 

                        (1)       Vegetation alterations.

 

                                    (a)       Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas regulated by division (D) of this section are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.

 

                                    (b)       Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in subsections (F)(2) and (3) of this section, respectfully, is allowed subject to the following standards:

 

Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District in which the property is located;
 

In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, livestock watering areas, beach and watercraft access areas and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, provided that:
 

The screening of structures, vehicles or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced;
 

Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved; and
 

The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs or branches that are dead, diseased or pose safety hazards.
                        (2)       Topographic alterations/grading and filling.

 

                                    (a)       Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems and driveways under validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this section must be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems and driveways.

 

                                    (b)       Public roads and parking areas are regulated by division (D) of this section.

 

                                    (c)       Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) above, a grading and filling permit will be required for:

 

The movement of more than ten cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
 

The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones but still within a shoreland district.
 

                                    (d)       The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:

 

Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland: (This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews or approvals by other local, state or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will be so advised.)
 

Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
 

Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
 

Fish and wildlife habitat;
 

Recreational use;
 

Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
 

Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals or others.
 

Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;
 

Mulches or similar materials must be used, where necessary, for temporary bare soil coverage and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible;
 

Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used;
 

Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service;
 

Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;
 

Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be reviewed by qualified professionals for continued slope stability and must not create finished slopes of 30% or greater;
 

Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones;
 

Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner under M.S. § 103G.245, as it may be amended from time to time;
 

Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and
 

Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet.
 

                                    (e)       Excavations where the intended purpose is connection to a public water, such as boat slips, canals, lagoons and harbors, must be controlled by local shoreland controls. Permission for excavations may be given only after the Commissioner has approved the proposed connection to public waters.

 

 

 

 

            (D)      Placement and design of roads, driveways and parking areas.

 

                        (1)       Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district or other applicable technical materials.

 

                        (2)       Roads, driveways and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.

 

                        (3)       Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones, provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subsection are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of subsection (c)(2) of this section must be met.

 

            (E)       Stormwater management. The following general and specific standards shall apply.

 

                        (1)       General standards.

 

                                    (a)       When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.

 

                                    (b)       Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.

 

                                    (c)       When development density, topographic features and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made materials and facilities.

 

                        (2)       Specific standards.

 

                                    (a)       Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25% of the lot area.

 

                                    (b)       When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation must be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.

 

                                    (c)       New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.

 

            (F)       Special provisions for commercial, industrial, public/semipublic, agricultural, forestry and extractive uses and mining of metallic minerals and peat.

 

                        (1)       Standards for commercial, industrial, public and semipublic uses.

 

                                    (a)       Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:

 

In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks and other zoning standards in this chapter, the uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;
 

Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
 

Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards:
 

No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the County Sheriff;
 

Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They must only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs must not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, must not be located higher than ten feet above the ground and must not exceed 32 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and
 

Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights.
 

                                    (b)       Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.

 

                        (2)       Agriculture use standards.

 

                                    (a)       General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.

 

                                    (b)       Animal feedlots as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency must meet the following standards:

 

New feedlots must not be located in the shoreland of watercourses or in bluff impact zones and must meet a minimum setback of 300 feet from the ordinary high water level of all public waters basins; and
 

Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level or within a bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones;
 

Use of fertilizer, pesticides or animal wastes within shorelands must be done in such a way as to minimize impact on the shore impact zone or public water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
 

                        (3)       Forest management standards. The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management “Best Management Practices in Minnesota.”

 

                                    (a)       Shore and bluff impact zones must not be intensively cleared of vegetation; and

 

                                    (b)       An erosion and sediment control plan is developed and approved by the local SWCD before issuance of a conditional use permit for the conversion.

 

 

                        (4)       Extractive use standards.

 

                                    (a)       Site development and restoration plan. An extractive use site development and restoration plan must be developed, approved and followed over the course of operation of the site. The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and must clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.

 

                                    (b)       Setbacks for processing machinery. Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs.

 

                        (5)       Mining of metallic minerals and peat. Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended from time to time, shall be a permitted use, provided the provisions of M.S. §§ 93.44 to 93.51, as they may be amended from time to time, are satisfied.

 

            (G)      Conditional uses. Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be subject to the review and approval procedures and criteria and conditions for review of conditional uses established community-wide. The following additional evaluation criteria and conditions apply within shoreland areas.

 

                        (1)       Evaluation criteria. A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic, vegetation and soils conditions on the site must be made to ensure:

 

                                    (a)       The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;

 

                                    (b)       The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is limited;

 

                                    (c)       The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment; and

 

                                    (d)       The types, uses and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.

 

                        (2)       Conditions attached to conditional use permits. The city, upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this chapter, shall attach such conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

 

                                    (a)       Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;

 

                                    (b)       Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and

 

                                    (c)       Special provisions for the location, design and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas and vehicle parking areas.

 

            (H)      Water supply and sewage treatment.

 

                        (1)       Water supply. Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the Minnesota Department of Health and the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.

 

                        (2)       Sewage treatment. Any premises used for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment as follows:

 

                                    (a)       Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used where available;

 

                                    (b)       All private sewage treatment systems shall be in conformance with Section 52.22; (Ord. 01-04, March 1, 2004)

 

                                    (c)       On-site sewage treatment systems must be set back from the ordinary high water level in accordance with the setbacks contained in subsection (B)(1);

 

                                    (d)       (Repealed Ord 03-10, 5-3-10)

 

                                    (e)       Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and upgraded in accordance with subsection (B)(2) of this section.

(Prior Code, § 22.14(5.0))

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

154.048 NONCONFORMITIES.
 

            All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this chapter may continue, but they will be managed according to applicable state statutes and other regulations of this community for the subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use and intensification of use; except that the following standards will also apply in shoreland areas.

 

            (A)      Construction on nonconforming lots of record.

 

                        (1)       Lots of record in the office of the County Recorder on the date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of division (A) of this section may be allowed as building sites without variances from lot size requirements, provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at the time and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this chapter are met.

 

                        (2)       A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any use, sewage treatment system or building permit is issued for a lot. In evaluating the variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.

 

                        (3)       If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of § 154.047(A), the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting the requirements of § 154.047(A) as much as possible.

 

            (B)       Additions/expansions to nonconforming structures.

 

                        (1)       All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height and other requirements of this section. Any deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance pursuant to § 154.045(C).

 

                        (2)       Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following criteria and standards are met:

 

                                    (a)       The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established;

 

                                    (b)       A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;

 

                                    (c)       The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15% of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and

 

                                    (d)       The deck is constructed primarily of wood and is not roofed or screened.

 

            (C)       Nonconforming sewage treatment systems.

 

                        (1)       A sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of § 154.047(H) must be upgraded, at a minimum, at any time a permit or variance of any type is required for any improvement on or use of the property. For the purposes of this provision, a sewage treatment system shall not be considered nonconforming if the only deficiency is the sewage treatment system’s improper setback from the ordinary high water level.

 

                        (2)       The governing body of the City of Mountain Iron contacts the St. Louis County Health Department to identify nonconforming sewage treatment systems.  The City of Mountain Iron will require upgrading or replacement of any nonconforming systems identified by the St. Louis County Health Department within a reasonable period of time which will not exceed two (2) years.  Sewage systems installed according to all applicable local shoreland management standards adopted under Minnesota Statutes, section 103F.201, in effect at the time of installation may be considered as conforming unless they are determined to be failing, except that systems using cesspools, leaching pits, seepage pits, or other deep disposal methods, or systems with less soil treatment area separation above groundwater than required by Saint Louis County, shall be considered nonconforming.

(Prior Code, § 22.14(6.0)) (Ord. 04-01, March 1, 2004, Amd Ord 03-10, 5-3-10)

 

154.049 SUBDIVISION/PLATTING PROVISIONS.
 

            (A)      Land suitability. Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit developments authorized under § 154.050, must be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.

 

            (B)       Consistency with other controls. Subdivisions must conform to all official controls of this community. A subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. In areas not served by publicly owned sewer and water systems, a subdivision will not be approved unless domestic water supply is available and a sewage treatment system consistent with § 154.047(B) and (H) can be provided for every lot. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of § 154.047(A), including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be approved.

 

            (C)       Information requirements. Sufficient information must be submitted by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land suitability. The information shall include at least the following:

 

                        (1)       Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less from United States Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site characteristics;

 

                        (2)       The surface water features required in M.S. § 505.02, Subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time, to be shown on plats obtained from United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;

 

                        (3)       Adequate soils information to determine suitability for building and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot from the most current existing sources or from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests or other methods;

 

                        (4)       Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion, both during and after construction activities;

 

                        (5)       Location of 100-year flood plain areas and floodway districts from existing adopted maps or data; and

 

                        (6)       A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the “toe” and the “top” of bluffs and the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.

 

            (D)      Dedications. When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over natural drainage or ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands.

 

            (E)       Platting. All subdivisions that create five or more lots or parcels that are two and one-half acres or less in size shall be processed as a plat in accordance with M.S. Chapter 505, as it may be amended from time to time. No permit for construction of buildings or sewage treatment systems shall be issued for lots created after these official controls were enacted unless the lot was approved as part of a formal subdivision.

 

            (F)       Controlled access or recreational lots. Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by nonriparian lots within a subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing criteria in § 154.047(A)(4).

(Prior Code, § 22.14(7.0)

 

 

154.050 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
 

            (A)      Types of PUDs permissible. Planned unit developments (PUDs) are allowed for new projects on undeveloped land, redevelopment of previously built sites or conversions of existing buildings and land. The land use districts in which they are an allowable use are identified in the land use district descriptions in § 154.046(B) and the Official Zoning Map.

 

            (B)       Processing of PUDs. Planned unit developments must be processed as a conditional use, except that an expansion to an existing commercial PUD involving six or less new dwelling units or sites since the date this chapter was adopted is permissible as a permitted use, provided the total project density does not exceed the allowable densities calculated in the project density evaluation procedures in division (E) of this section. Approval cannot occur until the environmental review process (EAW/EIS) is complete.

 

            (C)       Application for a PUD. The applicant for a PUD must submit the following documents prior to final action being taken on the application request:

 

                        (1)       A site plan and/or plat for the project showing locations of property boundaries, surface water features, existing and proposed structures and other facilities, land alterations, sewage treatment and water supply systems (where public systems will not be provided) and topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less. When a PUD is a combined commercial and residential development, the site plan and/or plat must indicate and distinguish which buildings and portions of the project are residential, commercial or a combination of the two;

 

                        (2)       A property owners association agreement (for residential PUDs) with mandatory membership and all in accordance with the requirements of division (F) of this section;

 

                        (3)       Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements or other instruments that:

 

                                    (a)       Properly address future vegetative and topographic alterations, construction of additional buildings, beaching of watercraft and construction of commercial buildings in residential PUDs; and

 

                                    (b)       Ensure the long-term preservation and maintenance of open space in accordance with the criteria and analysis specified in division (F) of this section;

 

                        (4)       When necessary, a master plan/drawing describing the project and the floor plan for all commercial structures to be occupied;

 

                        (5)       Those additional documents as requested by the city that are necessary to explain how the PUD will be designed and will function.

 

            (D)      Site “suitable area” evaluation. Proposed new or expansions to existing planned unit developments must be evaluated using the following procedures and standards to determine the suitable area for the dwelling unit/dwelling site density evaluation in division (E) of this section.

 

                        (1)       The project parcel must be divided into tiers by locating one or more lines approximately parallel to a line that identifies the ordinary high water level at the following intervals, proceeding landward:

 

            Shoreland Tier Dimensions

 

 

Unsewered (Feet)

Sewered (Feet)

General development lakes – first tier

200

200

General development lakes – second and additional tiers

267

200

Recreational development lakes

267

267

Natural environment lakes

400

320

All river classes

300

300

 

                        (2)       The suitable area within each tier is next calculated by excluding from the tier area all wetlands, bluffs or land below the ordinary high water level of public waters. This suitable area and the proposed project are then subjected to either the residential or commercial planned unit development density evaluation steps to arrive at an allowable number of dwelling units or sites.

 

            (E)       Residential and commercial PUD density evaluation. The procedures for determining the “base” density of a PUD and density increase multipliers are as follows. Allowable densities may be transferred from any tier to any other tier further from the waterbody, but must not be transferred to any other tier closer.

 

                        (1)       Residential PUD “base” density evaluation.

 

                                    (a)       The suitable area within each tier is divided by the single residential lot size standard for lakes or for rivers, the single residential lot width standard times the tier depth, to yield a base density of dwelling units or sites for each tier. Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the residential planned unit developments are then compared with the tier, density and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in division (F) of this section.

 

                                    (b)       Commercial PUD “base” density evaluation:

 

Determine the average inside living area size of dwelling units or sites within each tier, including both existing and proposed units and sites. Computation of inside living area sizes need not include decks, patios, stoops, steps, garages or porches and basements, unless they are habitable space.
 

Select the appropriate floor area ratio from the following table.
 

            Commercial Planned Unit Development

            Floor Area Ratios*

            Public Waters Classes

 

*Average Unit Floor Area

(Sq. Ft.)

Sewered General Development Lakes; First Tier on Unsewered General Development Lakes; Urban, Agricultural, Tributary, River Segments

Second and Additional Tiers on Unsewered General Development Lakes; Recreational Development Lakes; Transition and Forested River Segments

Natural Lakes and Remote River Segments

200

.040

.020

.010

300

.048

.024

.012

400

.056

.028

.014

500

.065

.032

.016

600

.072

.038

.019

700

.082

.042

.021

800

.091

.046

.023

900

.099

.050

.025

1,000

.108

.054

.027

1,100

.116

.058

.029

1,200

.125

.064

.032

1,300

.133

.068

.034

1,400

.142

.072

.036

1,500

.150

.075

.038

*For average unit floor areas less than shown, use the floor area ratios listed for 200 square feet. For areas greater than shown, use the ratios listed for 1,500 square feet. For recreational camping areas, use the ratios listed at 400 square feet. Manufactured home sites in recreational camping areas shall use a ratio equal to the size of the manufactured home, or if unknown, the ratio listed for 1,000 square feet.

 

                                    (c)       Multiply the useable area within each tier by the floor area ratio to yield total floor area for each tier allowed to be used for dwelling units or sites;

 

                                    (d)       Divide the total floor area by tier computed in subsection (c) above by the average inside living area size determined in subsection (a) above. This yields a base number of dwelling units and sites for each tier;

 

                                    (e)       Proposed locations and numbers of dwelling units or sites for the commercial planned unit development are then compared with the tier, density and suitability analyses herein and the design criteria in division (F) of this section.

                        (3)       Density increase multipliers.

 

                                    (a)       Increases to the dwelling unit or dwelling site base densities previously determined are allowable if the dimensional standards in § 154.047 are met or exceeded and the design criteria in division (F) of this section are satisfied. The allowable density increases in subsection (b) below will only be  allowed if structure setbacks from the ordinary high water level are increased to at least 50% greater than the minimum setback or the impact on the waterbody is reduced an equivalent amount through vegetative management, topography or additional means acceptable to the local unit of government and the setback is at least 25% greater than the minimum setback.

 

                                    (b)       Allowable dwelling unit or dwelling site density increases for residential or commercial planned unit developments:

 

 

Density Evaluation Tiers

Maximum Density Increase Within Each Tier (Percent)

First

50

Second

100

Third

200

Fourth

200

Fifth

200

 

            (F)       Maintenance and design criteria.

 

                        (1)       Maintenance and administration requirements.

 

                                    (a)       Prior to final approval. Before final approval of a planned unit development, adequate provisions must be developed for preservation and maintenance in perpetuity of open spaces and for the continued existence and functioning of the development.

 

                                    (b)       Open space preservation. Deed restrictions, covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance or other equally effective and permanent means must be provided to ensure long-term preservation and maintenance of open space. The instruments must include all of the following protections:

 

Commercial uses prohibited (for residential PUDs);
 

Vegetation and topographic alterations other than routine maintenance prohibited;
 

Construction of additional buildings or storage of vehicles and other materials prohibited; and
 

Uncontrolled beaching of watercraft prohibited.
 

                                    (c)       Development organization and functioning. Unless an equally effective alternative community framework is established, when applicable,  all residential planned unit developments must use an owners association with the following features:

 

Membership must be mandatory for each dwelling unit or site purchaser and any successive purchasers;
 

Each member must pay a pro rata share of the association’s expenses and unpaid assessments can become liens on units or sites;
 

Assessments must be adjustable to accommodate changing conditions; and
 

The association must be responsible for insurance, taxes and maintenance of all commonly owned property and facility.
 

                        (2)       Open space requirements. Planned unit developments must contain open space meeting all of the following criteria:

 

                                    (a)       At least 50% of the total project area must be preserved as open space;

 

                                    (b)       Dwelling units or sites, road rights-of-way or land covered by road surfaces, parking areas or structures, except water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, are developed areas and shall not be included in the computation of minimum open space;

 

                                    (c)       Open space must include areas with physical characteristics unsuitable for development in their natural state and areas containing significant historic sites or unplatted cemeteries;

 

                                    (d)       Open space may include outdoor recreational facilities for use by owners of dwelling units or sites, by guests staying in commercial dwelling units or sites and by the general public;

 

                                    (e)       Open space may include subsurface sewage treatment systems if the use of the space is restricted to avoid adverse impacts on the systems;

 

                                    (f)        Open space must not include commercial facilities or uses, but may contain water-oriented accessory structures or facilities;

 

                                    (g)       The appearance of open space areas, including topography, vegetation and allowable uses, must be preserved by use of restrictive deed covenants, permanent easements, public dedication and acceptance or other equally effective and permanent means; and

 

                                    (h)       The shore impact zone, based on normal structure setbacks, must be .04 included as open space. For residential PUDs, at least 50% of the shore impact zone area of existing developments or at least 70% of the shore impact zone area of new developments must be preserved in its natural or existing state. For commercial PUDs, at least 50% of the shore impact zone must be preserved in its natural state.

 

                        (3)       Erosion control and stormwater management. Erosion control and stormwater management plans for PUDs must be developed and:

 

                                    (a)       Be designed, and the construction managed, to minimize the likelihood of serious erosion occurring either during or after construction. This must be accomplished by limiting the amount and length of time of bare ground exposure. Temporary ground covers, sediment entrapment facilities, vegetated buffer strips or other appropriate techniques must be used to minimize erosion impacts on surface water features. Erosion control plans approved by a soil and water conservation district may be required if project size and site physical characteristics warrant; and

 

                                    (b)       Be designed and constructed to effectively manage reasonable expected quantities and qualities of stormwater runoff. Impervious surface coverage within any tier must not exceed 25% of the tier area, except that for commercial PUDs 35% impervious surface coverage may be allowed in the first tier of general development lakes with an approved stormwater management plan and consistency with § 154.047(C).

 

                        (4)       Centralization and design of facilities. Centralization and design of facilities and structures must be done according to the following standards:

 

                                    (a)       Planned unit developments must be connected to publicly owned water supply and sewer systems, if available. On-site water supply and sewage treatment systems must be centralized and designed and installed to meet or exceed applicable standards or rules of the Minnesota Department of Health and § 154.047(B) and (H) of this section. On-site sewage treatment systems must be located on the most suitable areas of the development, and sufficient lawn area free of limiting factors must be provided for a replacement soil treatment system for each sewage system;

 

                                    (b)       Dwelling units or sites must be clustered into one or more groups and located on suitable areas of the development. They must be designed and located to meet or exceed the following dimensional standards for the relevant shoreland classification: setback from the ordinary high water level, elevation above the surface water features and maximum height; setbacks from the ordinary high water level must be increased in accordance with subsection (E)(3) of this section for developments with density increases;

 

                                    (c)       Shore recreation facilities, including but not limited to swimming areas, docks and watercraft mooring areas and launching ramps, must be centralized and located in areas suitable for them. Evaluation of suitability must include consideration of land slope, water depth, vegetation, soils, depth to groundwater and bedrock or other relevant factors. The number of spaces provided for continuous beaching, mooring or docking of watercraft must not exceed one for each allowable dwelling

unit or site in the first tier (notwithstanding existing mooring sites in an existing commercially used harbor). Launching ramp and facilities, including a small dock for loading and unloading equipment, may be provided for use by occupants of dwelling units or sites located in other tiers;

 

                                    (d)       Structures, parking areas and other facilities must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks, color or other means acceptable to the governing body of this chapter, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions. Vegetative and topographic screening must be preserved, if existing, or may be required to be provided;

 

                                    (e)       Accessory structures and facilities, except water-oriented accessory structures, must meet the required principal structure setback and must be centralized; and

 

                                    (f)        Water-oriented accessory structures and facilities may be allowed if they meet or exceed design standards contained in § 154.047(B)(2) and are centralized.

 

            (G)      Conversions. Existing resorts or other land uses and facilities may be converted to residential planned unit developments if all of the following standards are met.

 

                        (1)       Proposed conversions must be initially evaluated using the same procedures for residential planned unit developments involving all new construction. Inconsistencies between existing features of the development and these standards must be identified.

 

                        (2)       Deficiencies involving water supply and sewage treatment, structure color, impervious coverage, open space and shore recreation facilities must be corrected as part of the conversion or as specified in the conditional use permit.

(Prior Code, § 22.14(8.0))

 

REGULATIONS

 

154.065 COMPLIANCE.
 

            Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the District in which it is located.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(1))

 

 

 

 

 

154.066 LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
 

            No building permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any purpose inconsistent with the land uses permitted in the affected district or inconsistent with a variance or conditional use permit duly granted in accordance with this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(2))

 

154.067 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
 

            No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed in height; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than therein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(3))

 

154.068 FOUNDATIONS.
 

            Any structure designed to be used as a dwelling shall be placed on a foundation constructed of masonry, concrete or treated wood.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(4))

 

154.069 AREA REQUIREMENTS.
 

            (A)      No part of a yard, other open space or off-street parking or loading space required for or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building, except as modified hereinafter.

 

            (B)       No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(5))

 

154.070 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
 

            In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are in variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, city code, deed restriction or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(6))

 

 

 

 

154.071 DWELLING ON ANY LOT OF RECORD.
 

            In any district where dwellings are permitted, a one-family detached dwelling may be erected on a nonconforming lot, provided that:

 

            (A)      The lot was a lot of record before the effective date of this chapter as amended in its entirety;

 

            (B)       The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands;

 

            (C)       All applicable setbacks and yard requirements are satisfied or modified by variance.

 

154.072 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS NOT APPLICABLE.
 

            The height limitations stipulated in this chapter shall not apply to the following:

 

            (A)      Essential service structures, architectural features and the like:  church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smoke stacks, flag poles, radio and television towers, masts and aerials, also parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the limiting height of the building.

 

            (B)       Places of public assembly: places of public assembly in churches, schools and other permitted public and semi-public buildings, provided that they are located on the first floor of such buildings; provided that for each two feet by which the height of such buildings exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district and further provided that the Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall find that such additional height will not be materially detrimental to surrounding property;

 

            (C)       Elevator penthouses and the like:  elevator penthouses (elevator machinery loft), monitors and scenery lofts, provided no linear dimension of any such structure exceeds 50% of the corresponding street lot line frontage. Fire hose or cooling towers, elevators, gas holders or other structures incorporated into a principal structure where a manufacturing process requires a greater height shall be excepted.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(8))

 

154.073 YARD AND FRONTAGE LIMITATIONS NOT APPLICABLE.
 

            The yard and frontage limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not apply to the following. Average depth of front yards, front yard observed:  in any district where front yards are required and where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have a front yard that is greater or less than the required front yard in the district, no building shall project beyond the average front yard as established. Where such varying average front yard setback has been established no variance shall be required for structure placement.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(9))

 

154.074 YARD SPACE.
 

            Any building, structure or use hereafter erected, altered or established shall comply with the yard space requirements of the district in which it is located except as specified below. The required yard space for any building, structure or use shall be contained on the same lot as the building, structure or use and such required yard space shall fall entirely upon land in a district or districts which the principal use is permitted. Any required yard space shall be open from 36 inches above the ground to the sky except as specified elsewhere in this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(10))

 

154.075 PLACEMENT OF SINGLE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES ON LARGE LOTS.
 

            In any Residence District where a single or two family structure is to be developed on large lots which could later be subdivided and still meet the dimensional and area requirements for another lot for the district in which it is situated, it is desirable but not mandatory for such structure to be placed in a manner which would permit such later re-subdivision.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(11))

 

154.076 YARD SPACE ENCROACHMENTS; PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
 

            (A)      The following projections may be permitted into any front, rear or exterior side yard adjoining a street lot line:

 

                        (1)       Cornices, sills, belt courses, eaves and other ornamental features to a distance of not more than two feet six inches;

 

                        (2)       Fire escapes to a distance of not more than four feet six inches;

 

                        (3)       Landings and uncovered porches, when constructed not more than three feet above the ground level at the building line or at the entrance floor level, to a horizontal distance of not more than eight feet. An open railing no higher than three feet six inches may be placed around such structure;

 

                        (4)       Bay windows and chimneys to a distance of not more than three feet, provided that such features do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third the length of the building wall on which they are located;

 

                        (5)       Porte cocheres or canopies to a distance of not more than four feet six inches;

 

                        (6)       Balconies, in Residence Districts, to a distance of not more than four feet into yards of less than 20 feet and to a distance of not more than eight feet into yards of more than 20 feet; provided that said balconies do not occupy, in the aggregate, more than one-third the length of the building wall on which they are located.

 

            (B)       Interior side yards:  subject to the limitations for features projecting into front yards, said features may also project into required yards adjoining interior side lot lines, provided that the distance shall not exceed one-fifth of the required least width of such yard and not more than three feet in any case.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(12))

 

154.077 YARD SPACE EXCEPTION, STEEP SLOPES.
 

            In any Residence District where the natural grade of a lot within the required front yard has an average slope, normal to the front lot line at every point along said line, of such a degree or percent of slope that it is not practical to provide a driveway with a grade of 12% or less to a private garage conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such garage may be located within such front yard, but not in any case closer than 12 feet to the street line.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(13))

 

154.078 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON A LOT.
 

            In any district, more than one structure housing a permitted or permissible principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(14))

 

154.079 HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS WITH SINGLE OPEN SIDE YARDS.
 

            Every development proposal which is designed so as to place the principal structure abutting a side property line in order to have only one open side yard must file with the Zoning Administrator a signed copy of the covenant assuring access through the adjacent yard for the purposes of repairs and general maintenance. Such covenant is mandatory and the issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be contingent on the filing.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(15))

 

154.080 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
 

(A)      In any case an accessory building is attached to the main building; it shall be made structurally a part of the main building and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the main building. An accessory building, unless attached to and made a part of the main building, shall not be closer than five feet to the main building.

 

(B)       A detached accessory building used as a private garage enclosure not over one story and not over 15 feet in height may occupy up to 30% of the area of any side or rear yard, but shall not be placed in any front yard (for example, closer than the building setback from the street line) in any zoning district.

 

(C)       A building permit is not required for accessory buildings of 120 square feet or less if they are not placed on a permanent foundation, not located in the front yard, and meet rear and side setbacks, except in Zoning Classifications that limit the total square footage of accessory structures. (Amd 06-15. 09-08-15)

(Prior Code, § 22.21(16))  (Am. Ord. 01-98, passed 4-6-1998; Am. Ord. 01-08, passed 5-19-2008)

 

154.081 FENCES, WALLS, TREES AND HEDGES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
 

            (A)      Fences, walls: fences for decorative, screening and/or confinement purposes may be constructed on any lot; provided, however, that fences in any front or side yard of a corner lot shall be limited to a maximum height of 30 inches along the street side within 40 feet of the intersecting street right-of-way lines, and of 60 inches if of mesh or similar construction permitting functional line-of-sight through such fencing for purposes of street traffic safety.

 

            (B)       All fencing shall be so constructed so that the exterior or outer face of the fencing will face to the outside or away from the property being fenced. This means that the fence posts, bracing and similar material will be located on the inside or the owner’s side of the fence. All fencing shall be maintained so that the exposed outer surface shall be one uniform color and in a neat and aesthetically pleasing condition.

 

            (C)       Trees, hedges: fences and hedges not over six feet in height may occupy any yard except no fence or hedge or other planting (maximum 24 inches diameter) exceeding 30 inches in height or a tree where the diameter of the trunk is greater than 24 inches or there are limbs less than ten feet above the ground shall be permitted where there will be interference with traffic sight distance at a corner.

 

            (D)      A zoning permit is required for fence construction in all zoning districts except rural residential (22.05).

(Prior Code, § 22.21(17))  (Ord. 01-97, passed 10-6-1997)

 

154.082 POLE BUILDINGS.
 

            Pole buildings shall be allowed as an accessory use in any Residential District, provided that they comply with the following items: overhead door, enameled panels, 40 pound roof snow load and gable or hip type roof construction. A building permit is not required for agricultural buildings.

(Prior Code, § 22.21(18))

 



154.083 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES.
 

            Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be required in all zoning districts according to the following schedule.

 

            TABLE 1

            SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES

 

Use or Use Category

Parking Spaces

Loading Spaces Required

Number

Unit/Measure

Floor Area

Number

            Residential

Dwelling, 1 & 2 family

2.0

Dwelling unit

– –

None

Townhouses

2.0

Dwelling unit

– –

None

Dwelling, multi-family,

except elderly

1.5

Efficiency or 1 bedroom

2 or more bedroom

1 per complex building

 

Dwelling, multi-family which are specifically designed for & occupied exclusively by persons 60 years of age or older

0.8

Dwelling unit

 

 

Motels, hotels

1.0

Sleeping unit

Under 20,000

20,000-50,000

50,000-100,000

1

2

3

            Educational, Cultural and Institutional

Churches, auditoriums and other place or assembly

1.0

4 seats

Under 100,000

Over 100,00

1

2

Elementary & nursery schools

2.0

Per classroom

– –

1

Hospitals, convalescence

or nursing homes

1.0

1.0

4 beds plus: 2 employees or professional staff members

Under 10,000

10,000-50,000

Each part of 50,000 over 50,000

1

2

1 add’l

Junior & senior high school

1.0

1.0

2 employees plus: each 5 seats in auditorium, stadium, and the like (whichever is larger)

– –

1

Public libraries, museums and art galleries

1.0

300 sq. ft. floor

– –

1

Commercial

Automobile or machinery sales

6.0

500 sq. ft. of floor area over 1,000

Less than 2,000

None

Bowling alleys

5.0

Per alley

2,000-5,000

1

Clinics

1.0

200 sq. ft. floor area

5,000-10,000

2

Funeral homes

1.0

5 seats with minimum of 20 spaces

10,000-20,000

3

Furniture & appliance stores

1.0

600 sq. ft. floor area

40,000-70,000

5

Offices, banks and public administration

1.0

300 sq. ft. floor area

Each part of 50,000 over 70,000

1 add’l

Restaurants, night clubs

1.0

75 sq. ft. floor area

 

 

Retail stores over 2,000 sq. ft.

4.0

1,000 sq. ft.

 

 

Shopping center

5.0

1,000 sq. ft. floor area

 

 

All other commercial

1.0

300 sq. ft. floor area

 

 

            Wholesaling

Industrial, warehousing

1.0

2 employees of largest shift or per 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area, whichever is greater

Under 10,000

10,000-20,000

20,000-40,000

40,000-70,000

70,000-110,000

Each part of 50,000 over 110,000

1

2

3

4

5

1 add’l

 

(Prior Code, § 22.21(19))

 

154.084 ENCLOSURES.
 

Prefabricated utility enclosures may be used without a permit in any district as temporary protection for construction equipment and materials being used to construct a structure for which a building permit has been issued. (Ord. 02-07 April 2, 2007)

 

SIGNS

 

154.095 PERMITS REQUIRED.
 

            Zoning permits for both on-site and off-site signs shall be required and shall be subject to the requirements stated in this subchapter. Signs costing more than $100 shall also require a building permit.

(Prior Code, § 22.22(1))

 

154.096 EXEMPTION.
 

            Zoning permits shall not be required and the regulations stated in this subchapter shall not apply to the following:

 

            (A)      Signs mounted flush on a building wall or applied directly to a wall and not protruding beyond the wall and which are related to the activity within the building;

 

            (B)       Signs not exceeding four square feet in area and bearing only property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants, fire numbers or other identification of premises, not having commercial connotations;

 

            (C)       Flags and insignias of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion;

 

            (D)      Legal notices, identification, information or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies, as defined in M.S. § 173.02, Subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time;

 

            (E)       Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights;

 

            (F)       Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property but bearing no advertising matter;

 

            (G)      A temporary sign indicating real estate for rent or for sale, related to the premises only on which it is located, and not exceeding six square feet in area.

(Prior Code, § 22.22(2))

 

(H)      Bed and Breakfast Homes

 

154.097 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
 

            No sign in the following category shall be erected or maintained:

 

            (A)      Signs which purport to be or resemble an official traffic control device, sign or signal or railroad sign or signal; or which hide from view or interfere to any material degree with the effectiveness of any traffic control device, sign or signal or railroad sign or signal; or which obstructs or interferes with a driver’s view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic for a distance not to exceed 500 feet;

 

            (B)       Signs which prominently display the words “stop” or “danger;”

 

            (C)       Signs which contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent or immoral character or such as offend public morals or decency;

 

            (D)      Signs on trees or shrubs or which are painted or drawn upon rocks, other natural features, public utility poles or abandoned buildings;

 

            (E)       Signs accessible only from a controlled access highway, but excluding adjacent frontage roads;

 

            (F)       Signs which are structurally unsafe, in disrepair or are abandoned;

 

            (G)      Signs within the right-of-way of any public roadway.

(Prior Code, § 22.22(3))

 

154.098 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
 

            The following regulation shall apply in all districts.

 

            (A)      Official signs. Only official identification, directional or traffic control signs, as defined in M.S. § 173.02, Subd. 6 (a), (b) and (d), as it may be amended from time to time, and all acts amendatory thereof, shall be allowed within the public right-of-way.

 

            (B)       Setbacks. All signs shall be set back a minimum distance of ten feet from any front, side or rear lot line, except that normal required setbacks shall prevail in the Shoreland Overlay District where applicable.

 

            (C)       Lighting. Signs shall not be erected or maintained which contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing lights, except those giving public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or news.

 

                        (1)       Signs shall not be erected or maintained which are not effectively shielded so as to prevent:

 

                                    (a)       Beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way of any roadway; or

 

                                    (b)       Beams of light of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of the operator of any motor vehicle.

 

                        (2)       No sign shall be erected or maintained which will be so placed or illuminated that it obscures or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, device or signal or any official sign.

 

            (D)      The change in advertising message, maintenance and repair or the use of extensions, cut-outs or embellishments upon an existing sign shall not be considered an enlargement, extension or structural alteration, provided that thereby the sign does not exceed any other limitation imposed by this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.22(4))

 

154.099 ON-SITE SIGN REGULATIONS.
 

            (A)      On-site signs within commercial or industrial zone districts shall be limited to not more than three display faces, each not to exceed 25 square feet in area for each 25 linear feet of total road frontage.

 

            (B)       For the purpose of providing necessary direction or identification for approved commercial uses and industrial uses as listed in this chapter, one on-site sign per each use shall be permitted, provided such sign shall not exceed 68 square feet per each of two faces or sides or 128 square feet if only a one sided sign. No on-site sign shall be permitted for home occupations.

(Prior Code, § 22.22(5))

 

154.100 OFF-SITE SIGN REGULATIONS.
 

            Off-site signs shall be allowed as conditional uses as provided in this chapter, provided the following standards and criteria are adhered to:

 

            (A)      The maximum area of a sign face, whether a single sign face or each face of two back to back or V-type signs, shall not exceed 500 square feet, including border and trim, but excluding base and apron supports and other structural members. The maximum size limitation stated herein shall apply to each side of a sign structure, and signs may be placed back to back, side by side or in a V-type arrangement, provided that there shall be not more than two displays to each facing and such structure shall be considered as one sign;

 

            (B)       Off-site signs shall not be erected or maintained in such a place or manner as to obscure or otherwise physically interfere with an official traffic control device or a railroad safety signal or sign or to obstruct or physically interfere with a driver’s view or approaching merging or intersecting traffic for a distance of 500 feet;

 

            (C)       No off-site sign shall be erected closer to any other off-site sign on the same side of the same roadway facing traffic proceeding in the same direction than 300 feet on any other highway or road.

(Prior Code, § 22.22(6))

 

 

 

154.101 POLITICAL POSTERS.
 

            All non-commercial signs of any size may be posted from August 1 in a state general election year until ten days following the state general election, and in the case of a special election, from 30 days before the special election to ten days after a special election.

(Prior Code, § 22.22(7))

 

EXTENSIVE EXCAVATION/FILL OR BORROW PIT OPERATIONS

 

154.120 PERMITS REQUIRED.
 

            A conditional use permit shall be required for the extensive excavation/fill of any peat, topsoil, sand gravel or similar operation or the establishment of a borrow pit in all districts except the Mineral Mining District where they shall be considered a permitted use. The procedures specified in §§ 154.140 et seq. shall be followed in determining whether a conditional use may be granted. A building permit shall be required for any permanent or temporary structure accessory to such operations.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(1))

 

 

154.121 EXTENSIVE EXCAVATION/FILL DEFINED.
 

            For purposes of this subchapter, EXTENSIVE shall mean the excavation/fill of 100 cubic yards or more of material in platted areas and 400 cubic yards or more in unplatted areas.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(2))

 

154.122 EXEMPT OPERATIONS.
 

            The excavation/fill of materials for the purpose of installing building foundations in platted and unplatted areas shall be exempt from these special provisions; provided, however, that such exemption shall apply only to the actual foundation or building floor area. This shall not be interpreted to include extensive site preparation which shall require a permit.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(3))

 

154.123 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
 

            In addition to the information required for conditional use permit applications for extensive excavation/fill operations and borrow pits shall contain the following:

 

            (A)      Nature of the proposed operation and plan for the future use of the property upon completion of the operation;

 

            (B)       Development plans showing excavation/fill or borrow pit operations in relation to property lines and the use of surrounding properties, existing and proposed elevations and slopes at completion, access routes to be used in hauling to and from the site;

 

            (C)       Daily hours of equipment operation on the site and the estimated starting and completion dates for the proposed operation;

 

            (D)      A statement as to whether or not explosives will be used during the operation;

 

            (E)       A statement as to the methods to be used to suppress dust.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(4))

 

154.124 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
 

            If during the excavation/fill or borrow pit operations it becomes necessary to create a condition of grade or drainage not in the interest of health or safety, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to immediately correct the dangerous situation created. No water or other waste shall be allowed to run off from any pit or depression into any stream, lake or pond so as to pollute the same.

 

            (A)      Operations shall be limited to reasonable hours that will not interfere with the health, safety or welfare of surrounding residents and the premises and activities shall be designed and operated so as not to create a nuisance.

 

            (B)       When explosives are used and the permittee so authorized all necessary precautions and care shall be taken so as not to endanger life and/or damage and destroy property.

 

            (C)       All explosives shall be stored in a reasonably secure and safe place or places and all such storage places shall be clearly marked “Dangerous – Explosives” and shall have appropriate warning symbols.

 

            (D)      The method of storing and handling explosives and highly inflammable materials shall conform with current standards of the State of Minnesota.

 

            (E)       A log of the time and day and personnel familiar with the work shall be kept of all blasting and a copy of said log shall be made available to the Zoning Administrator.

 

            (F)       In the case of borrow pit operations, at the end of each season’s operations and no later than the last day of December of each year, the pit is to be left in a neat and orderly condition, with reasonable uniform slopes without overhang.

 

            (G)      Following the completion of the excavation/fill or borrow pit operation, the permit holder shall restore the land to a useable and safe condition by means approved at the time of issuance of the zoning permit.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(5))

 

154.125 BONDING.
 

            It shall be necessary for the person securing a zoning permit for excavation/fill or borrow pit operation involving 5,000 cubic yards or more of material to present adequate proof of bonding to the city in the form of a performance bond, sufficient in value to cover the expense of the completion of the development plan for site grade or to bring such portion of the completed project to a safe grade and elevation and to provide adequate drainage of the site.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(6))

 

154.126 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
 

            The Zoning Administrator may submit any zoning permit application to the City Engineer for review and approval where this is deemed necessary. Such conditions or limitations as may be suggested by the City Engineer may be attached to, and become a part of, the zoning permit. Permit applications  submitted in the above manner shall be processed and returned to the Zoning Administrator within ten days of the date received.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(7))

 

154.127 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
 

            The Council may, in addition to any or all other remedies available for violations of this subchapter, declare the premises to be a public nuisance and public hazard, and after a public hearing held in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, proceed to have the necessary work done to comply with the provisions of this chapter and stipulations of the permit as issued and assess all the costs and expense thereof against said property.

(Prior Code, § 22.23(8))

 

CONDITIONAL USES

 

154.140 AUTHORITY.
 

            The Council may, after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, grant a conditional use permit authorizing the development of uses listed as conditional uses in each of the zoning districts in this chapter or as otherwise enumerated in this subchapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.24(1))

 

154.141 STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS FOR CONDITIONAL USES.
 

            A conditional use permit may be granted for the following uses only:

 

            (A)      Any use specifically listed as a conditional use in the regulations applicable to the district in which it is to be located;

 

            (B)       A conditional use permit may be granted only if evidence is presented to establish:

 

                        (1)       That the proposed building or use at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable to provide convenience and will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood or community;

 

                        (2)       That the proposed building or use will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, utility facilities and other matters affecting the public health, safety and general welfare; and

 

                        (3)       That the proposed building or use will be designed, arranged and operated so as to permit development and use of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations;

 

            (C)       The Council may impose such conditions upon the premises benefitted by a conditional use permit as may be necessary to prevent or minimize injurious effects therefrom upon other property in the neighborhood. Violation of such conditions and safeguards shall be a violation of this chapter.

(Prior Code, § 22.24(2))

 

154.142 PROCEDURE.
 

            (A)      An application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms supplied by the city. Except as specifically excused by a written order of the Planning and Zoning Commission, a copy of which order shall be attached to the application, the application shall contain the submissions listed in § 154.143, as well as such additional information and submissions as may be prescribed by rule of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

 

            (B)       A public hearing shall be set, advertised and conducted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with procedures set forth in § 154.179.

 

            (C)       After the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the Council a written report containing its recommendations concerning findings of fact specifying the reasons for the recommendations.

 

            (D)      The Council shall, after the receipt of the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission, grant or deny the conditional use or refer the matter back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration. The Council shall not grant a conditional use permit unless it finds that the standards of this subchapter have been satisfied. Any proposed conditional use which fails to receive the approval of the majority of the members of the Planning Commission voting upon it shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of four-fifths of the Council.

 

            (E)       A conditional use permit shall be valid for a period of one year, after which the same shall be revoked in the event that any proposed construction, alteration or operation has not been started in accordance with the terms of such permit.

 

            (F)       A conditional use permit, once issued, shall be transferable for a use of the same classification in the event of change of property ownership or control, providing, however, that those conditions attached to the original permit shall be applicable to the responsible agent following such change. It shall be the duty of the original permit holder to advise the party assuming control regarding the condition of such permit.

(Prior Code, § 22.24(3))

 

154.143 REQUIRED SUBMISSIONS.
 

            The following information shall be included with the formal application for a conditional use permit:

 

            (A)      Legal description of the tract of land;

 

            (B)       Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the tract to effectuate the proposed plan, including a statement of all ownership and beneficial interest in the tract of land and the proposed development;

 

            (C)       Evidence of the financial capability of the applicant to complete the proposed development;

 

            (D)      Plans drawn to convenient scale, showing the current zoning classification and existing land use of the tract and those tracts directly adjacent to it and any significant topographical or physical features on the tract;

 

            (E)       Three copies of preliminary plans, drawn to a convenient scale, showing the following information:

 

                        (1)       The location, size, use and arrangement of proposed and existing  buildings and uses which will remain;

 

                        (2)       The proposed quantity and arrangement of off-street parking and loading spaces;

 

                        (3)       The location of proposed entrance, exit and circulation drives;

 

                        (4)       The location, use and size of structure and other land uses on adjacent properties;

 

            (F)       When it deems it to be necessary, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require a traffic survey setting out and analyzing the effect that the conditional use will have upon traffic in the streets and thoroughfares adjacent to and in the proposed development;

 

            (G)      A statement as to why the proposed conditional use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood; and

 

            (H)      A statement as to how the proposed conditional use is to be designed, arranged and operated in order to permit the development and use of neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations.

(Prior Code, § 22.24(4))

 

154.144 DURATION.
 

            (A)      A conditional use permit shall be transferable for a use of the same classification in the event of change of property ownership or control, providing, however, that those conditions attached to the original permit shall be applicable to the responsible agent following such change. It shall be the duty of the original permit holder to advise the party assuming control regarding the condition of such permit.

 

            (B)       A conditional use permit shall be permitted to remain as long as the conditions agreed upon are observed, but nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from enacting or amending official controls to change the status of conditional uses.

(Prior Code, § 22.24(5))

 

154.145 FILING OF PERMIT.
 

            A certified copy of any conditional use permit shall be filed for record with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The conditional use permit shall include the legal description of the property.

(Prior Code, § 22.24(6))

 

NONCONFORMING LOTS, LAND USES AND STRUCTURES

 

154.160 INTENT.
 

            (A)      Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this chapter or future amendment.

 

            (B)       It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted or conditional uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended or to be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.

 

            (C)       A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this chapter by attachment of additional signs to a building or the placement of additional signs or display devices on the land outside the building or by the addition of other uses, if such additions are of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.

 

            (D)      To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, constructions or designated use of any building on which the actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner and demolition, elimination and removal of an existing structure in connection with such structure, provided that actual construction work shall be diligently carried on until the completion of the building involved.

(Prior Code, § 22.26(1))

 

154.161 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
 

(A)      In any residential district or commercial district, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, structures may be erected on any single lot of record provided that: (Amd 04-15, April 6, 2015)

 

(1)       The lot was a lot of record before the effective date of this chapter, as amended in its entirety; (Amd 04-15, April 6, 2015)

 

(2)       The lot is in separate ownership from abutting lands; (Amd 04-15, April 6, 2015)

 

(3)       All applicable setbacks and yard requirements are satisfied or modified by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals. (Amd 04-15, April 6, 2015)

 

            (B)       If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in a single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this subchapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established for this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with and/or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. For purposes of this subdivision, recorded lots presently leased from the State of Minnesota shall be considered in the same category as others in single ownership.

(Prior Code, § 22.26(2))

 

154.162 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
 

            Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:

 

            (A)      No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extend to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this subchapter;

 

            (B)       No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this subchapter;

 

            (C)       If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located.

(Prior Code, § 22.26(3))

 

154.163 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
 

            If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this subchapter that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions.

 

            (A)      No such structure may be enlarged, extended, converted, reconstructed or structurally altered unless the use of the structure is changed to one permitted within the district in which the building is located. The nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed.

 

            (B)       Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its market value at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. An exception may be considered in order to use existing slabs for reconstructions, or to rehabilitate a damaged structure when insurance will cover such rehabilitation, but not total replacement costs, subject to approval of a variance by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.

 

            (C)       Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is moved.

 

            (D)      When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for more than one year, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.

 

            (E)       When a nonconforming use status is applied to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.

 

            (F)       Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, any principal or accessory structure existing on the effective date of this provision, and which is nonconforming only by reason of placement on a lot of insufficient size, and which would otherwise be permitted in the zoning district, shall for the purpose of administration of this chapter be considered a conforming use. Such principal or accessory structure may be altered, expanded, renovated or improved, provided that it does not exceed the dimensional requirements of the zoning district as to lot area, lot coverage and building line setbacks unless these requirements are modified by the Zoning Board of Adjustment and Appeals.

(Prior Code, § 22.26(4))

 

154.164 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
 

            (A)      On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair of replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubical space content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased.

 

            (B)       Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to prevent the restoring of a nonconforming structure to a safe condition when said structure is declared to be hazardous or unsafe by the City Building Official. Such restoration shall not extend the nonconforming structure in any manner, except as reasonably required to eliminate the hazardous or unsafe condition.

(Prior Code, § 22.26(5))

 

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

 

154.175 GENERALLY.
 

            (A)      A Zoning Administrator designated by the city shall be the enforcement officer and shall be

responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.

 

            (B)       The duties of the Zoning Administrator shall be as follows:

 

                        (1)       Examine all applications pertaining to the use of land, buildings or structures and grant approval of and issue zoning permits or take other appropriate action on such applications when in conformance with the provisions of this chapter;

 

                        (2)       Keep a record of all nonconforming uses within the several zoning districts of the city;

 

                        (3)       Periodically inspect buildings, structures and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;

 

                        (4)       Notify, in writing, any person responsible for violating a provision of this chapter, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it;

 

                        (5)       Order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; order removal of illegal buildings, structures, additions or alterations; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or take any other action authorized by this chapter to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions;

 

                        (6)       Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter, including all maps, amendments, conditional uses and variances;

 

                        (7)       Maintain a current file of all zoning permits, certificates of occupancy and notices of violation, discontinuance or removal for such time as necessary to insure a continuous compliance with the provisions of this chapter and on request provide information to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in any specific property or to any individual seeking an understanding or clarification of the regulations and procedures stipulated in this chapter;

 

                        (8)       Attend all scheduled Planning Commission and Board of Adjustment and Appeals meetings and hearings in an ex-officio capacity. The responsibility for drafting recommendations, resolutions and decisions for the public record may be assigned to the Zoning Administrator at the option of the chairperson of the Commission or Board;

 

                        (9)       A certified copy of every ordinance, resolution, conditional use permit, map or regulation adopted or variance granted shall be filed with the County Recorder.

(Prior Code, § 22.29)

 

154.176 VARIANCES.
 

            (A)      Application. Any person affected by any order or decision of the Zoning Administrator or Building Official, or desiring a variance from the terms of this chapter, may apply therefore and have the matter heard by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.

 

            (B)       Conditions for variances.

 

                        (1)       A variance from the literal provisions of this chapter may be granted in instances where the strict enforcement of such provisions would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration only when it is demonstrated that such action will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter.

 

                        (2)       The term UNDUE HARDSHIP as used in this section means the following:

 

                                    (a)       The property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if used under conditions allowed by this chapter;

 

                                    (b)       The plight of the owner of the property in question is due to circumstances unique to his or her property and not created by him or her;

 

                                    (c)       If the variance is granted, it will not alter the essential character of the locality;

 

                                    (d)       The term also includes, but is not limited to, inadequate access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems.

 

                        (3)       Economic considerations alone will not constitute an undue hardship if reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of this chapter.

 

                        (4)       Variances may be granted for earth sheltered construction as defined by statute when in harmony with this chapter.

 

                        (5)       A variance may not be granted for any use that is not a permitted or conditional use under this chapter for property in the district where the affected land is located.

 

                        (6)       A variance may be granted for the temporary use of a one-family dwelling as a two-family dwelling.

 

            (C)       Procedure.

 

                        (1)       An application for a variance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The application shall in all instances contain the following information and such other information the Zoning Administrator may consider necessary for the determination by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals:

 

                                    (a)       The applicant’s name and address;

 

                                    (b)       The legal description of the property for which the variance is requested;

 

                                    (c)       The area of the property for which the variance is requested;

 

                                    (d)       The zoning district classification for which the variance is requested;

 

                                    (e)       A map drawn to scale, showing the applicant’s property, including all existing or proposed buildings and uses;

 

                                    (f)        The reasons the applicant considers that a variance is necessary.

 

                        (2)       A public hearing shall be set, advertised and conducted by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in accordance with § 154.179.

 

                        (3)       Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall transmit to the Council its recommendation in the form of a written report. Such report shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons for the recommendation.

 

                        (4)       After the receipt of the report of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the Council shall approve or deny the proposed variance.

 

                        (5)       In any situation where a written report specifying recommendation and pertinent findings of fact regarding the proposed amendment has not been transmitted to the Council within 10 days from the date of public hearing, the Council may act on such a proposal without report from the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.

 

            (D)      Filing of variance. A certified copy of any variance shall be filed with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The variance shall include the legal description of the property.

(Prior Code, § 22.29)

 

154.177 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS.
 

            (A)      Board established. There is established a Board of Adjustment and Appeals which shall consist of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission.

 

            (B)       Powers of Board. The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall have the following powers with respect to this zoning code:

 

                        (1)       To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any area, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator or Building Official in the enforcement of this chapter;

 

                        (2)       To hear requests for variances from the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration;

 

                        (3)       To grant such variance only when it is demonstrated that such action will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this chapter;

 

                        (4)       The Board may impose conditions in the granting of a variance to insure compliance and to protect adjacent properties;

 

                        (5)       The Board may adopt rules for the conduct of proceedings before it, which may include provisions for the giving of oaths to witnesses and the filing of written briefs by the parties;

 

                        (6)       The Board shall provide for a record of its proceedings which shall include the minutes of its meetings, its findings and the action taken on each matter heard by it, including the final order.

 

            (C)       Decisions of the Board. Decisions of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall be final subject to appeal to the City Council and later judicial review.

(Prior Code, § 22.28)

 

 

 

 

154.178 AMENDMENTS.
 

            (A)      Authority. This chapter and the Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time by the City Council in accordance with the procedures of this section. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be made promptly as set forth in § 154.021.

 

            (B)       Initiation. Proposed amendments may be initiated by the City Council, the Planning Commission or the owners of the specific property for which the change or amendment is requested.

 

            (C)       Procedure.

 

                        (1)       An application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or to the Official Zoning Map shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The application shall, in all instances, contain the following information and such other information the Zoning Administrator considers necessary for the determination of the Planning Commission:

 

                                    (a)       The applicant’s name and address;

 

                                    (b)       The precise wording of any proposed amendment to the text of this chapter; and,

 

                                    (c)       In the event that the proposed amendment would change the zoning classification of any property:

 

A legal description and street address of the property proposed to be reclassified;
 

The name and address of the owner or owners of said property;
 

The present zoning classification and existing uses of the property proposed to be reclassified;
 

The area of the property proposed to be reclassified, stated in square feet or acres, or fraction thereof; and
 

A map, drawn to scale, clearly showing the property proposed to be reclassified and its present zoning classification and existing uses.
 

                        (2)       A public hearing shall be set, advertised and conducted by the Planning Commission in accordance with § 154.179.

 

                        (3)       Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall transmit to the Council its recommendation in the form of a written report. Such report shall be accompanied by findings of fact specifying the reasons for the recommendation.

 

                        (4)       After the receipt of the report of the Planning Commission the Council shall refuse, or, by ordinance duly enacted, adopt the proposed amendment.

 

                        (5)       The adoption or amendment of any portion of a zoning ordinance which changes all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or industrial requires a two-thirds majority vote of all members of then City Council.

 

                        (6)       In any situation where a written report specifying recommendation and pertinent findings of fact regarding the proposed amendments have not been transmitted to the Council with 60 days from the date of the public hearing, the Council may act on such a proposal without report from the Planning  Commission.

 

            (D)      Filing of amendment. A certified copy of any amendment shall be filed with the County Recorder or Registrar of Titles. The amendment shall include the legal description of the property.

(Prior Code, § 22.30)

 

154.179 HEARINGS AND HEARING NOTICES.
 

            (A)      Setting of hearings. For all requests brought before the Board Adjustment and Appeals or the Planning Commission for which a public hearing is required by this chapter, the body in charge of conducting the hearing shall select a reasonable time and place for the public hearing on the request.

 

            (B)       Notice of hearings.

 

                        (1)       Notice of public hearings shall be given not more than 30 days and not less than ten days before the hearing by publication at least once in the official newspaper of the city. Such notice shall include the time and place of the hearing, a description of the contents of the request to be heard and the address or location of the property to which the request applies.

 

                        (2)       In addition to the general notice to the public, separate notice by letter shall be required for all property owners residing within a distance of 350 feet from the boundaries of the property to which the request applies. Such notices shall be sent by the office of the Zoning Administrator and addresses taken from current city records shall be deemed sufficient for such notification.

 

                        (3)       A copy of the list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent shall be attested to by the Zoning Administrator and shall be made a part of the records of the proceedings, provided a bona fide attempt to comply with this requirement has been made.

 

                        (4)       Copies of all notices of any public hearings to consider variances, amendments, or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings.  Notices of hearings to consider proposed subdivisions/plats must include copies of the subdivision/plat. (Ord. 01-04, March 1, 2004)

 

                        (5)       A copy of approved amendments and subdivisions/plats, and final decisions granting variances or conditional uses under local shoreland management controls must be sent to the commissioner or the commissioner’s designated representative and postmarked within ten days of final action. (Ord. 01-04, March 1, 2004)

 

            (C)       Conduct of hearing. Any person may appear and testify at a public hearing, either in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. Applicants for variances or conditional uses, and the owner or owners of property in or within 350 feet of property under consideration for a rezoning action by amendment to this chapter, shall have the following rights in addition to any others they possess by law:

 

                        (1)       The right to have subpoenas issued for persons to appear at the hearings and for examination of documents by the person requesting the subpoena either before or during the hearing. Such subpoenas shall be enforceable against persons or for documents which have a substantial evidentiary connection with:

 

                                    (a)       The property to which the request applies;

 

                                    (b)       Facts which would support or negate the legal standards for granting the request;

 

                                    (c)       Facts which would support or negate the conclusion that the property within 350 feet, excluding all public streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way, will be substantially affected by the decision on the request being heard;

 

                        (2)       The right to cross-examine all witnesses testifying;

 

                        (3)       The right to present witnesses on their own behalf;

 

                        (4)       The right to be granted, upon request, one continuance for the purpose of presenting evidence to rebut testimony given by another party.

 

            (D)      Administrative procedures and recordings at public hearings. The Zoning Administrator shall record all pertinent data and comments at the hearing for later preparation as a written public record. Such written record shall be filed with the City Administrator within a reasonable period of time, but in no event later than 30 days from the date of hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in an orderly manner according to rules of procedure established or accepted by the city. The Chairperson of the responsible body shall conduct the hearing and shall require that all participants furnish name, address and position of interest prior to comment on the subject under consideration during such hearing.

 

            (E)       Continuance; determination. The responsible body may close the hearing or schedule a date, time and place for a continuance of the same, subject to the requirements of the matter under consideration. Following closure, the responsible body shall meet to make the appropriate determination which shall be prepared and filed as a written public record in the office of the City Administrator. In no event shall such determination be made later than ten days from the date of the hearing and written record of the same filed not later than 30 days from the date of the hearing.

(Prior Code, § 22.31)

 

154.180 PERMITS AND FEES.
 

(A)      A Zoning Permit issued by the City of Mountain Iron shall be secured prior to the construction, addition, or alteration of any building or structure that changes its footprint on the land or its heights; prior to the erection of a fence or sign; prior to the use or change of use of a building, structure, or land; prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use; and prior to any excavation. (Am. Ord. 03-09, passed 4-6-2009)

 

(B)       A Building Permit issued by the City of Mountain Iron shall be secured prior to the construction, addition, or alteration of any building or structure except when such construction, addition, or alteration is not subject to the provisions of the State Building Code and when the total value of materials and labor does not exceed $2,000. (Am. Ord. 03-09, passed 4-6-2009)

 

            (C)       Certificate of occupancy. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any principal building to be used for multi-family residential, commercial or industrial use without obtaining a certificate of occupancy attesting that the building has been constructed in accordance with the building permit. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be reviewed by the Building Official, who may issue the certificate if the building conforms to all requirements of the approved building permit.

 

            (D)      Application forms. Applications for a zoning permit, building permit, conditional use, variance, certificate of occupancy or zoning amendment shall contain such information as may be deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this chapter. Said forms shall be approved by the City Council and shall be available from the City Administrator.

 

            (E)       Permit application fees. The Council, by ordinance, which need not be codified, shall establish a schedule of fees to defray the administrative cost of processing all applications for required permits, variances and zoning amendments. The fee shall be payable in full at the time the application is filed with the City Administrator and shall not be refundable.

 

(F)       Permit expiration. A zoning permit will be valid for a period no longer than six months from the date of issue.  The portion of a building permit which covers exterior construction will be valid for a period no longer than six months.  If either of these permits expire prior to the completion of the work, a new permit must be applied for.

(Prior Code, § 22.32)  (Am. Ord. 03-02, passed 4-1-2002, Am. Ord. 02-08, passed 5-19-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99

 

(G)      State and federal permits. Prior to granting a permit or processing an application for a variance, the Mountain Iron Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine that the applicant has obtained all necessary state and federal permits. (Am. Ord. 03-09, passed 4-6-2009)

 

(H)      Certificate Survey.  For any structure to be constructed on a permanent foundation, the applicant shall submit a certificate of survey of the subject property prepared by a registered land surveyor.  The original markers identified on the survey must be located and marked on the site.  If the original markers cannot be located, the survey must be updated by a registered land surveyor.  Properties located within the boundaries of the mineral mining classification are exempt from this requirement. (Am. Ord. 03-09, passed 4-6-2009)

 

154.181 CONSISTENCY WITH STATE LAW.
 

            Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the provisions of M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time, and the following sections shall govern the process for making decisions under this chapter. To the extent to which these sections conflict with the provisions of M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time, the provisions of that statute shall apply.

 

154.182 APPLICATIONS.
 

            (A)      Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, all applications for any site plan, conditional use permit, land use permit, variance, or for any other city approval required by this chapter, or to amend this chapter, shall be made in writing on a form provided by the city, if the city has a form, to the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to reject in writing any incomplete application within 15 business days of receipt if the application is incomplete, stating the reasons for its rejection, including what information is missing. This rejection shall be sent by first-class mail to the applicant. Every application shall contain the legal description of the property and a statement of the specific permit or action being sought. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the city from requesting additional information from the applicant upon which to base a decision.

 

            (B)       If a dispute arises over a specific fee imposed by the city, the amount of the fee must be deposited and held in escrow, and the person aggrieved by the fee may appeal to district court, as provided by M.S. § 462.361, as it may be amended from time to time. The application shall proceed as if the fee had been paid, pending a decision of the court.

 

154.183 FINAL ACTIONS.
 

            (A)      As required by M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time, the following provisions apply to the process for approving or denying applications for a zoning amendment, site plan, conditional use permit, land use permit, variance, or any other application which requires a city approval under this chapter.

 

            (B)       The city shall take final action to approve or deny an application described above within 60 days of receiving an application, unless the application is not accepted under § 154.181. If the city cannot take action to approve or deny the application within 60 days of receiving the application, the Zoning Administrator is authorized before the end of the initial 60-day period, to make a one-time extension of the time for taking action by providing written notice by first-class mail to the applicant of the extension, the reasons for the extension, and its anticipated length, which may not exceed an additional 60 days unless approved by the applicant in writing.

 

            (C)       When the final action to approve or disapprove an application is to be taken by the City Council, the Planning Commission or the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, if a vote on a resolution or properly made motion to approve the application fails for any reason, the failure shall constitute a denial of the application, provided that those voting against the motion state on the record the reasons why they oppose the application. A denial of an application because of a failure to approve a resolution or motion does not preclude an immediate submission of a same or similar application.

 

            (D)      Except as provided in division (C), if the application is denied by the City Council, Planning Commission or Board of Appeals and Adjustments, whichever body has the authority to make the final decision to approve or deny an application, it must state the reasons for denial on the record and provide the applicant in writing a statement of the reasons for the denial. If this written statement is not adopted at the same time as the denial, it must be adopted at the next meeting following the denial of the application but before the expiration of the time allowed for making a decision under this section. The written statement must be consistent with the reasons stated in the record at the time of the denial. The written statement must be provided to the applicant upon adoption.

 

            (E)       If the decision to deny the request is made by the Zoning Administrator or other city official, the official must state in writing the reasons for the denial at the time the official denies the request.

 

154.184 ADDITIONAL EXTENSIONS OF TIME.
 

            M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time,  provides for certain exceptions to the time limits established in § 154.183. These exceptions are as follows. If the provisions of M.S. § 15.99, as it may be amended from time to time are inconsistent with this section, then the provisions of that statute shall apply.

 

            (A)      The time limit in § 154.183 is extended if a state statute, federal law, or court order requires a process to occur before the city acts on the application, and the time periods prescribed in the state statute, federal law, or court order make it impossible to act on the application within 60 days.  In cases described in this paragraph, the deadline is extended to 60 days after completion of the last process required in the applicable statute, law, or order.  Final approval of the city receiving an application is not considered a process for purposes of this paragraph.

 

            (B)       The time limit in § 154.183 is also extended if: (1) an application submitted to a state agency requires prior approval of a federal agency; or (2) an application submitted to the city, requires prior approval of a state or federal agency. In cases described in this paragraph, the deadline for action is extended to 60 days after the required prior approval is granted.

 

154.185 APPLICATIONS FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL AND BUILDING PERMITS.
 

            Sections 154.181 through 154.183 shall not apply to any request for action under the city’s Subdivision Regulations or under M.S. § 462.358 or Chapter 505, as they may be amended from time to time. Neither shall they apply to a request for a building permit.

 

154.998 VIOLATIONS.
 

            Every person violates a section, division, subsection or provision of this chapter when he or she performs an act thereby prohibited or declared unlawful or fails to act when such failure is thereby prohibited or declared unlawful, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor as provided in § 10.99 except as otherwise stated in specific provisions hereof.

(Prior Code, § 22.33)  Penalty, see § 10.99