
Monticello, MN Code of Ordinances


MONTICELLO, MINNESOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




Local Legislation current through Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  www.amlegal.com




TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Rules of interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Official time



   10.11   Reasonable time



   10.12   Ordinances repealed



   10.13   Ordinances unaffected



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.16   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities



   10.18   Copies of code



   10.19   Adoption of statutes and rules and supplements by reference



   10.20   Enforcement



 



   10.98   Supplemental administrative penalties



   10.99   General penalty and enforcement



   Appendix:      Notice of code violation



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the city,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“city code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
the components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may
be referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.”
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by
the number, such as “§ 10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code
other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or
implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing
the interpretation of state law.



   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all
ordinances of this city shall be by the following rules, unless that
construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of
the context of the same ordinance.



      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as
if written “and/or”, whenever the context requires.



      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions, or
ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the
performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.



      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



      (4)   General term. A general term following specific
enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless
expressly so limited.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted which amend or supplement this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to
their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. The area within the corporate boundaries of the city as
presently established or as amended by ordinance, annexation, or other legal
actions at a future time. The term CITY when used in this code may also be
used to refer to the City Council and its authorized representatives.



      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



      COUNTY.  The county of Wright.



      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH. A calendar month.



      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED. All
terms shall mean a pledge taken by the person and administered by an
individual authorized by state law.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



      PERSON. Extends to and includes an individual, person, persons,
firm, corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used
in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER
as applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



      STATE. The State of Minnesota.



      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.



      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.10  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.11  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day is a legal holiday or a Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this
code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.15  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect to it, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.16  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.17  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been
enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway
rights-of-way, contracts entered into, or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.



§ 10.18  COPIES OF CODE.



   The official copy of this code shall be kept in the office of the City
Clerk for public inspection. The Clerk shall provide a copy for sale for a
reasonable charge.



§ 10.19  ADOPTION OF STATUTES AND RULES AND SUPPLEMENTS BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   All future amendments to any state or federal rules and
statutes adopted by reference in this code or referenced in this code are
hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in existence at
the time this code was adopted, unless there is clear intention expressed in
the code to the contrary.



   (B)   All future supplements are hereby adopted as if they had been
in existence at the time this code was enacted, unless there is clear
intention expressed in the code to the contrary.



§ 10.20  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any Licensed Peace Officer of the city’s Police Department,
or the County Sheriff, or any Deputy Sheriff shall have the authority to
enforce any provision of this code.



   (B)   As permitted by M.S. § 626.862, as it may be amended from
time to time, the City Clerk shall have the authority to administer and
enforce this code. In addition, under that statutory authority, certain
individuals designated within the code or by the Clerk or City Council shall
have the authority to administer and enforce the provisions specified. All
and any person or persons designated may issue a citation in lieu of arrest
or continued detention to enforce any provision of the code.



   (C)   The City Clerk and any city official or employee designated by
this code who has the responsibility to perform a duty under this code may,
with the permission of a licensee of a business or owner of any property or
resident of a dwelling, or other person in control of any premises, inspect
or otherwise enter any property to enforce compliance with this code.



   (D)   If the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control
of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the
City Clerk, Peace Officer, or any employee or official charged with the duty
of enforcing the provisions of this code may, upon a showing that probable
cause exists for the issuance of a valid search warrant from a court of
competent jurisdiction, petition and obtain a search warrant before
conducting the inspection or otherwise entering the property. This warrant
shall be only to determine whether the provisions of this code enacted to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being complied with
and to enforce these provisions only, and no criminal charges shall be made
as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there be
probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is
reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the
condition of a particula



   (E)   Every licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
property within the city shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or
entrance to the property by the City Clerk or any other authorized city
officer or employee only to determine whether the provisions of this code
enacted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people are being
complied with and to enforce these provisions. Unreasonable refusal to permit
the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for
termination of any and all permits, licenses, or city service to the
property. Mailed notice shall be given to the licensee, owner, resident, or
other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the
termination, and the licensee, owner, resident, or other person in control of
the property shall be given an opportunity to appear before the City Clerk to
object to the termination before it occurs, subject to appeal of the
Clerk’s decision to the City Council at a regularly scheduled or special
meeting.



   (F)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of the city to enter private property in urgent emergency
situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.



§ 10.98  SUPPLEMENTAL ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to those administrative penalties established in
this code and the enforcement powers granted in § 10.20, the City Council is
authorized to create by resolution, adopted by a majority of the members of
the Council, supplemental administrative penalties. The resolution may be in
the form established in Appendix VI of the User’s Guide to the MBC. Such
resolution may not proscribe administrative penalties for traffic offenses
designated by M.S. § 169.999.



   (B)   These administrative penalty procedures in this section are
intended to provide the public and the city with an informal, cost effective,
and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges for violations of
certain provisions of this code. The procedures are intended to be voluntary
on the part of those who have been charged with those offenses.



   (C)   Administrative penalties for violations of various provisions
of the code, other than those penalties established in the code or in
statutes that are adopted by reference, may be established from time to time
by resolution of a majority of the members of the City Council. In order to
be effective, an administrative penalty for a particular violation must be
established before the violation occurred.



   (D)   In the discretion of the peace officer, City Clerk, or other
person giving notice of an alleged violation of a provision of this code, in
a written notice of an alleged violation, sent by first class mail to the
person who is alleged to have violated the code, the person giving notice may
request the payment of a voluntary administrative penalty for the violation
directly to the City Treasurer within 14 days of the notice of the violation.
A sample notice is contained in the Appendix to this chapter. In the sole
discretion of the person giving the notice of the alleged violation, the time
for payment may be extended an additional 14 days, whether or not requested
by the person to whom the notice has been given. In addition to the
administrative penalty, the person giving notice may request in the notice to
the alleged violator to adopt a compliance plan to correct the situation
resulting in the alleged violation and may provide that if the alleged
violator corrects the situation resulting in the alleged violation within the
time specified in the notice, that the payment of the administrative penalty
will be waived.



   (E)   At any time before the payment of the administrative penalty
is due, the person who has been given notice of an alleged violation may
request to appear before the City Council to contest the request for payment
of the penalty. After a hearing before the Council, the Council may determine
to withdraw the request for payment or to renew the request for payment.
Because the payment of the administrative penalty is voluntary, there shall
be no appeal from the decision of the Council.



   (F)   At any time after the date the payment of the administrative
penalty is due, if the administrative penalty remains unpaid or the situation
creating the alleged violation remains uncorrected, the city, through its
Attorney, may bring criminal charges in accordance with state law and this
code. Likewise, the city, in its discretion, may bring criminal charges in
the first instance, rather than requesting the payment of an administrative
penalty, even if a penalty for the particular violation has been established
by City Council resolution. If the administrative penalty is paid, or if any
requested correction of the situation resulting in the violation is
completed, no criminal charges shall be initiated by the city for the alleged
violation.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for
any crime which is a misdemeanor under this code, including state statutes
specifically adopted by reference, shall be a sentence of not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than $1,000, or both.



   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of
this code, including state statutes specifically adopted by reference, which
is designated to be a petty misdemeanor shall, upon conviction be guilty of a
petty misdemeanor. The penalty which may be imposed for any petty offense
which is a petty misdemeanor shall be a sentence of a fine of not more than
$300.



   (C)   Pursuant to M.S. § 631.48, as it may be amended from time to
time, in either the case of a misdemeanor or a petty misdemeanor, the costs
of prosecution may be added. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.



   (D)   The failure of any officer or employee of the city to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation.



   (E)   In addition to any penalties provided for in this section or
in § 10.98, if any person, firm, or corporation fails to comply with any
provision of this code, the City Council or any city official designated by
it, may institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.



   APPENDIX
   NOTICE OF CODE VIOLATION



To:  (Name and address of person who is alleged to have violated the code)



From:  (Name and title of city official giving the notice)



Re:  Alleged violation of section of the city code, relating to (give title
of section)



Date:  (Date of notice)



   I hereby allege that on (date of violation) you violated §        
            of the city code relating to



                                                   
                                                   
                                                   
    .



   The City Council has by resolution established an administrative
penalty in the amount of $        for this violation.



   Payment of this administrative penalty is voluntary, but if you do not
pay it the city may initiate criminal proceedings for this alleged violation.



   Payment is due within 14 days of the date of this notice. Before the
due date, you may request an additional 14-day extension of the time to pay
the administrative penalty.



   As an alternative to the payment of this administrative penalty, if the
situation that gave rise to this alleged violation is corrected by      
                (establish date), then the payment of the
administrative penalty will be waived.



   Even if the administrative penalty is paid, the city reserves the right
to institute appropriate proceedings at law or at equity to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation.



   Before the due date, you may request to appear before the City Council
to contest the request for payment of the penalty. After a hearing before the
Council, the Council may determine to withdraw the request for payment or to
renew the request for payment. Because the payment of the administrative
penalty is voluntary, there shall be no appeal from the decision of the
Council.



   If you pay the administrative penalty, the city will not initiate
criminal proceedings for this alleged violation. However, the City Council,
or any city official designated by it, may institute appropriate proceedings
at law or at equity to restrain.



   Payment of the administrative penalty may be made by check, cash, or
money order to the City Treasurer.



Signed:                                              
             



      (Name and title of person giving notice)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   CITY COUNCIL



      31.   EMPLOYEE POLICIES



      32.   ORGANIZATIONS



      33.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



      34.   EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES



      35.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



      36.   FEE SCHEDULE



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Meetings



   30.02   Presiding officer



   30.03   Minutes



   30.04   Order of business



   30.05   Agenda



   30.06   Quorum



   30.07   Voting



   30.08   Ordinances, resolutions, motions, and the like



   30.09   Commissions



   30.10   Suspensions, amendments of rules



   30.11   Compensation



   30.12   Worker’s compensation; elected officials



   30.13   Mayoral term



   30.14   Removal of appointed city councilmembers from a committee,
commission, board, and the like



§ 30.01  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the
second and fourth Monday of each calendar month at a time to be established
and approved annually with the regular meeting schedule of Council and
commissions. Any regular meeting falling upon a holiday shall be held on the
next following business day at the same time and place. All meetings,
including special and adjourned meetings, shall be held in the Council
chambers, unless the notice of the special meeting designates a different
location.



   (B)   Special meetings of the City Council may be called by the
Mayor or by any two members of the Council by writing filed with the Clerk.
At least one day before the meeting, the Clerk or his or her appointed
assistant shall notify each member of the time, place, and purpose of the
meeting. Special meetings may be held without prior written notice when all
councilmembers are present at the meeting or consent thereto in writing. Any
special meeting attended by all the councilmembers shall be a valid meeting
for the transaction of any business that may come before the meeting.



   (C)   At the first regular City Council meeting in January of each
year, the Council shall:



      (1)   Designate the depositories of city funds;



      (2)   Designate the official newspaper;



      (3)   Choose an acting Mayor from the members who shall
perform the duties of the Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor
from the city, or in case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor until a
successor has been appointed and qualifies; and



      (4)   Appoint officers and employees and members of boards,
commissions, and committees as may be necessary.



   (D)   All City Council meetings, including special and adjourned
meetings, shall be open to the public.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-1)  (Ord. 616, passed 6-22-2015)



§ 30.02  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council.
In the absence of the Mayor, the acting Mayor shall preside, or in the
absence of both, the Clerk shall call the meeting to order and shall preside
until the councilmembers present at the meeting choose one of their number to
act temporarily as presiding officer.



   (B)   The presiding officer shall preserve order, enforce the rules
of procedure herein prescribed, and determine without debate, subject to the
final decision of the City Council on appeal, all questions of procedures and
order. Except as otherwise provided by statute or by these rules, the
proceedings of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s
Rules of Order, Revised.



   (C)   Any member may appeal to the City Council from a ruling of the
presiding officer. If the appeal is seconded, the member may speak once
solely on the question involved and the presiding officer may explain his or
her ruling, but no other councilmember shall participate in the discussion.
The appeal shall be sustained if it is approved by a majority of the members
present exclusive of the presiding officer.



   (D)   The Mayor or any other member of the City Council may move,
second, and debate a motion. The presiding officer shall not be deprived of
any of the privileges of a councilmember by reason of his or her acting as
the presiding officer.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-2)



§ 30.03  MINUTES.



   (A)   The minutes of each City Council meeting shall be kept by the
Clerk. In the absence of the Clerk, the presiding officer shall appoint a
secretary pro tem. Ordinances, resolutions, and claims need not be recorded
in full in the minutes if they appear in other permanent records of the Clerk
and can be accurately identified from the description given in the minutes.



   (B)   The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the Clerk, and
copies thereof shall be delivered to each city councilmember as soon as
practicable after the meeting. At the next regular meeting following
delivery, approval of the minutes shall be considered by the Council, which
minutes need not be read aloud, but the presiding officer shall call for any
additions or corrections. If there is no objection to a proposed addition or
correction, it may be made without a vote of the Council. If there is an
objection, the Council shall vote upon the addition or correction. If there
are no additions or corrections, the minutes shall stand approved as
submitted.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-3)



§ 30.04  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   Each meeting of the City Council shall convene at the time and
place appointed therefor, and Council business shall be conducted in the
following order:



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   Approval of minutes;



      (3)   Citizen comments;



      (4)   Reports of officers, boards, and committees;



      (5)   Consent agenda;



      (6)   Payment of claims;



      (7)   Ordinance and resolutions;



      (8)   Public hearings;



      (9)   New business;



      (10)   Unfinished business; and



      (11)   Adjournment.



   (B)   The order of business may be varied by the presiding officer,
but all public hearings shall be held at an approximate time specified in the
notice of hearing.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-4)



§ 30.05  AGENDA.



   The agenda shall be prepared in accordance with the order of business
and agenda packet shall be provided to each councilmember. No item of
business shall be considered unless it appears on the agenda for the meeting;
but the City Council may, in its discretion, consider matters not appearing
on the agenda.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-5)



§ 30.06  QUORUM.



   At all City Council meetings, a majority of all councilmembers elected
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller
number may adjourn from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-6)



§ 30.07  VOTING.



   The votes of the members on any question pending before the City
Council may be by voice vote, standing vote, or in any other manner of voting
which signifies the intention of the members; but if the vote is not
unanimous, the names of those voting for and against the question shall be
recorded in the minutes. If any member being present does not vote, the
minutes, as to his or her name, shall be marked “present, not voting”.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-7)



§ 30.08  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, MOTIONS, AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Every ordinance and resolution shall be presented in writing
and shall be ready in full before a vote is taken thereon, but reading in
full may be dispensed with by unanimous consent. All motions shall be
recorded in the minutes and stated in full before they are submitted to a
vote by the presiding officer. All petitions and other communications
addressed to the City Council shall be in writing and shall be read in full
upon presentation of the same to the Council. They shall then be recorded in
the minutes by title and filed with the minutes in the office of the Clerk.



   (B)   Every ordinance and resolution passed by the City Council
shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Clerk, and filed by him or her
in the ordinance or resolution book. Proof of publication of every ordinance
shall be attached to and filed with the ordinance.



   (C)   Every ordinance or resolution repealing a previous ordinance
or resolution or a section or subdivision thereof shall be assigned the
number, if any, and the title of the ordinance or resolution to be repealed
in whole or part. No ordinance or resolution or section or subdivision
thereof shall be amended by reference to the title alone, but an amending
ordinance or resolution shall set forth in full each section or subdivision
to be amended.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-8)



§ 30.09  COMMISSIONS.



   The City Council may create such commissions, standing or special, as
it deems necessary. Commissions shall consist of as many members, and perform
such duties, as the Council may from time to time require. Any matter brought
before the Council for consideration may be referred by the presiding officer
to the appropriate commission or to a special commission appointed by him or
her for a written report and recommendation before it is considered by the
Council as a whole.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-9)



§ 30.10  SUSPENSIONS, AMENDMENTS OF RULES.



   The rules and regulation of the City Council may be temporarily
suspended by a majority vote of all the councilmembers and shall not be
repealed or amended except by a majority vote of the whole Council after
notice has been given at some preceding Council meeting.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-10)



§ 30.11  COMPENSATION.



   The monthly salary for the offices of Mayor and councilmembers shall be
as follows:



   (A)   Mayor: $700; and



   (B)   Councilmembers: $600.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-11)  (Ord. 482, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 30.12  WORKER’S COMPENSATION; ELECTED OFFICIALS.



   Pursuant to M.S. § 176.011, subd. 9, clause 6, as it may be amended
from time to time, the elected officials of the city are hereby included in
the coverage of the state’s Worker’s Compensation Act, being M.S. Ch.
176, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-12)  (Ord. 168, passed 1-23-1989)



§ 30.13  MAYORAL TERM.



   Pursuant to M.S. § 205.07, as it may be amended from time to time, the
term of an elected mayor shall be two years, effective January 1, 2001.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-13)  (Ord. 316, passed 8-10-1998; Ord. 324, passed
4-26-1999)



§ 30.14  REMOVAL OF APPOINTED COUNCILMEMBERS FROM A COMMITTEE, COMMISSION,
BOARD, AND THE LIKE.



   Except as otherwise provided in this code, any city councilmember
appointed to any board, commission, committee, or other entity by the City
Council, whether for a specified term or for an indefinite term, shall serve
at the pleasure of the Council and may be removed by the Council by a
three-fifths vote of the full Council at any time.



(Prior Code, § 1-5-14)  (Ord. 327, passed 6-28-1999; Ord. 328, passed
7-12-1999)



CHAPTER 31:  EMPLOYEE POLICIES



Section




Personnel




   31.01   Purpose



   31.02   Adoption of city personnel handbook by reference



   31.03   Positions



   31.04   City Administrator



   31.05   Outside employment




Procedure for Enforcing Administrative Offenses




   31.20   Purpose



   31.21   Definition



   31.22   Notices



   31.23   Payment



   31.24   Hearing



   31.25   Hearing Officer



   31.26   Failure to pay



   31.27   Disposition of penalties




Criminal History Background Investigations




   31.40   Background investigations



   31.41   Investigation process



   31.42   Results and action by city



   31.43   Additional conditions




PERSONNEL




§ 31.01  PURPOSE.



   It shall be the purpose of those rules and regulations to establish a
uniform and equitable system of municipal personnel administration for all
employees of the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-6-1)



§ 31.02  ADOPTION OF CITY PERSONNEL HANDBOOK BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s personnel handbook as adopted by the City Council, and
amended as needed, shall serve as the system of municipal personnel
administration for the city.



(Prior Code, § 1-6-2)



§ 31.03  POSITIONS.



   All offices and positions in the city now existing or hereafter created
by the City Council, unless specifically exempt, shall be subject to the
provisions of these rules and regulations, except that the following offices
and positions in the municipal employ shall be exempt from the provisions of
these rules and regulations:



   (A)   Elected officials;



   (B)   Members of boards and commissions; and



   (C)   Appointed officials as follows: Attorney.



(Prior Code, § 1-6-3)



§ 31.04  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The City Council shall appoint a City Administrator who shall
provide the administrative supervision and direction of the city under the
governance of the Council.



   (B)   The duties of Administrator shall be as prescribed by the City
Council and in accordance with state statutes.



(Prior Code, § 1-6-4)  (Ord. 72, passed 1-30-1980; Ord. 608, passed
1-26-2015)



§ 31.05  OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Any employee holding one of the positions listed below shall
not perform the same or substantially similar duties for another local unit
of government on either a full-time or ongoing part-time basis, either
directly as an employee or independent contractor or indirectly through a
corporation or other entity.



   (B)   The positions covered by this section are: City Administrator;
Community Development Director; Economic Development Director; Public Works
Director; Chief Building Official; and City Engineer.



(Prior Code, § 1-6-5)  (Ord. 430, passed 9-26-2005; Ord. 586, passed
11-12-2013)




PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCING ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSES




§ 31.20  PURPOSE.



   Administrative offense procedures established pursuant to this
subchapter are intended to provide the public and the city with an informal,
cost effective, and expeditious alternative to traditional criminal charges
for violations of certain ordinance provisions. The procedures are intended
to be voluntary on the part of those who have been charged with
administrative offenses. At any time prior to the payment of the
administrative penalty as is provided for hereafter, the individual may
withdraw from participation in the procedures in which event the city may
bring criminal charges in accordance with law. Likewise, the city, in its
discretion, may choose not to initiate an administrative offense and may
bring criminal charges in the first instance. In the event a party
participates in the administrative offense procedures but does not pay the
monetary penalty which may be imposed, the city will seek to collect the
costs of the administrative offense procedures as part of a subsequent
criminal sentence in the event the party is charged and is adjudicated guilty
of the criminal violation.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-1)



§ 31.21  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFENSE. A violation of a provision of this code and is
subject to the administrative penalties set forth in the schedule of offenses
and penalties referred to in §§ 10.98 and 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-2)



§ 31.22  NOTICES.



   (A)   Before an administrative citation may be issued, staff shall
mail a notice of violation to the last known address of the individual
committing the alleged offense. In the event there is no response to the
initial letter, staff shall mail a final notice of violation to the last
known address of the individual committing the alleged offense and provide
them notice that failure to comply with the final notice will result in the
issuance of an administrative citation. No additional notice shall be
required before issuing a citation if the property owner has already been
issued a citation within the last 12 months.



   (B)   Any officer of the Wright County Sheriff’s Office or any
other person employed by the city, authorized in writing by the City
Administrator, and having authority to enforce this code, shall, upon
determining that there has been a violation, notify the violator and provide
the violator with notice. The notice shall set forth the nature, date, and
time of violation, the name of the official issuing the notice, and the
amount of the scheduled penalty.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-3)



§ 31.23  PAYMENT.



   Once notice is given, the alleged violator may, within seven days of
the notice, pay the amount set forth on the schedule of penalties for the
violation, or may request a hearing in writing, as is provided for hereafter.
The penalty may be paid in person or by mail, and payment shall be deemed to
be an admission of the violation.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-4)



§ 31.24  HEARING.



   Any person contesting an administrative offense pursuant to this
subchapter may, within seven days of the time of issuance of the notice,
request a hearing by a hearing officer who shall forthwith conduct an
informal hearing to determine if a violation has occurred. The hearing
officer shall have authority to dismiss the violation or reduce or waive the
penalty. If the violation is sustained by the hearing officer, the violator
shall pay the penalty imposed.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-5)



§ 31.25  HEARING OFFICER.



   A city representative designated in writing by the City Administrator
shall be the hearing officer for all administrative offenses. The hearing
officer is authorized to hear and determine any controversy relating to
administrative offenses provided for in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-6)



§ 31.26  FAILURE TO PAY.



   In the event a party charged with an administrative offense fails to
pay the penalty, a misdemeanor or petty misdemeanor charge may be brought
against the alleged violator in accordance with applicable ordinance or
statutes. If the penalty is paid or if an individual is found not to have
committed the administrative offense by the hearing officer, no charge may be
brought by the city for the same violation.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-7)



§ 31.27  DISPOSITION OF PENALTIES.



   All penalties collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be paid to
the city and may be deposited in the city’s General Fund.



(Prior Code, § 1-7-8)




CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS




§ 31.40  BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   Applicants for city employment. The city shall conduct a
criminal history background investigation on the applicants for all full- and
part-time employment positions with the city. All employees hired on or after
the effective date hereof shall be subject to additional periodic criminal
history background investigations at the discretion of the city during the
term of their employment.



   (B)   City volunteers. The city shall conduct a criminal history
background investigation on those applicants the City Administrator or
designee deems such investigation to be necessary based upon anticipated
interaction with children, seniors, or vulnerable persons, or for any other
reason or as a matter of general practice, as determined at the sole
discretion of the city. This division (B) specifically excludes members
elected or appointed to the City Council. All volunteers appointed on or
after the effective date hereof shall be subject to additional periodic
criminal history background investigations at the discretion of the city
during the term of their service to the city.



   (C)   Applicants for city licenses. The city or Wright County
Sheriff’s Office shall conduct a criminal history background investigation
on the applicants for the following licenses with the city:



      (1)   Liquor licenses (3.2% malt liquor, wine, intoxicating
liquors, breweries, distilleries, Sunday liquor);



      (2)   Lawful gambling;



      (3)   Pawnshops;



      (4)   Massage businesses and services; and



      (5)   Peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants.



§ 31.41  INVESTIGATION PROCESS.



   (A)   Individuals subject to a criminal background investigation
must authorize the city or Wright County Sheriff’s Office, by written or
other specified mean, of consent to conduct the criminal history background
investigation before the investigation is undertaken with such consent fully
compliant with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 13, as it may be amended from time
to time, regarding the collection, maintenance, and use of the information.



   (B)   Any data that is accessed and acquired by the city shall be
maintained at City Hall under the care and custody of the Human Resources
Manager and City Clerk.



   (C)   Any data that is accessed and acquired by Wright County
Sheriff’s Office shall be maintained under the care and custody of Wright
County’s designee.



   (D)   Any data that is acquired or summary of the results of the
criminal history background investigation may be released to the City
Council, City Administrator, City Attorney, City Clerk, or Human Resources if
necessary to carry out the duties of their position.



   (E)   The cost of the criminal background investigations shall be
listed in the city’s fee schedule ordinance and shall be paid to the city.



§ 31.42  RESULTS AND ACTION BY CITY.



   (A)   Except for the positions set forth in M.S. § 364.09, as it
may be amended from time to time, the city will not reject an applicant for
employment, volunteer assignment, or license on the basis of the
applicant’s prior conviction unless the crime is directly related to the
position of employment sought and the conviction is for a felony, gross
misdemeanor, or misdemeanor with a jail sentence.



   (B)   If the city rejects the applicant’s request on this basis,
the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the following:



      (1)   The grounds and reasons for the denial;



      (2)   The applicant complaint and grievance procedure set for
the in M.S. § 364.06;



      (3)   The earliest date the applicant may reapply for
employment, volunteer assignment, or issuance of a license; and



      (4)   All competent evidence of rehabilitation will be
considered upon reapplication.



§ 31.43  ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter limits the city’s right to establish
additional conditions or requirements above and beyond a criminal background
investigation in circumstances where the City Council or city staff determine
that such additional conditions or requirements will serve to better protect
the city and/or the health, safety, and welfare of its residents or the
public in general.



CHAPTER 32:  ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Planning Commission




   32.001   Name of the Commission



   32.002   Authorization



   32.003   Membership



   32.004   Term of office



   32.005   Attendance



   32.006   Vacancy



   32.007   Officers



   32.008   Meetings



   32.009   Quorum



   32.010   Duties of the Commission



   32.011   Amendments



   32.012   Compensation




Library Board




   32.025   Appointment



   32.026   Terms



   32.027   Removal of Directors



   32.028   Vacancies



   32.029   Organization of Board and rules



   32.030   Treasurer



   32.031   Financial report



   32.032   Budget



   32.033   Reserve fund



   32.034   Additional power




Parks and Recreation Commission




   32.045   Purpose



   32.046   Membership



   32.047   Term of office



   32.048   Attendance



   32.049   Vacancy



   32.050   Officers



   32.051   Meetings



   32.052   Quorum



   32.053   Duties of the Commission



   32.054   Amendments




Bertram Chain of Lakes Regional Park Advisory Council




   32.065   Establishment



   32.066   Purpose



   32.067   Bylaws by reference




Industrial and Economic Development Committee




   32.075   Name of Committee



   32.076   Authorization



   32.077   Membership



   32.078   Term of office



   32.079   Attendance



   32.080   Vacancy



   32.081   Officers



   32.082   Meetings



   32.083   Quorum



   32.084   Duties of the Committee



   32.085   Amendments




Economic Development Authority




   32.100   Established




PLANNING COMMISSION




§ 32.001  NAME OF THE COMMISSION.



   The name of the organization shall be the Monticello Planning
Commission.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-1)



§ 32.002  AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The authorization for the establishment of this Commission is
set forth under M.S. Ch. 462, Municipal Planning Enabling Act, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (B)   The Planning Commission is hereby designated the planning
agency of the city pursuant to the Municipal Planning Act.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-2)



§ 32.003  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the
City Council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall have equal
rights and privileges.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-3)



§ 32.004  TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   Appointments. All members shall be appointed for three-year
terms ending on December 31 of a given year; however, the term may be
terminated earlier by the City Council. Terms shall be staggered so that no
more than two members’ terms shall expire in a given year. The terms are to
commence on the day of appointment by Council. Every appointed member shall,
before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, take an oath that he
or she will faithfully discharge the duties of office.



   (B)   Renewals. When an expiring member’s term is up, such member
may be reappointed by Council with the effective date of the new term
beginning on the first day of the next year following the expiration.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-4)



§ 32.005  ATTENDANCE.



   It is the City Council’s intention to encourage Planning Commission
members to attend all Planning Commission meetings. Should any Planning
Commission member be absent for more than three meetings in a calendar year,
that member may be subject to replacement by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-5)



§ 32.006  VACANCY.



   Any vacancy in the regular or at-large membership shall be filled by
the City Council, and such appointee shall serve for the unexpired term so
filled.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-6)



§ 32.007  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Elections. The City Planning Commission shall elect at its
January meeting from its membership a Chair, Vice Chair, and a Secretary who
shall serve for a term of one year and shall have powers as may be prescribed
in the rules of the Commission.



   (B)   Duties of Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of
the Planning Commission and shall have the duties normally conferred and
parliamentary usage of such officers.



   (C)   Duties of Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall act for the Chair
in his or her absence.



   (D)   Duties of Secretary.



      (1)   A Secretary may be appointed who is not a member of the
Planning Commission but can be employed as a member of city staff.



      (2)   The Secretary shall keep the minutes and records of the
Commission; and with the assistance of staff as is available shall prepare
the agenda of the regular and special meetings for Commission members,
arrange proper and legal notice of hearings when necessary, attend to
correspondence of the Commission, and handle other duties as are normally
carried out by a Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-7)



§ 32.008  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting each month. This meeting shall be held on the first Tuesday. Regular
meetings shall commence at 6:00 p.m. Hearings shall be heard as soon
thereafter as possible. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the
transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, and findings, which record shall be a public record. The
meeting shall be open to the general public.



   (B)   In the event of conflict for a regularly-scheduled meeting
date, a majority at any meeting may change the date, time, and location of
the meeting.



   (C)   Special meetings may be called by the chair or two members of
the Planning Commission together, as needed, and shall be coordinated with
city staff.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-8)



§ 32.009  QUORUM.



   A majority of all voting Planning Commission members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-9)



§ 32.010  DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission has the powers and duties assigned to it under
M.S. Ch. 462, Municipal Planning Enabling Act, as it may be amended from time
to time, by this code, and state law.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-10)



   (B)   The Planning Commission shall act as the Board of Adjustment
and Appeals for the Monticello zoning ordinance and shall act according to
procedures as established by the Monticello zoning ordinance.



§ 32.011  AMENDMENTS.



   This subchapter may be amended as recommended by the majority vote of
the existing membership of the Planning Commission and only after majority
vote of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-11)



§ 32.012  COMPENSATION.



   Compensation of members of the Commission shall be as set forth in city
code for fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 2-1-12)  (Ord. 336, passed 11-22-1999; Ord. 337, passed
1-10-2011; Ord. 593, passed 3-10-2014; Ord. 607, passed 1-26-2015)




LIBRARY BOARD




§ 32.025  APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby created and established a Library Board
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 134, as it may be amended from time to time, and laws
amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto. The Board shall consist of five
members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.



   (B)   The Board shall consist of no more than one member who is not
a resident of the city and no more than one member of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-1)



§ 32.026  TERMS.



   (A)   Two members shall hold office until December 31, 1981, two
members shall hold office until December 31, 1982, and one member shall hold
office until December 31, 1983.



   (B)   Annually thereafter, appointments shall be for the term of
three years.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-2)



§ 32.027  REMOVAL OF DIRECTORS.



   The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, may remove any member
of the Library Board for misconduct or neglect of duty.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-3)



§ 32.028  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies in the Board shall be filled by an appointment by the Mayor
with City Council approval. Any Board member so appointed shall serve the
remaining term of the vacated Board member.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-4)



§ 32.029  ORGANIZATION OF BOARD AND RULES.



   (A)   Immediately after appointment, such Board shall organize by
electing one of its number as President and one as Secretary, and from time
to time it may appoint other officers and employees as it deems necessary.



   (B)   The Board shall adopt bylaws and regulations for the
government of the library, community room, and reading room and for the
conduct of its business as may be expedient and conformable to law.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-5)



§ 32.030  TREASURER.



   The City Clerk-Treasurer shall be the Treasurer for the Library Board,
but shall not be a member thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-6)



§ 32.031  FINANCIAL REPORT.



   At the first regular meeting of the Board following the end of each
calendar year, the Board shall report to the governing body of the
municipality all amounts received during the preceding year and the sources
thereof, the amounts expended and for what purposes, the number of books on
hand, the number purchased and loaned, and other information as it deems
advisable. A copy of the report shall be filed with the Library Division,
State Department of Education.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-7)



§ 32.032  BUDGET.



   Prior to August 1 of each year, the Board of Directors shall adopt a
budget for library purposes and submit this budget to the City Council by
this date. City Council shall review budget and revise as deemed necessary
and include necessary levy for library purposes to be certified to the County
Auditor.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-8)



§ 32.033  RESERVE FUND.



   The City Council may establish a reserve fund in case expenditures
exceed revenues and also due to the timing of expenditures and revenues. Any
expenditure of monies in excess of the library’s operating and reserve
funds requires approval by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-9)



§ 32.034  ADDITIONAL POWER.



   The Board shall have additional powers as commensurate with M.S. Ch.
134, as it may be amended from time to time, and laws amendatory thereof or
supplemental thereto.



(Prior Code, § 2-5-10)  (Ord. 96, passed 4-13-1981)




PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION




§ 32.045  PURPOSE.



   A Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established to serve as an
advisory commission to the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-1)  (Ord. 664, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 32.046  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Commission shall consist of seven
regular members to be appointed by the City Council. The Commission shall
consist of no more than one member who is not a resident of the city.



   (B)   Any non-resident appointed to the Commission must reside in
the Orderly Annexation Area.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-2)  (Ord. 664, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 32.047  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the regular members shall be for three years and shall be
staggered so that no more than two members’ terms expire in a given year.
All regular terms shall expire on December 31 of a given year.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-3)



§ 32.048  ATTENDANCE.



   It is the City Council’s intention to encourage Parks and Recreation
Commission members to attend all Parks and Recreation Commission meetings.
Should any Parks and Recreation Commission member be absent for more than
three meetings in a calendar year, that member will be subject to replacement
by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-4)



§ 32.049  VACANCY.



   Any vacancy in the regular or at large membership shall be filled by
the City Council, and such appointee shall serve for the unexpired term so
filled.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-5)



§ 32.050  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Elections. The city’s Parks and Recreation Commission shall
elect at its January meeting from its membership a Chair, Vice Chair, and a
Secretary who shall serve for a term of one year and shall have powers as may
be prescribed in the rules of the Commission.



   (B)   Duties of Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of
the Parks and Recreation Commission and shall have the duties normally
conferred and parliamentary usage of such officers.



   (C)   Duties of Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall act for the Chair
in his or her absence.



   (D)   Duties of Secretary. A Secretary may be appointed who is not a
member of the Parks and Recreation Commission but can be employed as a member
of city staff. The Secretary shall keep the minutes and records of the
Commission; and with the assistance of staff as is available shall prepare
the agenda of the regular and special meetings for Commission members,
arrange proper and legal notice of hearings when necessary, attend to
correspondence of the Commission, and other duties as are normally carried
out by a Secretary.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-6)



§ 32.051  MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings shall be held on a date established by the Parks and
Recreation Commission. In the event of a conflict with a holiday or special
events, a majority at any meeting may change the date and location of the
meeting. The meeting shall be open to the general public.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-7)



§ 32.052  QUORUM.



   A majority of the total Parks and Recreation Commission members shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-8)



§ 32.053  DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.



   It shall be the duty of the Commission, with staff assistance, to study
and provide information to determine the city’s needs for parks facilities
and open space needs of the city along with recommendations for recreation
activities and programming including general and specific development
standards and criteria for evaluating specific sites.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-9)  (Ord. 664, passed 4-10-2017)



§ 32.054  AMENDMENTS.



   This subchapter may be amended as recommend by the majority vote of the
existing membership of the Parks and Recreation Commission and only after
majority vote of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-6-10)  (Ord. 203, passed 2-11-1991; Ord. 664, passed
4-10-2017)



BERTRAM CHAIN OF LAKES REGIONAL PARK ADVISORY COUNCIL



§ 32.065  ESTABLISHMENT.



   The City of Monticello, in partnership with Wright County, hereby
establishes an Advisory Council of the Bertram Chain of Lakes Regional Park.



(Ord. 598, passed 5-12-2014)



§ 32.066  PURPOSE.



   The Bertram Chain of Lakes Regional Park Advisory Council shall provide
information to its governing bodies in determination of the acquisition,
usage, operation, management, and functions of the Bertram Chain of Lakes
Regional Park.



(Ord. 598, passed 5-12-2014)



§ 32.067  BYLAWS BY REFERENCE.



   The City Council has approved bylaws for the Bertram Chain of Lakes
Regional Park Advisory Council, the current version of which has been filed
in the office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 598, passed 5-12-2014)




INDUSTRIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE




§ 32.075  NAME OF COMMITTEE.



   The name of the organization shall be the city’s Industrial and
Economic Development Committee (IEDC).



(Prior Code, § 2-10-1)



§ 32.076  AUTHORIZATION.



   Duties are delegated to the IEDC by the City Council by the ordinance
codified herein dated June 28, 2010, and by Res. 2008-44, approved May 27,
2008.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-2)



§ 32.077  MEMBERSHIP.



   The city’s IEDC shall consist of 16 to 18 regular members to be
appointed by the City Council. The Committee members shall consist of city
business representatives or residents of the city. One councilmember shall be
appointed annually to serve on the IEDC. The Director of the city’s Chamber
of Commerce and Industry shall be an ex-officio member of the IEDC. Up to two
Monticello High School senior students may serve as voting members during
their appointed term. The High School Principal shall recommend their
membership on the IEDC. The IEDC and the City Council shall confirm their
appointment.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-3)  (Ord. 637, passed 4-25-2016; Ord. 715, passed
3-25-2019)



§ 32.078  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the regular members shall be for three years and shall be
staggered so that no more than one-half of the terms expire in a given year.
All regular terms shall expire on December 31 of any given year.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-4)



§ 32.079  ATTENDANCE.



   It is the City Council’s intention to encourage IEDC members to
attend all IEDC meetings. It is desired that IEDC members attend at least 75%
of meetings in a calendar year. Members may be subject to replacement by the
Council in the event attendance does not meet this standard.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-5)



§ 32.080  VACANCY.



   Any vacancy in the regular or at large membership shall be filled by
the City Council, and such appointee shall serve for the unexpired term so
filled.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-6)



§ 32.081  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Elections. The city’s IEDC shall elect at its annual meeting
from its membership a Chair, Vice Chair, and a Secretary who shall serve for
a term of one year and shall have powers as may be prescribed in the rules of
the Committee.



   (B)   Duties of Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of
the IEDC and shall have the duties normally conferred and parliamentary usage
of such officers.



   (C)   Duties of Vice Chair. The Vice Chair shall act for the Chair
in his or her absence.



   (D)   Duties of Secretary. The Secretary shall keep the minutes and
records of the Committee with the assistance of city staff.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-7)



§ 32.082  MEETINGS.



   Regular meetings shall be held on a date established by the IEDC. In
the event of a conflict with a holiday or special events, a majority at any
meeting may change the date and location of the meeting. The meeting shall be
open to the general public.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-8)



§ 32.083  QUORUM.



   A majority of the total IEDC members shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-9)



§ 32.084  DUTIES OF THE COMMITTEE.



   It shall be the duty of the Committee, with staff assistance, to
advocate and make recommendations to the Economic Development Authority and
City Council, relative to and including influencing industrial and economic
development in and for the city, with an emphasis on industrial land,
increasing tax base and number of livable wage-level jobs by promoting
industrial and economic growth, and working to maintain a desirable business
environment.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-10)



§ 32.085  AMENDMENTS.



   This subchapter may be amended as recommend by the majority vote of the
existing membership of the IEDC and only after majority vote of the City
Council.



(Prior Code, § 2-10-11)  (Ord. 519, passed 8-23-2010)




ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY




§ 32.100  ESTABLISHED.



   As authorized by M.S. Ch. 469, as it may be amended from time to time,
the City Council has established an Economic Development Authority by passing
an enabling resolution, the current version of which has been filed in the
office of the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 2-3-1)  (Ord. 469A, passed 12-10-2007; Ord. 551, passed
2-27-2012)



CHAPTER 33:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



Section



   33.01   Policy and purpose



   33.02   Definitions



   33.03   Establishment of emergency management organization



   33.04   Powers and duties of Director



   33.05   Local emergencies



   33.06   Emergency regulations



   33.07   Emergency management a government function



   33.08   Participation in labor disputes or politics



 



   33.99   Penalty



§ 33.01  POLICY AND PURPOSE.



   Because of the existing possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destruction resulting from fire, flood, tornado,
blizzard, destructive winds, or other natural causes, or from sabotage,
hostile action, or from hazardous material mishaps of catastrophic measure;
and in order to ensure that preparations of this city will be adequate to
deal with those disasters, and generally, to provide for the common defense
and to protect the public peace, health, and safety, and to preserve the
lives and property of the people of this city, it is hereby found and
declared to be necessary:



   (A)   To establish a city emergency management organization
responsible for city planning and preparation for emergency government
operations in time of disasters;



   (B)   To provide for the exercise of necessary powers during
emergencies and disasters;



   (C)   To provide for the rendering of mutual aid between this city
and other political subdivisions of this state and of other states with
respect to the carrying out of emergency preparedness functions; and



   (D)   To comply with the provisions of M.S. § 12.25, as it may be
amended from time to time, which requires that each political subdivision of
the state shall establish a local organization for emergency management.



§ 33.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISASTER. A situation which creates an immediate and serious impairment
to the health and safety of any person, or a situation which has resulted in
or is likely to result in catastrophic loss to property, and for which
traditional sources of relief and assistance within the affected area are
unable to repair or prevent the injury or loss.



   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances which calls for
immediate action to prevent from developing or occurring.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The preparation for and the carrying out of all
emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage
resulting from disasters caused by fire, flood, tornado, and other acts of
nature, or from sabotage, hostile action, or from industrial hazardous
material mishaps. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting
services, police services, emergency medical services, engineering, warning
services, communications, radiological, chemical, evacuation, congregate
care, emergency transportation, existing or properly assigned functions of
plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other
functions related to civil protection, together with all other activities
necessary or incidental for carrying out the foregoing functions.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES. The total personnel resources engaged in
city level emergency management functions in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or order thereunder. This includes personnel from
city departments, authorized volunteers, and private organizations and
agencies.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION. The staff responsible for
coordinating city-level planning and preparation for disaster response. This
organization provides a city liaison and coordination with federal, state,
and local jurisdictions relative to disaster preparedness activities and
assures implementation of federal and state program requirements.



§ 33.03  ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION.



   There is hereby created within the city government an emergency
management organization which shall be under the supervision and control of
the City Emergency Management Director, called the Director. The Director’s
responsibilities shall be part of the duties of the Fire Marshal/Emergency
Services Coordinator. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, and operation of the emergency preparedness
organization, subject to the direction and control of the City Administrator.
The emergency management organization shall conform to and be consistent
with, where applicable, all state and federal requirements, including the
National Incident Management System framework found at 44 C.F.R. part 201, as
it may be amended from time to time.



§ 33.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director shall represent the city on any regional or state
conference for emergency management. The Director shall develop proposed
mutual aid agreements with other political subdivisions of the state for
reciprocal emergency management aid and assistance in an emergency too great
to be dealt with unassisted, and shall present these agreements to the City
Council for its action. These arrangements shall be consistent with the
Minnesota State Emergency Plan.



   (B)   The Director shall make studies and surveys of the human
resources, industries, resources, and facilities of the city as deemed
necessary to determine their adequacy for emergency management and to plan
for their most efficient use in time of an emergency or disaster. The
Director shall establish the economic stabilization systems and measures,
service staffs, boards, and sub-boards required, in accordance with state and
federal plans and directions subject to the approval of the City
Administrator and/or City Council.



   (C)   The Director shall prepare a comprehensive emergency plan for
the emergency preparedness of the city and shall present the plan to the City
Council for its approval. When the Council has approved the plan, it shall be
the duty of all city agencies and all emergency preparedness forces of the
city to perform the duties and functions assigned by the plan as approved.
The plan may be modified in like manner from time to time. The Director shall
coordinate the emergency management activities of the city to the end that
they shall be consistent and fully integrated with the emergency plans of the
federal government and the state and correlated with emergency plans of the
county and other political subdivisions within the state.



   (D)   In accordance with the State and City Emergency Plan, the
Director shall institute training programs, public information programs and
conduct practice warning alerts and emergency exercises as may be necessary
to assure prompt and effective operation of the City Emergency Operations
Plan when a disaster occurs.



   (E)   The Director shall utilize the personnel, services, equipment,
supplies, and facilities of existing departments and agencies of the city to
the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city
departments and agencies shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate
with and extend services and facilities to the city’s emergency management
organization and to the Governor upon request. The head of each department or
agency in cooperation with the Director shall be responsible for the planning
and programming of those emergency activities as will involve the utilization
of the facilities of the department or agency.



   (F)   The Director shall, in cooperation with those city departments
and agencies affected, assist in the organizing, recruiting, and training of
emergency management personnel, which may be required on a volunteer basis to
carry out the emergency plans of the city and state. To the extent that
emergency personnel are recruited to augment a regular city department or
agency for emergencies, they shall be assigned to the departments or agencies
and shall be under the administration and control of the department or agency.



   (G)   Consistent with the state emergency services law, the Director
shall coordinate the activity of municipal emergency management organizations
within the city and assist in establishing and conducting training programs
as required to assure emergency operational capability in the several
services as provided by M.S. § 12.25, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (H)   The Director shall carry out all orders, rules, and
regulations issued by the Governor with reference to emergency management.



   (I)   The Director shall prepare and submit reports on emergency
preparedness activities when requested by the Mayor.



§ 33.05  LOCAL EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   A local emergency may be declared only by the Mayor or his or
her legal successor. It shall not be continued for a period in excess of
three days except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order, or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local emergency shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk.



   (B)   A declaration of a local emergency shall invoke necessary
portions of the response and recovery aspects of applicable local or
inter-jurisdictional disaster plans, and may authorize aid and assistance
thereunder.



   (C)   No jurisdictional agency or official may declare a local
emergency unless expressly authorized by the agreement under which the agency
functions. However, an inter-jurisdictional disaster agency shall provide aid
and services in accordance with the agreement under which it functions.



Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.06  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever necessary, to meet a declared emergency or to prepare
for an emergency for which adequate regulations have not been adopted by the
Governor or the City Council, the Council may by resolution promulgate
regulations, consistent with applicable federal or state law or regulation,
respecting: the conduct of persons and the use of property during
emergencies; the repair, maintenance, and safeguarding of essential public
services, emergency health, fire, and safety regulations, drills or practice
periods required for preliminary training, and all other matters which are
required to protect public safety, health, and welfare in declared
emergencies.



   (B)   Every resolution of emergency regulations shall be in writing;
shall be dated; shall refer to the particular emergency to which it pertains,
if so limited, and shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk. A copy
shall be kept posted and available for public inspection during business
hours. Notice of the existence of these regulations and their availability
for inspection at the City Clerk’s office shall be conspicuously posted at
the front of the City Hall or other headquarters of the city or at other
places in the affected area as the City Council shall designate in the
resolution. By resolution, the Council may modify or rescind a regulation.



   (C)   The City Council may rescind any regulation by resolution at
any time. If not sooner rescinded, every regulation shall expire at the end
of 30 days after its effective date or at the end of the emergency to which
it relates, whichever comes first. Any resolution, rule, or regulation
inconsistent with an emergency regulation promulgated by the Council shall be
suspended during the period of time and to the extent conflict exists.



   (D)   During a declared emergency, the city is, under the provisions
of M.S. § 12.37, as it may be amended from time to time and notwithstanding
any statutory or Charter provision to the contrary, empowered, through its
City Council, acting within or without the corporate limits of the city, to
enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat the disaster
by protecting the health and safety of persons and property and providing
emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. The city may exercise
these powers in the light of the exigencies of the disaster without
compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities prescribed by
law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering rental equipment
agreements, purchase of supplies and materials, limitations upon tax levies,
and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds, including, but not
limited to, publication of resolutions, publication of calls for bids,
provisions of personnel laws and rules, provisions relating to low bids, and
requirement for bids.



Penalty, see § 33.99



§ 33.07  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT A GOVERNMENT FUNCTION.



   All functions and activities relating to emergency management are
hereby declared to be governmental functions. The provisions of this section
shall not affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he or
she would otherwise be entitled under this resolution or under the worker’s
compensation law, or under any pension law, nor the right of any person to
receive any benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



§ 33.08  PARTICIPATION IN LABOR DISPUTES OR POLITICS.



   The emergency management organization shall not participate in any form
of political activity, nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for
political purposes, nor shall it be employed in a labor dispute.



§ 33.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any regulation
adopted thereunder relating to acts, omissions, or conduct other than
official acts of city employees or officers is guilty of a misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 34:  EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES



Section



   34.01   Findings, purpose, and intent



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Conflicts



   34.04   Fire service charges in general



   34.05   Fire service charges



   34.06   Fees



§ 34.01  FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.



   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of authorizing the city to
establish and charge user service charges for emergency services as described
in this chapter.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm installation designed to be used for the
prevention or detection of burglary, robbery, heat, smoke, carbon monoxide,
and fire on the premises which contain an alarm installation. Automobile
alarm devices are not an ALARM SYSTEM.



   ALARM USER. A person in control of any building, structure, or facility
wherein an alarm system is maintained.



   COMMERCIAL BUILDING and INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING. Any structures that are
used, or intended either by the nature of its construction, or by any
conditional use permits, interim use permits, or business licenses issued to
be used for commercial, institutional (e.g., school or governmental uses), or
industrial purposes. Multiple family rental housing of any type is considered
to be commercial for the purposes of this chapter.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL RESPONSE (NON MOTOR VEHICLE INCIDENT). Any medical
response not involving a motor vehicle where the Fire Department is able to
render aid, provide assistance, or otherwise improve the conditions of any
injured persons.



   EXCAVATOR. A person who conducts excavation.



   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal eliciting a response by fire personnel
when a situation requiring a response does not, in fact, exist and which is
caused by the activation of the alarm system through mechanical failure,
alarm malfunction, improper installation, or the inadvertence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system.



   FIRE RESPONSE. Any deployment of firefighting personnel and/or
equipment to extinguish a fire or perform any preventative measure in an
effort to protect equipment, life, or property in an area threatened by fire.
It also includes the deployment of firefighting personnel and/or equipment to
provide fire suppression, rescue, extrication, or any other services related
to fire and rescue as may occasionally occur. Such deployment constitutes
FIRE RESPONSE regardless of whether these services are actually performed.



   FIRE SERVICE CHARGE. The charge imposed by the city for a fire response
or emergency medical response.



   FIRE WATCH. An event where one or more members of the city’s Fire
Department remain at the scene of an emergency response after the emergency
has been addressed by the city’s Fire Department for the purpose of
maintaining watch over the property responded to until an owner or an
owner’s representative arrives to secure the property.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any chemical or chemical compound that is listed
as a hazardous substance in rules adopted under M.S. Ch. 182, as it may be
amended from time to time.



   ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES. Any activity in violation of state statutes, rules,
and regulations, or city or county ordinances, which may be criminal or
merely not in conformity therewith.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed and originally
manufactured to operate primarily upon public roads and highways, and not
operated exclusively upon railroad tracks. It includes any vehicle propelled
or drawn by a self-propelled vehicle. This includes semi trailers,
snowmobiles, all terrain vehicles, and campers.



   MOTOR VEHICLE OWNER. Any person, firm, association, or corporation
owning or renting a motor vehicle, or having the exclusive use thereof, under
a lease or otherwise, for a period of greater than 30 days.



   PERSON. The state, a public agency, a local governmental unit, an
individual, corporation, partnership, association, business, public entity,
or a trustee, receiver, assignee, or personal representative of any of them.



   PREVENTATIVE FIRE WATCH. A situation when Fire Department personnel
provide fire watch protection in any place of assembly or any place where
people congregate where public safety is at risk due to the number of
persons, or the nature of the performance, exhibition, display, contest, or
activity, or due to unusual fire hazards.



   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any structure which is used or intended by the
nature of its construction to be used by persons for living and sleeping
quarters, but shall not include multi-family housing, hotels, motels, or
other buildings intended primarily for transient lodging. RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS shall also include outbuilding, barns, and other structures which
are not defined as commercial or institutional buildings as defined herein.



   UNDERGROUND PIPELINE UTILITY. An underground line, facility, system,
and its appurtenances used to produce, store, convey, transmit, or distribute
gas, oil, petroleum products, and other similar substances.



   VACANT PARCEL. Any property parcel that does not include any building
improvements.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 34.03  CONFLICTS.



   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and
applicable provisions of state law, rules, or regulations, the latter shall
prevail.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 34.04  FIRE SERVICE CHARGES IN GENERAL.



   (A)   The collection of fire service charges for the provision of
Fire Response and Emergency Medical Response shall be pursuant to M.S. §§
366.011 and 415.01, as they may be amended from time to time, and any other
applicable statute. Collection of unpaid service charges shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 366.012, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (B)   Said fees shall be charged as set forth in division § 34.05.



   (C)   For incidents where a fee is charged, the fee shall be
calculated on the basis of the personnel and equipment which respond to the
incident as set forth in the fee schedule in Chapter 36 of this code of
ordinances. All personnel and equipment provided by other fire departments
pursuant to a mutual aid request of the city’s Fire Department shall be
billed as if such personnel and equipment were provided by the city’s Fire
Department.



   (D)   When a particular service rendered by the Fire Department
directly benefits more than one person or property, the owner of each
property so benefitted and each person so benefitted shall be liable for the
payment of the full charge for such service to his or her respective property
or person.



   (E)   Parties billed the fire service charge will have 30 days to
pay. If the service charge is not paid by that time, it will be considered
delinquent and the city will send notice of delinquency.



   (F)   If the fire service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after
this notice of delinquency is sent, the city will use all practical and
reasonable legal means to collect the service charge including the provisions
of M.S. § 366.012, as it may be amended from time to time. The party
receiving the service shall be liable for all collection costs incurred by
the city including, but not limited to, administrative costs, attorneys’
fees, recording fees, and court costs.



   (G)   Any party aggrieved by a charge authorized in this chapter may
appeal the charge as follows.



      (1)   Within the time period for which a bill is payable, the
party shall file a written request with the City Clerk setting forth specific
reasons why the charge is improper.



      (2)   The City Clerk shall notify the aggrieved party, in
writing, of the time, place, and date the City Council will hold a hearing on
the issue.



      (3)   The City Council may grant relief on appeal if it finds
good cause and sufficient proof to satisfy the Council.



      (4)   The City Council may extend the time for payment for a
reasonable period.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 34.05  FIRE SERVICE CHARGES.



   The service charges for fire responses or emergency medical responses
shall be as follows.



   (A)   Emergency medical response (non-motor vehicle incident).



      (1)   Emergency medical response (non-motor vehicle incident)
is any medical response not involving a motor vehicle where the Fire
Department is able to render aid, provide assistance, or otherwise improve
the conditions of any injured persons.



      (2)   With regard to emergency medical response (non-motor
vehicle incident), there shall be no charge; provided, however, that should
it be determined by the city that the medical response falls within divisions
(B), (H), (I), and (J) as set out below, then an invoice for the cost of the
Fire Department response to the medical emergency will be sent to the
property owner or owner’s insurance company based on the fee schedule set
forth in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Motor vehicle incident.



      (1)   A motor vehicle incident is any response involving a
motor vehicle where the Fire Department is able to render aid, provide
assistance, or otherwise improve the conditions of any injured persons. This
would include, but not be limited to: vehicle fire; extrication; medical
care; absorbing liquid spills; vehicle system safety; vehicle stabilization;
and traffic control.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the motor vehicle owner or
owner’s insurance company for the cost of the Fire Department response to
the motor vehicle incident based on the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36
of this code of ordinances.



      (3)   If there is more than one motor vehicle involved for
which Fire Department service is provided, each motor vehicle owner or
insurer will be invoiced an equal share of the service charge.



   (C)   Residential fire.



      (1)   A residential fire is any incident response to a fire
involving a residential building as defined in this chapter.



      (2)   With regard to residential building fires, there shall
be no charge; provided, however, that should it be determined by the city
that the residential fire response falls within divisions (I), (J), or (K) as
set out below, then an invoice for the cost of the Fire Department response
will be sent to the property owner, hazardous waste generator, person(s)
charged with arson who set the fire, and/or the person(s) charged with an
illegal crime which contributed to the need for fire response. All such
charges shall be based on the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of this
code of ordinances.



   (D)   Commercial or institutional building fire response.



      (1)   A commercial or institutional building fire is any
incident response to a fire involving a commercial or institutional building
as defined in this chapter.



      (2)   With regard to commercial or institutional building
responses by the Fire Department, an invoice will be sent to the property
owner or owner’s insurance company for the cost of the Fire Department
response to the commercial or institutional incident based on the fee
schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances, but only when
the response requires the assistance of one or more other fire departments
responding pursuant to a call for mutual aid by the incident commander at the
scene.



   (E)   Grass fires within a state trunk highway or county
right-of-way.



      (1)   A grass fire is any incident response to a grass fire
within or outside of the right-of-way of a state trunk highway, county road,
or city road if the fire originated within the right-of-way of a state trunk
highway, county road, or city road as defined in M.S. § 161.465, as it may
be amended from time to time.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the State Commissioner of
Transportation or to the County Administrator for costs incurred by the Fire
Department to respond based on the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of
this code of ordinances.



   (F)   Technical rescue.



      (1)   A technical rescue is any incident response to a rescue
on the water, ice, confined space, trench, high or low level where
specialized equipment and training are required and where the Fire Department
is able to render aid, provide assistance, or otherwise improve the
conditions of the persons in need of rescue.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the person, entity, or
business receiving rescue service for costs incurred by the Fire Department
to respond based on the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of this code of
ordinances.



   (G)   Search and rescue.



      (1)   A search and rescue is any incident response to a search
and/or rescue of a missing person where the Fire Department is able to render
aid, provide assistance, or otherwise improve the conditions of the person in
need of rescue.



      (2)   With regard to search and rescue services, there shall
be no charge.



   (H)   Underground pipeline utility breaks.



      (1)   An underground pipeline utility break is any incident
response to an underground pipeline utility break.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the excavator or person
responsible for the pipeline utility break or to the owner or operator of the
pipeline for costs incurred by the Fire Department to respond based on the
fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances.



      (3)   In addition, the bill for service shall also include any
cost of cleanup of any contaminated equipment and/or repair of any equipment
damaged during the incident or its replacement, along with replacement of any
disposable equipment, supplies, and/or communication equipment.



   (I)   Hazardous material.



      (1)   A hazardous material incident is any response to the
release of hazardous material from its container, or the threat of a release
of a hazardous material from its container, chemical reaction, or other
potential emergency as the result of a hazardous material where the Fire
Department is able to render aid, provide assistance, or otherwise improve
the conditions or protect the public.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the person responsible for
the hazardous material or transportation of the hazardous material for costs
incurred by the Fire Department to respond based on the fee schedule set
forth in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances.



      (3)   In addition, the bill for service shall include any cost
of cleanup of any contaminated equipment and/or repair of any equipment
damaged during the incident or its replacement, along with replacement of any
disposable equipment, supplies, and/or communication equipment.



   (J)   Fire as the result of illegal activities.



      (1)   A fire as the result of illegal activities is any
incident response to a fire that resulted from illegal activities occurring
on the property as defined in this chapter. Examples of this would include,
but not be limited to, methamphetamine labs, commercial and industrial
operations where a necessary permit or license is required but has not been
obtained from the city, or the burning of debris without a properly issued
burn permit.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the property owner, owner’s
insurance company, and/or the person(s) responsible for the illegal activity
for costs incurred by the Fire Department to respond based on the fee
schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances. The Fire
Department reserves the right to seek reimbursement through restitution
should the person responsible for the illegal activity be convicted of a
crime related to the incident.



      (3)   In addition, the bill for service shall include any cost
of cleanup of any contaminated equipment and/or repair of any equipment
damaged during the incident or its replacement, along with replacement of any
disposable equipment, supplies, and/or communication equipment.



   (K)   Arson fire.



      (1)   An arson fire is any incident response to a fire where a
person is charged under state law.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the property owner, owner’s
insurance company, and/or the person charged with the arson for costs
incurred by the Fire Department to respond based on the fee schedule set
forth in in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances.



      (3)   In addition, the bill for service shall include any cost
of cleanup of any contaminated equipment and/or repair of any equipment
damaged during the incident or its replacement, along with replacement of any
disposable equipment, supplies, and/or communication equipment.



      (4)   The Fire Department reserves the right to seek
reimbursement through restitution should the person responsible for the fire
be convicted of a crime related to the incident. The fire investigator
responsible for the incident investigation will forward all costs expended by
the Fire Department in association with the incident to the court for
reimbursement through restitution.



   (L)   Fire on vacant land.



      (1)   A fire on vacant land is any incident response to a fire
involving a fire on vacant parcel as defined in this chapter.



      (2)   An invoice will be sent to the property owner or
owner’s insurance company for costs incurred by the Fire Department to
respond based on the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of this code of
ordinances.



   (M)   Fire watch. Fees for personnel to stand by on fire watch due
to unusual fire hazards or while waiting for the property owner or tenant to
respond to the scene following a fire incident and/or fire alarm, may be
billed to the owner of the property or the tenant, or both, on a per hour
basis with a one hour minimum. If a fire watch is established at a property,
the watch shall be maintained until the owner of the property, the tenant, or
his or her designated representative arrives at the property and takes over
responsibility for monitoring fire safety, or until the Fire Department
personnel on the scene determine that such responsible person either cannot
be located or is unwilling to take over responsibility for monitoring fire
safety, or until the Fire Department personnel on the scene determine that a
fire watch is no longer necessary. An invoice will be sent to the property
owner for costs incurred by the Fire Department for a fire watch based on the
fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances.



   (N)   Preventative fire watch. Fees for personnel to stand by on
preventative fire watch may be billed to the owner of the property or the
tenant, or both, on a per hour basis with a one hour minimum. An invoice will
be sent to the property owner for costs incurred by the Fire Department for a
preventative fire watch based on the fee schedule set forth in Chapter 36 of
this code of ordinances.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 34.06  FEES.



 



ATV/UTV with water tank
 

Current fee schedule



Car fires/accidents (nonresidential) 
 

Current fee schedule



Command vehicle/utility or grass truck
 

Current fee schedule



Engines - all types
 

Current fee schedule



Extra personnel
 

Current fee schedule



Fire investigation team (county-wide response team)
 

Current fee schedule



Fire watch
 

Current fee schedule



Heavy rescue/rescue/ambulance
 

Current fee schedule



Ladder/aerial
 

Current fee schedule



Preventative fire watch
 

Current fee schedule



Special response unit (county-wide response team)
 

Current fee schedule



Water tender
 

Current fee schedule





 



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 35: FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section




General Provisions




   35.01   Department established; purpose; organization



   35.02   Fire Chief



   35.03   Personnel



   35.04   Standard operating guidelines



   35.05   Firefighter’s relief association



   35.06   Emergency operations



   35.07   Authority at emergency scenes



   35.08   Investigation of emergency incidents



   35.09   Mutual aid



   35.10   Service fees



   35.11   Premises identification




Cleanup of Clandestine Drug Lab Sites and Chemical Dump Sites




   35.25   General provisions



   35.26   Definitions



   35.27   Declaration of site and contents as a public health nuisance



   35.28   Law enforcement action



   35.29   Seizure of property



   35.30   Action by City Building Official



   35.31   Site owner’s responsibility to act



   35.32   Site owner’s responsibility for costs



   35.33   City action and recovery of costs



   35.34   Recovery of costs from persons causing damage



   35.35   Site owner and address



   35.36   Suspension of residential rental license



   35.37   Unauthorized removal of postings



   35.38   Entry into or onto site



   35.39   Removal of personal property from the site




Public Safety 800 MHZ Radio Building Amplification System




   35.50   General



   35.51   Amplification systems allowed



   35.52   Testing procedures; acceptance test procedure



   35.53   Annual tests



   35.54   Five-year tests



   35.55   Qualifications of testing personnel



   35.56   Field testing



 



   35.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; PURPOSE; ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   There is hereby continued in the city and for its benefit a
Fire Department, whose mission is to respond to fire, rescue, hazardous
material, and other emergencies, to investigate the cause of fires, and to
prevent fires and promote safety in the community.



   (B)   The Fire Department shall be administered by a Fire Chief.



   (C)   The Fire Department shall have officers subordinate to the
Fire Chief who shall assist in management of Fire Department duties and
functions. The Fire Department chain of command shall be defined in the Fire
Department’s Standard Operating Guidelines. The Fire Chief shall develop
administrative policies.



   (D)   The Fire Department shall have staff to respond to fires and
other emergencies that may occur within the city and contract townships. The
Fire Chief shall recommend to the City Administrator for consideration by the
City Council a staffing plan for the Fire Department, which shall be adopted
as part of the Fire Department Standard Operating Guidelines.



§ 35.02  FIRE CHIEF.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Council upon
recommendation from the membership of the Department. The Fire Chief shall be
under the direction of the Council, but report to the City Administrator, for
general policy-making and administrative control, directing, planning, and
coordinating all activities of the Fire Department, including, but not
limited to, fire protection and emergency response, fire prevention and
safety educational services, training and safety of personnel, and fire
station facilities, vehicles, and equipment assigned to the Fire Department.
Specific duties of the Fire Chief shall be prescribed in a job description
prepared by the City Human Resources Director in consultation with the City
Administrator.



   (B)   For periods of absence from the city up to 60 days, the Fire
Chief shall appoint an acting Fire Chief. For periods of absence longer than
60 days, the City Council shall approve the appointment of an Acting Fire
Chief (normally the Assistant Chief).



§ 35.03  PERSONNEL.



   All employees of the Fire Department shall perform such duties and
functions as are prescribed in job descriptions which shall be prepared for
each position by the Fire Chief in consultation with the City Human Resources
Director. The City Council may consider, at its discretion, through the City
Administrator, the recommendations of the Fire Chief in these matters.



§ 35.04  STANDARD OPERATING GUIDELINES.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall recommend to the City Administrator for
approval by the City Council a set of Standard Operating Guidelines for
operation and administration of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The city’s personnel policies, as approved by the City
Council and as subsequently amended by authorization of the Council, shall
apply to Fire Department employees, including paid-on-call firefighters and
officers in their capacity as such. Any conflict between the city personnel
policies and Fire Department Standard Operating Guidelines, internal
administrative policies, and operational procedures shall be decided in favor
of the most restrictive policy.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall prepare operational procedures and
administrative policies as deemed necessary for the efficient operation of
the Department. Operational procedures and administrative policies shall not
require approval of the City Council.



§ 35.05  FIREFIGHTER’S RELIEF ASSOCIATION.



   (A)   There is hereby continued in the city a firefighter’s relief
association, whose function is to manage service pension benefits for
paid-on-call firefighters, which are authorized under state statutes, and to
provide other services to paid-on-call firefighters of the city’s Fire
Department as deemed appropriate by members of the association.



   (B)   Any proposed change to the association’s bylaws or articles
of incorporation which will affect the benefits paid from the association’s
special fund shall not be effective until ratified by the City Council.



§ 35.06  EMERGENCY OPERATIONS.



   The Fire Department shall utilize the national incident command system
to effectively and safely conduct emergency incident operations. The first
arriving fire officer shall be in command of Fire Department response
functions at the scene of any emergency incident until command is transferred
to another officer. The Fire Department commander on the scene of any
emergency incident shall coordinate with other emergency response agencies to
ensure safe and efficient operations.



§ 35.07  AUTHORITY AT EMERGENCY SCENES.



   (A)   The Fire Chief or any fire officer or firefighter in charge at
the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or
property shall have the authority to direct such operations as may be
necessary to limit or mitigate the threat of injury to persons, or damage to
property or the environment, extinguish or control any fire, perform any
rescue operation, investigate the existence of suspected or reported fires,
gas leaks or other hazardous conditions or situations, or taking any other
action necessary in the reasonable performance of duty. In the exercise of
such power, the Fire Chief or any other fire officer or firefighter is
authorized to prohibit any person, vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or thing from
approaching the scene and is authorized to remove or cause to be removed,
towed, or kept away from the scene any person, vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or
thing which may impede or interfere with the operations of the Fire
Department. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an offense
punishable as a misdemeanor.



   (B)   The Fire Chief or any fire officer or firefighter in charge at
the scene of an emergency is authorized to place ropes, guards, barricades,
or other obstructions across any street, highway, alley, place, or private
property in the vicinity of such operation so as to prevent accidents or
interference with the lawful efforts of the Fire Department to manage and/or
control the situation.



Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.08  INVESTIGATION OF EMERGENCY INCIDENTS.



   The Fire Chief shall investigate or cause to be investigated the cause,
origin, and circumstances of each and every fire occurring within the city
pursuant to M.S. Ch. 299F, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 35.09  MUTUAL AID.



   The Fire Chief or his or her designee is authorized to respond to
requests for mutual aid assistance in the form of Fire Department resources
from any political subdivision within the state, agencies of the state, and
federal agencies, for assistance within the state, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 12,
as it may be amended from time to time, provided the emergency response needs
of the city are not compromised and the City Administrator or his or her
respective designee is notified when city Fire Department personnel and/or
resources shall be committed to the mutual aid response in excess of 12 hours.



§ 35.10  SERVICE FEES.



   (A)   Establishment. The City Council may, by ordinance, set forth
fees for fire protection service and/or emergency response, which are not
otherwise specified by contract. Such fees may be established at a fixed rate
for certain specific types of incidents or for actual costs incurred by the
Fire Department in responding to the incident. The Fire Chief shall make a
recommendation annually to the City Administrator for approval by the Council
regarding the fee to be charged for each service noted in this section.



   (B)   False alarms. Fees for response to false fire alarms may be
charged to the property owner or tenant for any incident per Department
policy.



   (C)   Impoundment of vehicles and property. The Fire Chief or his or
her designate is authorized to impound vehicles or property related to a fire
and/or hazardous materials release to be held in a secure location until such
time as payment is received for Fire Department response to the incident
pursuant to this division (C) and/or the vehicle or property may be
transported without further risk of injury to the public or damage to the
environment.



§ 35.11  PREMISES IDENTIFICATION.



   Section 505 of the 2015 Minnesota State Fire Code is hereby amended by
adding the following language:



   (1)   General.



      a.   Approved numbers or addresses in compliance with the
requirements of the city code shall be placed on all new and existing
buildings in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible from the
street or road fronting the property. Said numbers shall contrast with their
background. Buildings, which have a range of addresses for one building,
shall display the range of numbers or addresses from lowest to highest as
required above.



      b.   Buildings with multiple tenants/addressees shall place
approved numbers or addresses on front and rear doors identifying each
address in the manner required in division (1)a. of this section.



      c.   Buildings that are remote/auxiliary from the main
building shall display approved numbers or addresses on each building in the
manner required in division (1)a. of this section and in such a manner as to
be visible from either direction of travel on the road or street fronting the
property.



      d.   If any building is too remote from the fronting road or
street to make it unreasonable to be seen from the fronting road or street, a
sign or post with visible and legible approved numbers or addresses, or range
of numbers or addresses from lowest to highest, shall be placed at the
driveway entrance in such a manner that the numbers or addresses are visible
from either direction of travel on said road or street.



      e.   Approved numbers of addresses shall be placed on all
construction sites in such a position as to be plainly visible and legible
from the street or road fronting the property.



CLEANUP OF CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITES AND CHEMICAL DUMP SITES



§ 35.25  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this subchapter is to
reduce public exposure to health risks where law enforcement officers have
determined that hazardous chemicals or residue from a suspected clandestine
drug lab site or associated dump site may exist. Professional reports, based
on assessments, testing, and investigations, show that chemicals used in the
production of illicit drugs can condense, penetrate, and contaminate
surfaces, furnishings, and equipment of surrounding structures. The City
Council finds that such sites, and the personal property within such sites,
may contain suspected chemicals and residues that place people, particularly
children or adults of child bearing age, at risk when exposed through
inhabiting or visiting the site or using or being exposed to contaminated
personal property.



   (B)   Interpretation and application. In the interpretation and
application of this subchapter, the provisions herein shall be construed to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare. Where the conditions imposed
by any provision of this subchapter are either more or less restrictive to
the public than comparable provisions imposed by any other law, ordinance,
statute, or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more
restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements on the public
shall prevail. Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section
or subpart of this subchapter to be invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the
provision declared invalid.



§ 35.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHEMICAL DUMP SITE. Any place or area where chemicals or other waste
materials used in a clandestine drug lab operation have been located.



   CHILD. Any person less than 18 years of age.



   CITY. The City of Monticello.



   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB OPERATION. The unlawful manufacture or attempt to
manufacture a controlled substance.



   CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE. Any place or area where law enforcement has
determined that conditions associated with an unlawful clandestine drug lab
operation exist. A CLANDESTINE DRUG LAB SITE may include dwellings, accessory
buildings, structures, or units, a chemical dump site, a vehicle, boat,
trailer, or other appliance or any other area or location.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug, substance, or immediate precursor in
M.S. § 152.02 Schedules I through V, as they may be amended from time to
time, together with any amendments or modifications thereto. The term shall
not include distilled spirits, wine, malt beverages, intoxicating liquors, or
tobacco.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste generated from a clandestine drug lab operation.



   MANUFACTURE, IN PLACES OTHER THAN A PHARMACY. Includes the production,
cultivation, quality control, and standardization, by mechanical, physical,
chemical, or pharmaceutical means, and the packing, repacking, tableting,
encapsulating, labeling, relabeling, or filling of drugs.



   OWNER. Any person(s), firm(s), corporation(s), or other entity who or
which owns, in whole or in part, the land, building, structure, vehicle,
boat, trailer or other location associated with a clandestine drug lab site
or chemical dump site.



§ 35.27  DECLARATION OF SITE AND CONTENTS AS A PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE.



   All dwellings, accessory structures, buildings, vehicles, boats,
trailers, personal property, adjacent property, or other locations,
associated with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site are
potentially unsafe due to health hazards and are hereby declared to be a
public health nuisance.



§ 35.28  LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTION.



   (A)   If law enforcement authorities determine the existence of a
clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site, the site, and all personal
property herein, shall be declared a public health nuisance.



   (B)   Law enforcement authorities who identify conditions associated
with a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site which may place
neighbors, the visiting public, or present and future occupants of the site
at risk for exposure to harmful contaminants and other associated conditions
are authorized to take the following action:



      (1)   Promptly notify the City Building Official, child
protection, public health authorities, and the appropriate enforcement
division of the Drug Enforcement Administration of the U.S. Justice
Department of the location of the site, and the owner if known, of the
conditions found;



      (2)   Treat, store, transport, or dispose of all hazardous
waste found at the site in a manner consistent with State Department of
Health, State Pollution Control, and County Health Department Standard
Operating Guidelines;



      (3)   Issue a temporary declaration of public health nuisance
for the affected site and post a copy of the declaration on all doorway
entrances to the site or, in the case of bare land, post the declaration in
several conspicuous places on the property. This temporary declaration of
public health nuisance issued by law enforcement shall expire after the City
Building Official inspects the site and determines the appropriateness of
issuing a permanent declaration of public health nuisance;



      (4)   Notify all persons occupying the site that a temporary
declaration of public health nuisance has been issued;



      (5)   Require all persons occupying the site to immediately
vacate the site, remove all pets from the site, and not return without
written authorization from the City Building Official;



      (6)   Notify all occupants vacating the site that all personal
property at the site may be contaminated with dangerous chemical residue; and



      (7)   Secure each doorway entrance to the site to reasonably
prohibit people from entering the site without authorization after all
occupants of the site have vacated.



   (C)   The obligation to promptly notify the persons and
organizations mentioned above may be delayed to accomplish appropriate law
enforcement objectives, but only to the extent that public health and child
protection responsibilities are not unnecessarily compromised.



§ 35.29  SEIZURE OF PROPERTY.



   When the clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site is inside a
vehicle, boat, trailer, or other form of moveable personal property, law
enforcement authorities shall immediately seize it and not allow it to be
transported except to a more secure location. In such circumstances, all
other requirements of this subchapter shall be followed as closely as
possible given the specific type of property in which the site is discovered.



§ 35.30  ACTION BY CITY BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (A)   Inspection and declaration of nuisance. Within 48 hours of
notification that law enforcement authorities have determined the existence
of a clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site, the City Building
Official shall inspect the site to determine the appropriate scope of a
permanent declaration of public health nuisance. Based on the results of the
inspection, the City Building Official or his or her designated
representative may then promptly issue a permanent declaration of public
health nuisance and a do not enter-unsafe to occupy order for the affected
site to replace the temporary declaration issued and posted by law
enforcement. A copy of the permanent declaration and order shall be posted on
all doorway entrances to the site or, in the case of bare land, shall be
posted in several conspicuous places on the property.



   (B)   Abatement order.



      (1)   After the permanent declaration of public health
nuisance has been issued and posted, the City Building Official shall send
written notice to the site owner ordering abatement of the public health
nuisance.



      (2)   The abatement order shall include the following
information:



         (a)   A copy of the declaration of public health
nuisance and do not enter-unsafe to occupy order;



         (b)   Information about the potentially hazardous
condition of the site;



         (c)   Notification of suspension of the site’s rental
license if applicable;



         (d)   A summary of the site owner’s and occupant’s
responsibilities under this subchapter; and



         (e)   Information that may help the owner locate
appropriate services necessary to abate the public health nuisance.



   (C)   Notice to concerned parties. The Building Official or
appropriate city staff shall also mail a copy of the permanent declaration of
public health nuisance, a copy of this subchapter, and a notification of the
suspension of the site’s rental licensees, if applicable, to the following,
but not limited to, concerned parties at their last known address:



      (1)   Occupants or residents of the site if the identities of
such persons are known;



      (2)   Neighbors in proximity to the site who may be reasonably
affected by the conditions found;



      (3)   The City Administrator;



      (4)    The Community Development Director;



      (5)   The City Police Department;



      (6)   The appropriate enforcement division of the Drug
Enforcement Administration of the U.S. Justice Department;



      (7)   The city Fire Department; and



      (8)   Other city, state, and local authorities, such as the
City Water Department, the State Pollution Control Agency, the State
Department of Health, and the Department of Natural Resources which are known
to have public and protection responsibilities that are applicable to the
situation.



   (D)   Modification or removal of declaration. The City Building
Official is authorized to modify or remove the declaration of public health
nuisance after the Building Official receives documentation from a city
approved environmental hazard testing and cleaning firm that holds the
necessary federal and state licenses and meets all applicable regulations for
hazardous materials site remediation, packaging, and shipping stating that
the suspected health and safety risks, including those to neighbors and
potential dwelling occupants, either do not exist or have been sufficiently
abated or corrected to justify amendment or removal of the declaration.



§ 35.31  SITE OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY TO ACT.



   (A)   Within ten business days of the date the abatement order is
mailed to the owner of the site, the owner shall accomplish the following:



      (1)   Provide the City Building Official with written
notification:



         (a)   The owner has confirmed that all persons and their
pets have vacated the site;



         (b)   Of the name(s) of all children who the owner
believes were residing at the site during the time period the clandestine
drug lab or chemical dump site is suspected to have been at the site; and



         (c)   The site will remain vacated and secured until the
public health nuisance is completely abated as required by this subchapter.



      (2)   Contract with one or more city approved environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firms to conduct the following work in accordance
with the most current state department of health guidelines:



         (a)   A detailed on-site assessment of the extent of
contamination at the site and the contamination of the personal property
therein;



         (b)   Soil testing of the site and testing of all
property and soil in proximity to the site which the environmental hazard
testing and cleaning firm determines may have been affected by the conditions
found at the site;



         (c)   A complete clean-up of the site (including, but
not limited to, the clean up or removal of plumbing, ventilation systems,
fixtures, and contaminated soil) or a demolition of the site and a complete
clean-up of the demolished site;



         (d)   A complete clean up, or disposal at an approved
dump site, of all personal property in the site;



         (e)   A complete clean-up of all property and soil in
proximity to the site which is found to have been affected by the conditions
found at the site; and



         (f)   Remediation testing and follow-up testing,
including, but not limited to, testing of the ventilation system and
plumbing, to determine that all health risks are sufficiently reduced,
according to State Department of Health guidelines, to allow safe human
occupancy and use of the site and use of the personal property therein and of
all property and soil in proximity to the site.



      (3)   Provide the City Building Official with the identity of
the testing and cleaning firm with which the owner has contracted for
abatement of the public health nuisance as required above; and



      (4)   Sign an agreement with the City Building Official
establishing a clean-up schedule. The schedule shall establish reasonable
deadlines for completing all actions required by this subchapter for
abatement of the public health nuisance. In determining appropriate
deadlines, the City Building Official shall consider practical limitations
and the availability of contractors in approving the schedule for clean-up.



   (B)   The site owner must meet all deadlines established on the
clean-up schedule. Also, pursuant to the deadlines established by the
clean-up schedule, the site owner is required to provide the City Building
Official with written documentation of the clean-up process, including a
signed statement from a city approved environmental hazard testing and
cleaning firm that the site, all personal property therein and all property
and soil in proximity to the site, is safe for human occupancy and use and
that the clean-up was conducted in accordance with the most current State
Department of Health guidelines.



§ 35.32  SITE OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS.



   (A)   The site owner shall be responsible for all costs, including
those of the city, of dealing with and abating the public health nuisance,
including contractor’s fees and the city’s costs for services performed
in association with the clandestine drug lab site or chemical dump site
clean-up.



   (B)   The city’s costs may also include, but shall not be limited
to:



      (1)   Posting of the site;



      (2)   Notification of affected parties;



      (3)   Securing the site, providing limited access to the site,
and prosecution of unauthorized persons found at the site;



      (4)   Expenses related to the recovery of costs, including the
assessment process;



      (5)   Laboratory fees;



      (6)   Clean up services;



      (7)   Administrative fees;



      (8)   Legal fees; and



      (9)   Other associated costs.



§ 35.33  CITY ACTION AND RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   (A)   If the building owner fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this subchapter, the City Building Official is authorized to
take all reasonable actions necessary to abate the public health nuisance
including, but not limited to, contracting with a city approved environmental
hazard testing and cleaning firm that holds the necessary federal and state
licenses and meets all applicable regulations for hazardous materials site
remediation, packaging, and shipping in order conduct the work outlined in §
35.30(B). The Building Official is also authorized to provide a copy of the
declaration of public health nuisance to the lien and/or mortgage holders of
the affected site to help assure that persons with interest in the site have
access to information about the declaration of public health nuisance.



   (B)   If the costs to clean the site or to clean the personal
property at the site are prohibitively high in relation to the value of the
site or the personal property, the city is authorized to remove or demolish
the site, structure, or building and/or dispose of the personal property
therein. These actions shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of
M.S. Ch. 463, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   If the city abates the public health nuisance, in addition to
any other legal remedy, the city shall be entitled to recover all of its out
of pocket costs plus an additional 25% of such costs for administrative and
legal expense. The city may recover costs by civil action against the owner
of the site or by assessing such costs as a special charge against the site
as taxes and special assessments are certified and collected pursuant to M.S.
§ 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, or according to the
provisions of M.S. Ch. 463, as it may be amended from time to time.



§ 35.34  RECOVERY OF COSTS FROM PERSONS CAUSING DAMAGE.



   No provisions of this subchapter are intended to limit the site
owner’s, resident’s, or the city’s right to recover costs incurred
under this subchapter from either the persons contributing to the public
health nuisance, such as the operators of the clandestine drug lab, and/or
from other lawful sources.



§ 35.35  SITE OWNER AND ADDRESS.



   When the site is real property and the owner or the address of the
owner of the site is unknown, the owner and the owner’s address is deemed
to be that of the property’s taxpayer’s name and address as that
information is maintained by the County Auditor’s office. When the site is
a vehicle, boat, or trailer and the owner or the address of the owner of the
site is unknown, the owner and the owner’s address is deemed to be that of
the person on file as the owner on the current or most recent title to the
vehicle, boat, or trailer.



§ 35.36  SUSPENSION OF RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE.



   Upon issuance of a permanent declaration of public health nuisance, any
residential rental license issued by the city for the site, or any part
thereof, is hereby declared to be immediately suspended pending full
compliance with this subchapter.



§ 35.37  UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF POSTINGS.



   It is unlawful for any person, except authorized city personnel, to
remove a temporary or permanent declaration of public health nuisance and/or
do not enter-unsafe to occupy order from a chemical dump site or a
clandestine drug lab site.



Penalty, see § 35.99



§ 35.38  ENTRY INTO OR ONTO SITE.



   While a declaration of public health nuisance for an affected site is
in effect and has been posted at the site, no persons are permitted to be
inside the site, or on the site property without prior written consent of the
City Building Official or as otherwise authorized by this subchapter. To
confirm compliance with this subchapter and to execute their duties under
this subchapter, law enforcement officers, the City Building Official, and
any persons designated by the Building Official may enter onto the site
property or enter into the site at any time while a declaration of public
health nuisance is in effect for the site.



§ 35.39  REMOVAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FROM THE SITE.



   (A)   While a declaration of public health nuisance for an affected
site is in effect and has been posted at the site, no personal property may
be removed from the site without prior written consent from the City Building
Official.



   (B)   Consent to remove personal property shall only be granted at
the reasonable discretion of the Building Official, and only in cases of
hardship after:



      (1)   A city approved environmental hazard testing and
cleaning firm has advised the city, in writing, that the item(s) of personal
property can be sufficiently cleaned to remove all harmful contamination; and



      (2)   The owner of the personal property agrees in writing:



         (a)   The owner is aware of the danger of using the
contaminated property;



         (b)   The owner will thoroughly clean the property to
remove all contamination before the property is used; and



         (c)   The owner releases and agrees to indemnify the
city, its staff, and the City Council from all liability to the owner and/or
third persons for injuries or damages caused, or alleged to have been caused,
by the contaminated property.



PUBLIC SAFETY 800 MHZ RADIO BUILDING AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM



§ 35.50  GENERAL.



   Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, change
the use of, or provide an addition of more that 20% to, any building or
structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done which fails to
support adequate radio coverage for the Minnesota Regional Radio
Communications System, including, but not limited to, firefighters and police
officers. This section shall not apply to: buildings of less than 8,500
square feet; or any building constructed of wood frame; provided none of the
aforementioned buildings make use of any metal construction or any below
grade levels or parking areas. Any part of any R-3 occupancy building,
including below grade levels and parking areas, are exempt from the
requirements of this section. For the purposes of this section, parking
structures and stairwells are included in the definition of BUILDING and
stair shafts and elevators are included in the definition of ALL PARTS OF THE
BUILDING. For purposes of this section, ADEQUATE RADIO COVERAGE shall be an
average received field strength of no less than -93 dBm, or 1% BER, measured
at 30 to 36 inches above the floor over 90% of the area of each floor and
other critical areas determined by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s
designee such as fire command centers, stairwells, elevators, high hazard
areas, basements, and parking areas. Without an in-building radio system,
only the received signal level standard must be achieved as the talk out path
is equivalent to the talk in path in this regional radio system.



§ 35.51  AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS ALLOWED.



   Buildings and structures which cannot support the required level of
radio coverage shall be equipped with either a radiating cable system or an
internal multiple antenna system with or without FCC type accepted
bi-directional 800 MHZ amplification as needed. If amplification is used in
the system, all required FCC authorizations must be obtained prior to the use
of the system. If any part of the installed system or systems contains an
electrically powered component, the system shall be capable of operating on
an independent battery and/or generator system for a period of at least 12
hours without external power input. The battery system shall automatically
charge in the presence of an external power input.



§ 35.52  TESTING PROCEDURES; ACCEPTANCE TEST PROCEDURE.



   With or without an in-building radio system, it will be the building
owner’s responsibility to have the regional radio system performance tested
to ensure that two-way coverage on each floor of the building is a minimum of
90% of the total floor area and the critical areas designated.



   (A)   Talk-in from the regional radio system coverage testing.



      (1)   The talk-in coverage testing process shall be the same
for buildings with and without in- building amplification systems.



      (2)   During test measuring, the center of the test equipment
receive antenna shall be between 30 and 36 inches above the floor.



      (3)   On each floor of a building to be tested, the floor
space, except for designated critical areas, shall be divided into square or
rectangular areas of approximately the same size and shape. Each floor shall
have at least ten grid areas; however, the maximum size of grid areas shall
not exceed 2,500 square feet. In buildings with support columns laid out in a
grid, the corners of the each grid may be arranged at the columns for ease in
identifying grid comers while testing is in progress. In buildings, such as a
warehouse, with large open areas, tests shall be conducted near the center of
each grid although the exact center may not be easily accessible due to the
location of large machinery, storage racks, and the like. In buildings with
divided office spaces, with or without floor to ceiling partitions, tests
shall be conducted in an office at or near the center of a grid. In buildings
with a large open area and an attached two-story, split level office or other
area, the lower level of the two-story, split level attachment shall be
considered as an extension of the large open area.



      (4)   In multi-story buildings and parking ramps, testing
shall begin at the lowest level, including any subgrade level(s), and
continue up one floor at a time. In-building amplification may only be
required on the lowest level or levels of a multi-story building or parking
ramp.



      (5)   Average radio signal field strength shall be measured
and recorded in each grid, and in each designated critical area defined
above. Average field strength may be obtained through use of an instantaneous
measuring instrument and a computer that samples the actual field strength at
very short time intervals and averages the sample values. As an alternative,
a field strength measuring instrument with an analog or digital readout of
average field strength may also be used. Measurements shall be made while the
measuring instrument is moved over a distance of four to ten feet. If the
average field strength varies over the measurement path, the lowest (most
negative) value shall be recorded. The test instrumentation used shall have
been calibrated within the six-month period prior to the testing.



      (6)   The percentage of area passed shall be calculated as 100
times the result of dividing the number of grids and critical areas that are
at least at -93 dBm or 1% BER by the total number of grids and critical areas
tested.



      (7)   The donor antenna in an in-building amplification system
may receive up to 87 800 MHZ radio frequencies of approximately equal field
strength from the regional system, plus some others of approximately equal
field strength from other radio systems. At any time, the donor antenna may
be receiving at least 60 radio frequencies of approximately equal level in
the pass band ranges. For that reason, it shall be assumed that the output
level of talk-in amplifiers will be at + 3.2 dBm per channel maximum.
Therefore, grid and critical areas tests shall be conducted while the headend
amplifier is disconnected and a signal of + 3.2 dBm is inserted into the
connector downstream from the headend amplifier.



      (8)   Any in-building talk-in amplification system shall have
pass band filters before the input to the first (headend) amplifier that
shall pass 806 to 817 MHZ and 821 to 824 MHZ only. In the future, within six
months after notification by the Fire Chief or his designee, the pass band
filter frequency range shall be changed in accordance with instructions, or
an additional pass band filter for 700 MHZ band frequencies shall be added.
When the donor antenna is installed, the average signal level received on the
Hennepin East site control channel shall be measured at the antenna
connector. A signal at that average received signal level shall be inserted
into the cable to the headend amplifier and filter while the output level of
the headend amplifier is measured, and the output level of the amplifier
shall be set at + 29 + 1 dBm.



      (9)   Alternative in-building amplification systems that do
not involve broadband pass band filters will be accepted provided that
similar testing can be demonstrated.



   (B)   Talk-out to the regional radio system testing.



      (1)   With an in-building amplification system, the talk-out
(to the regional 800 MHZ radio system) shall be measured at the same grid and
critical area locations as the talk-in measurements were made. The
measurements shall be made using a three-watt portable radio with a
well-charged battery to transmit into the in-building radio system while
field strength is measured out of the connector that is normally attached to
the donor antenna. To pass, the field strength at the donor antenna shall be
the measured value at the connector plus the donor antenna gain and minus a
free space loss factor. The free space loss factor shall be -93 dB for a
distance of one mile to the nearest Hennepin East base radio location,
adjusted by 6 dB each time the distance is halved or doubled. The acceptable
range for passing shall be between -65 and -95 dBm.



      (2)   (a)   Gain values of all amplifiers shall be measured
and the test measurement results shall be kept on file with the building
owner so that the measurements can be verified each year during the annual
tests.



         (b)   In the event that the measurement results become
lost, the building owner will be required to rerun the acceptance test to
reestablish the gain values.



§ 35.53  ANNUAL TESTS.



   When an in-building radio system is required, the building owner shall
test all active components of the system, including, but not limited to,
amplifiers, power supplies, and backup batteries, a minimum of once every 12
months. Amplifiers shall be tested to ensure that the gain is the same as it
was upon initial installation and acceptance. Backup batteries and power
supplies shall be tested under load for a period of one hour to verify that
they will properly operate during an actual power outage. If within the
one-hour test period, in the opinion of the testing technician, the battery
exhibits symptoms of failure, the test shall be extended for additional
one-hour periods until the testing technician confirms the integrity of the
battery. All other active components shall be checked to determine that they
are operating within the manufacturer’s specifications for the intended
purpose.



§ 35.54  FIVE-YEAR TESTS.



   In addition to the annual test, the building owner shall perform a
radio coverage test a minimum of once every five years to ensure that the
radio system continues to meet the requirements of the original acceptance
test. A radio test shall also be performed whenever there is a change in or
to the building that may have an impact on coverage. Examples of the types of
changes that may change radio coverage are interior remodeling that adds
and/or changes partitions, removal of windows, and the addition of metalized
treatment to window surfaces. The procedure described in section shall be
used for these tests.



§ 35.55  QUALIFICATIONS OF TESTING PERSONNEL.



   (A)   All tests shall be conducted, documented, and signed by
qualified and competent personnel that includes: persons in possession of a
current FCC license; or a current technician certification issued by the
Associated Public-Safety Communications Officials International (APCO) or the
Personal Communications Industry Association (PCIA); or a qualified radio
engineer licensed as a registered professional engineer by the State of
Minnesota. Testing personnel shall have test equipment that is appropriate
for the testing procedure, and that test equipment shall have been calibrated
within six months prior to the testing.



   (B)   All test records shall be retained on the inspected premises
by the building owner and a copy shall be submitted to Fire Department
officials.



§ 35.56  FIELD TESTING.



   Fire and police personnel, after providing reasonable notice to the
owner or the owner’s representative, shall have the right to enter onto the
property to conduct testing to be certain that the required level of radio
coverage is present.



§ 35.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of
§§ 35.01 through 35.11 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 35.25
through 35.39 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished in accordance with § 10.99. Each act of violation and every day
upon which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense. In addition to the above, the city may seek civil penalties and
enforcement.



CHAPTER 36:  FEE SCHEDULE



Section



   36.01   Fee schedule



§ 36.01  FEE SCHEDULE.



   Fee schedule rates supersede amounts shown in city ordinances or
policies which are dated prior to the fee schedule.

 



ANIMAL CONTROL


Boarding fee
 

$16/per day + tax



Boarding access fee
 

$250 per entity



Dog license
 

$20 - 2 years




$10 - 1 year




   Late fee

 

$5




   Replacement tag

 

$2 + tax



Disposal fee
 

$190 (euthanized animal)



 
 

$40 (adopted animal)



 
 

Licensed

 

Unlicensed

 


Fine: Running at large
 

$50

 

$75




   If impounded

 

Add boarding fee (plus tax)



Permit for keeping fowl on premises
 

$50

 





   Annual renewal for current permit

 

$25

 




Permit for keeping honeybees on premises
 

$50

 





   Annual renewal of permit

 

$25

 




CEMETERY


Cremation disinterment
 

$100



Flat marker setting with 4 in. concrete border
 

$250



Frost charge: (excavations December through March)
 

$100



Grave excavation fee:
 



   Weekday

 

$400




   Weekend

 

$450




   Infant grave excavation - weekday

 

$100




   Infant grave excavation - weekend

 

$125




   Cremation grave excavation - weekday

 

$150




   Cremation grave excavation - weekend

 

$200



Grave purchasing fee:
 

Resident

 

Non-Resident

 



   Full grave (4 ft. x 12 ft.) flush marker area

 

$1,050

 

$1,250

 



   Full grave (4 ft. x 12) raised marker area

 

$1,150

 

$1,350

 



   Infant grave (2 ft. x 6 ft.)

 

$340

 

$365

 



   Cremation grave (4 ft. x 4 ft.)

 

$575

 

$675

 


Columbarium (includes 2 interment niche covers w/ name, DOB, DOD)
 

Resident

 

Non-Resident

 



   Bottom niche row (row E) - 2 remains max.

 

$2,500

 

$2,600

 



   Middle niche rows (Rows C and D) - 2 remains max.

 

$2,700

 

$2,800

 



   Top niche row (row A) - 2 remains max.

 

$2,900

 

$3,000

 


Ossuary
 





   Co-mingle urn placement (includes inscription and urn bag)

 

$1,000




   Veteran co-mingle urn placement (includes inscription and urn bag)

 

$950




   Service emblem

 

$200



Grave staking fee for burials
 

$150



Staking for monument/marker placement
 

$60



Grave transfer fee
 

$15



Memorial plaque (bronze) stone
 

Cost + $10 + sales tax



Overtime fee (burials outside of business hours)
 

$125



Plant stand
 

$40 (includes tax)



Opening and closing of niche
 





   Weekday

 

$150




   Weekend

 

$200



Perpetual care fee:
 





   New grave sales

 

Included in grave price (Maint. not taxable - plant care taxable)




   Grave sold pre-1960

 

$100



Plant stand
 

$40 (includes tax)



COMMUNITY CENTER


Membership fees: (for new members)
 

Resident Rate

 

Regular Rate

 



Daily pass:

 


 




   Junior/senior
 

$6

 

$7



   Adult
 

$7

 

$8



Three month membership:
 
 


   Junior/senior
 

$87

 

$106



   Adult
 

$122

 

$149



   Dual senior
 

$143

 

$175



   Family
 

$215

 

$243



   Dual adult
 

$195

 

$221



 
 

Resident Rate

 

Regular Rate



Annual membership (paid in full options):
 
 


   Junior/senior
 

$237

 

$315



   Adult
 

$324

 

$419



   Dual senior
 

$391

 

$502



   Family
 

$550

 

$656



   Dual adult
 

$501

 

$606



Continuous membership (monthly payment option**):
 
 


   Junior/senior
 

$23

 

$29



   Adult
 

$35

 

$41



   Dual senior
 

$39

 

$50



   Family
 

$56

 

$61



   Dual adult
 

$51

 

$55



**Automatic withdrawal



Administrative fee for start-up of new monthly memberships (one-time fee) if
membership is not cancelled
 

$30

 

$30



Cancellation fee - applies if within 12 months of joining
 

$50

 

$50
$18/month for each child, or $36/month for family



Childcare - option with membership


All current MCC members, including charter members, will see an increase of
5% on their membership fees



Corporate memberships (quarterly rate)

 

Jr/Sr

 

Adult

 

Family




   Level 1

 

$60

 

$80

 

$130




   Level 2

 

$55

 

$73

 

$120




   Level 3

 

$52

 

$69

 

$113



 
 

Resident Rate

 

Regular Rate

 


Special passes:
 


 


 



   Group x class pass (10 uses)

 

$95

 

$116

 



   Daily pass (10 visits)

 

$66

 

$77

 


Special rates:
 


 


 



   Indoor play area

 

$4

 

$5

 



   Public skate - children 5 - 17

 

-

 

$4

 



   Public skate - adult

 

-

 

$5

 



   Public skate - family

 

-

 

$18

 



   Twilight swim rates - junior/adult

 

-

 

$4.50

 



   Group rates - junior

 

-

 

$5.50

 



   Group rates - adult

 

-

 

$6.50

 



   Shower only

 

-

 

$4

 



   Group x class drop-in

 

$13

 

$16

 



   Silver sneakers drop-in

 

-

 

$8.50

 


Swimming lessons/birthday parties
 


 


 



   Private swimming lessons

 

$30/lesson for members

 

$40/lesson for non- members

 
Additional rates available for more than 1 student or 4 lesson packages



   Swimming lessons (group)

 

$48 for members

 

$58 for non-members

 


 
 

Resident Rate

 

Regular Rate

 



   Birthday party room rental packages

 

Resident rate/child
$11 - $14
depending on package

 

Regular rate/child $12 - $15 depending on package

 


Gymnasium rental rates:
 


 


 



   Gym - prime time

 


 

$64/hour

 



   Gym - non prime time

 


 

$44/hour

 



   Full kitchen

 


 

$100/hour

 



   Energy fee

 


 

$91/hour

 



   Early set up fee

 


 

$63/hour

 



   Damage deposit

 


 

1/2 of rental fees

 


Pool rental
 


 

$105/hour

 


Hourly room rental rates (2-hour minimum required):
 

Resident

 

Regular

 

Non-Profit




   Boom island room

 

$1

 

$20

 

$16




   Bridge room (full)

 

$27

 

$32

 

$23




   N. or S. bridge room

 

$17

 

$19

 

$14




   Warehouse room - weekday

 

$31

 

$37

 

$23




   Warehouse room - weekend

 

$37

 

$45

 

$31




   Prairie room

 

$31

 

$37

 

$23




   Mississippi room:

 

Private Resident

 

Private Regular

 

Business Resident

 

Business Regular




      Half room rental

 

$58

 

$70

 

$45

 

$63




      Full room rental

 

$81

 

$97

 

$68

 

$89




      Rental event with alcohol (not weddings):

 

Resident

 

Regular

 

Organization




       (2 hour minimum - reserve within 3 months of event)

 

$160/hour

 

$174/hour

 

$147/hour




   Add chapel rental

 

$436 for 6 hours

 

$462 for 6 hours

 

Then $50 each additional hour



Hostess fee
 

$25/hour



Locker fees
 

$10 per month per locker



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - BUILDING


County Assessor fees:


Building valuation $499,999 or less
Building valuation $500,000 or more

 




$50
$150



Building inspection (non-permit related)
 

$60/hour
$15 minimum charge for 15 minutes or less



Building permit fees
 

106% of 1997 state recommended schedule



Building permit surcharge
 

Use state-mandated fee



Contractor license check fee
 

$5



Building permit/records - duplicate
 

$60/hour
$15 minimum charge for 15 minutes or less



Blight processing fee
 

$60 (per parcel)



Demolition permit
 

106% of 1997 state recommended schedule




   Permit is issued under a building permit (follow same procedures as
issuing a building permit). Prior to demolition permit issuance verify with
Public Works. Contractor must arrange disconnection: 1) sanitary sewer; 2)
city water and retrieve water meter; and 3) approve routing for trucks and
heavy equipment, (if applicable). Excavation permit may also be required.



Fire alarm/fire sprinkler system
 

106% of 1997 state recommended schedule



Master plan review
 

25% of building permit fee



Mechanical permits:


Residential
Commercial

 




$50 base + $9/fixture + state surcharge
1.5% of valuation + state surcharge



Mobile home permit
 

$180



Moving buildings
 

$150 + expense + demolition permit



Plan review
 

65% of building permit fee




Plumbing permits:

 




   Residential
 
$50 base + $9/fixture (“Fixture” includes such things as traps, toilets,
floor drains, sinks, showers)


   Commercial
 
1.5% of valuation + state surcharge


Rental housing license fee
 

$45/per building + $15 for each dwelling unit within the building



Rental housing license application/late fee
 

Double the standard license fee



Rental housing license transfer fee
 

$35



Residential building escrow
 

$2,000 (Held for completion of as-built survey, boulevard trees, turf
establishment. Secures street sweeping, lot erosion control, and any damage
to public improvements if all items not complete/satisfied at certificate of
occupancy)



Sign permits: permanent
 

$50 for first $1,000 of value (minimum fee $50)
$10 each additional $1,000 of value



Sign permits: temporary
 

$50



State surcharge on building permits:
 





   Valuation of structure

 

Addition or alteration surcharge computation




$1,000,000 or less

 

.0005 x valuation




$1,000,000 to $2,000,000

 

$500 + .0004 x (value - $ 1,000,000)




$2,000,000 to $3,000,000

 

$900 + .0003 x (value - $2,000,000)




$3,000,000 to $4,000,000

 

$1,200 + .0002 x (value - $3,000,000)




$4,000,000 to $5,000,000

 

$1,400 + .0001 x (value - $4,000,000)




Greater than $5,000,000

 

$1,500 + .00005 x (value - $5,000,000)



Surveys
 

$15



Utility locate fee:


Residential
Commercial/industrial

 




$50
$65



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



   Business subsidy application

 

$200




   GMEF loan application

 

$500 minimum or 1.5% of loan amount, whichever is greater




   SCDP loan application

 

$500 minimum or 1.5% of loan amount, whichever is greater




   TIF application

 

$10,000 escrow deposit



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - PLANNING/ZONING


Administrative home occupation permit
 

$50



Community garden plot
 

$30



Comprehensive plan amendment
 

$200 + escrow (per chart)



Conditional use permit
 

$200 + escrow (per chart)



Escrow chart - land use application plan review


 

Commercial

 

Residential




0 - 3 acres

 

$2,000

 

1 unit

 

$500 single- family




4 - 10 acres

 

$6,000

 

2+ units

 

$1,000 base + $100 per unit (up to $10,000)




11+ acres

 

$8,000



*Reconciled to actual costs for staff/consulting time after decision


Escrow chart - development and subdivision project
 
Planning review and administration
 

2% of estimated public improvement cost or $2,000 minimum, whichever is
greater



Review and inspection
 
Legal review and administration
 

2% of estimated public improvement cost or $2,000 minimum, whichever is
greater



City review and administration
 

2% of estimated public improvement cost or $2,000 minimum, whichever is
greater



Engineering review and inspection
 

3% of estimated public improvement cost or $2,000 minimum, whichever is
greater



Grading streets and utilities
 

4% of estimated public improvement cost or $2,000 minimum, whichever is
greater



Iron monuments
 

$300/lot



Interim use permit
 

$200 + escrow (per chart)



Labor (for community development/projects):


Construction inspector
Engineer
Planner

 







$111/hour (maximum)
$166/hour (maximum)
$170/hour



Landscaping security
 

Letter of credit or cash based on statement of value of landscaping x 125%



Park dedication (residential)
 

An amount of land equal to 11% of the total gross land area of the plat shall
be presumptively defined as “reasonably commensurate”. In the event that
the subdivider objects to the 11% standard, the city shall, at the
developer’s request and expense, conduct a specific dedication study of the
park system and the demand placed on the system by the proposed plat.




Cash-in-lieu: 11% of fair market value of the raw land to be platted at the
time of final plat. The city may require an appraisal to determine market
value of subject land being platted.



Parking fund (CCD District)
 

$4,500 per stall



Plat subdivisions:


Preliminary plat
Final plat
Sketch plat

 




$300 + escrow (per chart)
$50 + escrow (per chart)
$50 + $1,000 escrow



Planned Unit Developments (PUDs):


Concept
Development
Final
Adjustment

 




$200 + $2,000 escrow
$200 + escrow (per chart)
$50 + escrow (per chart)
$50 + $1,000 escrow




Public ROW or easement vacation
 

$200 + escrow (per chart)



Rezoning request
 

$200 + escrow (per chart)



Simple subdivision/administrative lot combination/lot line adjustment
 

$200 + escrow (per chart)



Wetland delineation review
 

$50 application fee/$500 escrow



Special home occupation permits
 

$200 + escrow (per chart)



Special Planning Commission meeting
 

$350



Temporary use permit (waived for parades only)
 

$50



Variance:
 





   Single-family



Application fee
Deposit

 




$200
$500



All other applications


Application fee
Deposit

 




$200
$1,000



NOTE: When multiple land use applications are run concurrently, only one
application fee and escrow deposit shall be required per meeting cycle, until
escrow is depleted. New escrow required per escrow chart once depleted.


ENGINEERING


Driveway permit
 

$35



GPS locate fee (new subdivisions)
 

$65/unit



Grading permit:
 





   Existing single-family residential

 

$75 per permit + $1,500/acre restoration surety bond




   New single-family residential development

 

No drainage calculation review required:
$150 per permit plus restoration surety bond of $3,000/per acre;
$3,000 minimum escrow




   Multi-dwelling, commercial and industrial properties

 

Drainage calculation review required:
$350 per permit plus restoration surety bond of $3,000/first acre;
$1,500 each additional acre



Erosion and sediment control inspection escrow
 

$300 x weeks of construction - sites disturbing 1 acre or more w/NPDES
construction stormwater permit



Land reclamation/mining permit (requires subdivision development agreement or
CUP)
 

Fee determined by City Council resolution + 100% of land restoration costs as
determined by City Engineer



Public improvement security
 

Letter of credit or cash based on statement of construction cost of
improvements x 125%



Right-of-way permits
 





   Drops - no drawing required unless origination occurs more than 10 feet
from property to be served:




      Fee w/out drawings

 

$30/25 addresses (maximum)




      Fee with drawings

 

$30/5 addresses with drawings (maximum)




      Permit extension fee

 

$20




   Pavement hole fee

 

$55




   Trunk line fee

 





      Base fee (first 100 feet)

 

$45




      Trenching (over 100 feet)

 

$0.10/lineal foot




      Boring (over 100 feet)

 

$0.05/lineal foot $45




   Obstruction fee

 

$45




   Small cell wireless fee

 

$45




   Collocation fees

 





      Escrow - document review

 

$1,500




      Wireless support structure rent

 

$150/year




      Wireless support structure maintenance

 

$25/year




      *Fee to cover actual electricity costs needed to operate the
small wireless facility, unless purchased directly from utility.



FIRE DEPARTMENT


Apparatus
 
   Rate per Hour



   Engine (up to 4 personnel)

 

$275




   Ladder/aerial (up to 4 personnel)

 

$275




   Water tender (up to 2 personnel)

 

$200




   Command vehicle/utility truck/grass truck (up to 2 personnel)

 

$85




   ATV/UTV with water tank (up to 2 personnel)

 

$50



Controlled/prescribed burns
 



   Building

 

$2,500




   Prairie or wildland, less than 20 acres

 

$750/hour




   Prairie or wildland, 20 acres or more

 

$1,000/hour



County-wide response teams
 





   Special response unit

 

$500




   Fire investigation team

 

$300



Emergency response - incident
 





   Non-resident

 

$500 plus reimbursable expenses at cost



Extra personnel
 

$15/hour



False alarm policy*


- first time
- second time
- third time or more



* Per calendar year

 




No charge
$250
$350






Fire lock box fee
 

Cost + 10% + sales tax



Home fire safety inspections (i.e., daycare/foster care)
 

$50



LICENSES/PERMITS


Burning permit (to cover expenses, if PW/Fire Dept. are called to burn site)
 

$250 deposit



Cigarette license
 

Tobacco licenses are issued by Wright County



Gambling license
 

Licensed through the state; requires Council approval



Liquor administrative fines:


First violation



Second violation, within 2 years



Third violation, within 2 years

 




$500



$1,000



$2,000 (no mandatory revocation of license)



Liquor licenses:
 





   1-day consumption and display

 

$25




   3.2 beer, on-sale

 

$275/year




   3.2 beer, off-sale

 

$100/per year




   Brew pub, off-sale

 

$200/per year




   Brewer taproom

 

$500/per year




      Taproom, Sunday sales

 

$0




   Liquor, on-sale

 

$3,750/per year




   On-sale liquor, Sunday sales

 

$200 (statutory limit)




   Liquor, setups

 

$250/year




   Liquor, club (veteran’s org):

 





Membership

 





200 or less

 

$300 (statutory limit)




201 - 500

 

$500 (statutory limit)




501 - 1,000

 

$650 (statutory limit)




1,001 - 2,000

 

$800 (statutory limit)




2,001 - 4,000

 

$1,000 (statutory limit)




Over 4,000

 

$2,000 (statutory limit)




   Microdistillery

 

$500/per year




   Temporary on-sale (beer)

 

$10/day




   Wine, on-sale

 

$275/per year




   Wine/strong beer comb. on-sale

 

$1,200/per year




   Wine/3.2 beer comb. on-sale

 

$500/per year



Mobile food unit
 





   Temporary permit

 

$10




   Annual permit

 

$50



Pawn shop
 





   Annual license, initial

 

$50




   Annual renewal of current license

 

$25/year




   Transaction fee

 

$1 per transaction



Peddler/solicitor permit:
 




    Peddler merchant/business application
 

$25



    Peddler merchant permit - per person
 

$25



Special event permit
 

$50
$25 (For non-profit/charitable organization)
(fee may be waived by Administration for non-profit organizations not
utilizing city services)



Therapeutic massage license
 





   Massage enterprise license

 

$100/per year




   Massage therapist license

 

$50/per year




   Massage enterprise/therapist - owner operates as therapist - one fee

 

$100/per year




   Background investigation fee

 

$25



Transient merchant
 





   Annual permit, private premises

 

$75/year




      Daily fees, operating under annual permit

 

$10/day (with annual permit)




   Daily fees, independent merchant

 

$50/day




   Daily fees, farm/garden fruits and vegetables

 

No fee from 6/15 to 9/15 (state mandated)




   Fireworks sale

 

$350/year




   Traveling shows

 

$100/first day; $50/day for each day thereafter



MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS


Assessment/property search - full
 

$30



Property bill search - limited
 

Free



Business list
 

Free



Brochures
 

Free



City resident list: (e.g., utility billing list)
 

$0.25/page + sales tax



City labels
 

$0.50/sheet + sales tax



Comprehensive guide plan - entire
 

$32 plus tax




   Downtown revitalization plan

 

$15 plus tax




   Transportation plan

 

$50 plus tax



Copies: copy machine
 

$0.25 per copy + sales tax




   Engineering copier

 

$0.50/square foot + sales tax ($2 minimum)




   Emailed

 

$35/hour + sales tax (minimum 1/4 hour)




   Electronic media

 

$10 + cost of media + sales tax




Delinquent certification processing fee:
Minimum account balance of $50
Processed once a year

 

$75 per parcel



Delinquent list
 

$10 + tax (each)



Deposits on city repair projects
 

$100 - $300 (depending on est. value of work)



Maps:
 





   City map (24 in. x 36 in.)

 

$3 + sales tax




   City map (11 in. x 17 in.)

 

$1 + sales tax




   Zoning map (24 in. x 36 in.)

 

$3 + sales tax




   State maps

 

$0.55 + sales tax




   County maps

 

$3 + sales tax



Notary
 

$3 each



Signs
 

Current listed price + 10% handling charge + tax



Commercial, non-city initiated proclamations
 

$50



PARKS



Memorials:
Bench
Tree

 

$1,500 (includes tax, delivery, installation)
$300 (includes tax, delivery, installation)



Facility rental fees:
 



   Baseball/softball field rental* (no lights)



Residents
Non-resident

 







$25 per field per day
$35 per field per day




   Field lighting*



Residents
Non-resident

 




$15 per hour per field
$20 per hour per field




   *these fees are for individuals/groups to use the city facility for
practice or an informal game.



Tournament field rental (includes lights as needed)


Up to 3 days
Extended days

 




$90 per field
$10 per field for each additional day


Park rental rates:
 

Resident

 

Non-Resident

 



   East Bridge Wedding Gazebo

 

$110 for 6 hours

 

$135 for 6 hours




   Ellison Gazebo

 

$110

 

$135




   Ellison Log Shelter

 

$110 for 6 hours

 

$135 for 6 hours




   Groveland Park Picnic Shelter

 

$110 for 6 hours

 

$135 for 6 hours




   Lions Den/Gazebo

 

$300

 





   Otter Creek

 

$55 for 6 hours

 

$80 for 6 hours




   Pioneer Park

 

$110 for 6 hours

 

$135 for 6 hours




   West Bridge Park Shelter/Warming House

 

$110 for 6 hours

 

$135 for 6 hours




   West Bridge Picnic Shelter

 

$110 for 6 hours

 

$135 for 6 hours



PUBLIC WORKS


Disease replacement tree
 

$50 per property



Chipping
 

$60 + tax per 1/2 hour or part thereof for the first 2 hours



$90 + tax per 1/2 hour or part thereof for the next hour



No more than 3 hours per year per property



Cone replacement
 

Cost + $10 + sales tax



Construction inspection (city or engineer)
 

$115/hour



Labor (no equipment)
 

$65/hour - regular business hours
Rate will be increased if response required outside of regular hours



Sidewalk snow and ice control
 

$50 per lot - 1st offense
$75 per lot - 2nd offense
$100 per lot - maximum after 2nd offense
$100 mobilization charge per offense at staff discretion



Sweeping
 

$135/hour - includes operator



Utility excavation permit fee (water, wastewater, stormwater)

(bonding and insurance required)
 

$105



Vac/sewer jet
 

$365/hour for two operators and machine



Other equipment (including operator):


Backhoe loader



Dump truck



Large front end loaders



Mid size loaders



Motor grader



Pickup or 1-ton truck



Skid steere

 




$155/hour



$105/hour



$155/hour



$105/hour



$155/hour



$95/hour



$105/hour



SANITARY SEWER


Sewer rates: 1st 1,000 gallons


    Over 1,000 gallons

 

$9 minimum



$5.77/1,000 gallons



Sewer rates: special cases
 

$10 per month x number of people in household



Industrial sewer rates: (effective July 1, 2019)


All usage



BOD5



TSS



Testing

 







$3.485/1,000 gallons + sales tax



$0.376/lb. + sales tax



$0.517/lb. + sales tax



Actual costs + 10%



Sewer discharge environmental fee (all sewer customers)
 

2% of sewer bill



Sewer and water combination permit
 

$130 (residential)
$130 plus tax (commercial)



Sewer access charge


Residential - single-family



All others per unit equivalent

 




$4,315/unit



$4,315/unit



Trunk sanitary sewer


Residential unit



Non-residential

 




$1,488/unit



$3,730/acre



Waste water discharge permit:


10,000 to 15,000 GPD



15,001 to 25,000 GPD



25,001 to 50,000 GPD



50,001 to 100,000 GPD



Over 100,000 GPD

 




$50 annually



$100 annually



$150 annually



$250 annually



$300 annually



STORM SEWER


Trunk storm sewer fees
 

$3,985 (net acre)




   Alternate ponding area - commercial

 

$8,185 per acre




   Alternate ponding area - industrial

 

$9,564 per acre




   Alternate ponding area - residential

 

$4,083 per acre



STORMWATER UTILITY (effective July 1, 2019)



   Residential (1 drainage unit per residential unit)

 

$1/drainage unit per month




   Non-residential (7 drainage units per impervious acre - minimum 7)

 

$1/drainage unit per month (minimum 7)



WASTE ITEMS


Garbage service fees
 



   All residential garbage with cart service:



1st container



2nd container

 







$7 + 9.75% tax per month



$13 + 9.75% tax per month



Cart transfer fee
 

$30



Garbage cart replacement (if lost or stolen):


38 gallon
60 gallon
90 gallon

 




Cost + tax + $10
Cost + tax + $10
Cost + tax + $10



Recycle cart replacement (if lost or stolen):


35 gallon
64 gallon
90 gallon

 




Cost + tax + $10
Cost + tax + $10
Cost + tax + $10



Recycle


Additional cart pickup

 




$0






Storage bins (red, yellow, blue)
 
$10 includes sales tax (until sold out)


WATER


Hydrant rates for contractors: (#1, #2, and #3 are all taxable if commercial)



   1.   All contractors must obtain a permit from the Water
Superintendent. The permit fee is $500. This permit will define the hydrant
to be used and provides a tally sheet for water usage.




   2.   The following rates shall apply:


 





      Up to 3,000 gallons:

 

$40 minimum




Over 3,000 gallons:

 

$4.09/1,000 gallons




   3.   The following deposits shall be taken for use of city equipment
(no exceptions):




      Hydrant wrench

 

$100




      2-1/2 in. fill hose

 

$150




      1-1/2 in. fill hose with 2-1/2 in. adapter

 

$150




      2-1/2 in. hydrant meter

 

$1,500




      3/4 in. and small meter

 

$250




      Nozzle

 

$75




      *If equipment is returned within 10 days of permit expiration in
good condition, the full amount for water and equipment, less 10% per month
on portion thereof for rent, shall be refunded.



Industrial water rate, mtr 1 (effective July 1, 2019)



   All usage

 

$2.110/1,000 gallons + sales tax



Irrigation water rate - resid., twnhms. and comm.:



   first 1,000 gallons

 

$7.10 minimum + sales tax




   1,001 - 10,000 gallons

 

$1.74/1,000 gallons + sales tax




   10,001 - 33,000 gallons

 

$2.02/1,000 gallons + sales tax




   over 33,000 gallons

 

$2.21/1,000 gallons + sales tax




   (if metered separately, no quarterly minimum base rate is applied to
irrigation meters with zero usage)



Final bill processing fee
 

$20



Manual meter reading (per month for customers refusing radio reading
equipment)
 

$20



Obsolete equipment charge (per month charge until replacement is scheduled)
 

$20



Delinquent sprinkling meter turn-off
 

$25



Delinquent sprinkling meter turn-on
 

$25



Res/Comm Water: 0 - 1,000 gallons


first 1,000 gallons



1,001 - 10,000 gallons



10,001 - 33,000 gallons



over 33,000 gallons



Minimum bill for malfunctioning meter

 




$7.10 minimum + sales tax



$1.74/1,000 gallons + sales tax



$2.02/1,000 gallons + sales tax



$2.21/1,000 gallons + sales tax



$150 after 3rd contact attempt






Trunk water charge
 

$l,103/residential unit
$2,758/acre non-residential



Water access charge:


1 in. line



1-1/4 in. line



1-1/2 in. line



2 in. line



3 in. line



4 in. line



6 in. line



8 in. line

 




$833 + materials



$1,266 + materials



$1,518 + materials



$1,997 + materials



$2,498 + materials



$3,291 + materials



$4,143 + materials



$5,440 +materials




Water availability charge (for those who have city water available but choose
not to hook up)
 

$41 (billed in July)



Water main tapping - new services (1 in. only)
 

$250 each + materials



Water meters:


5/8 in. meter



3/4 in. meter



1 in. meter



1-1/2 in. meter



2 in. meter + up



1 in. x 3/4 in. meter valves



1 in. x 1 in. meter valves

 




$355 + sales tax



$390 + sales tax



$490 + sales tax



$790 + sales tax



Cost + $50 +sales tax



$55 + sales tax



$60 + sales tax



Water meter replacement due to preventable damage
 

Cost + labor ( 1hour minimum)



Water shut off, then turned on:
 

$50 ($25 on - $25 off) + delinquency (taxable if non-res.)



Water violations (sprinkling):


1st violation
2nd violation
Each subsequent violation

 




No fee
$50
$100/per violation



Utility bill


Utility bill penalty - monthly
Utility - Ebill discount
Utility - ACH payment discount

 




5% of past due amount, except September penalty 0%
$0.50
$1





 



(Ord. 704, passed 12-10-2018)



TITLE V: MUNICIPAL UTILITIES



   Chapter



      50.   WATER AND SEWER



      51.   STORMWATER UTILITY



      52.   WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM



      53.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE, DETECTION, AND ELIMINATION



      54.   GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND RECYCLING



CHAPTER 50:  WATER AND SEWER



Section




General Provisions




   50.01   Applications, permits, and fees



   50.02   Meters



   50.03   Private water systems



   50.04   Implied consent to rules, regulations, and rates



   50.05   Meter readings



   50.06   Billing regulations



   50.07   Faulty meters



   50.08   Leak in service line



   50.09   Connection requirements



   50.10   Private wastewater disposal



   50.11   Water meter regulations



   50.12   Unlawful to tamper with meter



   50.13   Liability for repairs



   50.14   Installation of connections



   50.15   City not liable



   50.16   Stormwater not permitted in sanitary sewer system



   50.17   Excavation work and testing of meters



   50.18   Emergency regulations



   50.19   Right to enter land



   50.20   Private water not permitted in system



   50.21   Provision for shut off of service




User Charges




   50.35   Purpose



   50.36   Computation of user charges



   50.37   Billing and enforcement procedures



   50.38   Inspection and control



 



   50.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Stormwater utility, see Chapter 51



   Wastewater disposal system, see Chapter 52




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.01  APPLICATIONS, PERMITS, AND FEES.



   (A)   No person shall make any type of connection to the water
system, sanitary sewer system, or storm sewer system except upon making an
application therefor on a form provided by the city and receiving a permit
issued by the city for such purposes. The application shall include the legal
description of the property to be served, the uses for which the connection
is requested, and the size of the service line to be used.



   (B)   No connection shall be made with respect to any sanitary
sewer, water system, or storm sewer system serving the property of any person
or occupants of the land, parcel, or premises affected that have not paid or
provided for the payment of the full and proportionate share of the
utilities. At the time of taking the application, there shall be paid to the
city the following fees for the following purposes.



      (1)   For service to property to which service lines have not
been previously run from the street laterals to the property line, the owner,
occupant, or user shall pay an amount not less than the cost of making the
necessary connection taps, and installation of pipe and appurtenances to
provide service to the property and the necessary street repairs.



      (2)   For service to property to which service lines have been
run to the property line but which have not been paid for, the owner,
occupant, or user shall pay in cash or agree to pay charges in the form of
special assessments to be levied against the property to be spread over a
number of years coincident with maturity requirements of any special
improvement bonds sold for the purpose of financing the construction of
sanitary sewer, municipal water, or storm sewer system serving the property.
Cash payment or assessment charge shall be in the principal amount of not
less than the payments made by or charges placed against comparable
properties for like services for the sanitary sewer, water, or storm sewer
system in an amount as may be established by the City Council. In the
instance of services run to the property lines as provided under division
(B)(1) above, the payment of any amount required under this division (B)(2)
shall be reduced by the amount paid to the city under division (B)(1) above.



      (3)   (a)   The water connection rate schedule, listed in
the fee schedule ordinance, applies to a premises that does not have city
water. It also applies where a property had city water and then changes the
size of the water connection.



         (b)   Costs include cost of a water meter and those
costs (if service line necessary) in division (B)(1) above.



         (c)   The hookup charge for water is based upon the
following factors:



            1.   Some means of recovering a portion of water
main costs not assessed;



            2.   Portion of oversizing of water main not
assessed should be recovered; and



            3.   A hookup charge should be based on service
line flow capabilities.



      (4)   (a)   Where application is made for connection of any
single-family residence to the sanitary sewer system, a connection fee
adopted by the City Council for treatment plant plus trunk sanitary sewer
shall be paid to the city.



         (b)   For various commercial, public, and institutional
facilities, refer to the most recent version of the Metropolitan Council
Environmental Services (MCES) SAC criteria. Use the plumbing code for those
items not included in the MCES criteria. The city uses the MCES criteria as
the basis for calculating our SAC rates but the city reserves the right to
vary from the MCES criteria to accommodate those uses which are deemed to be
unique.



         (c)   Before proceeding with the construction,
enlargement, alteration, or repair of any water or sewer lines connecting the
water system, sanitary sewer system, or storm sewer system and any house or
building, the owner or his or her agent shall first obtain a permit for such
purpose from the city. The applicant shall pay to the city as noted in the
fee schedule ordinance.



         (d)   The plumbing inspector shall examine all
applications before construction is begun; and after the construction,
enlargement, alteration, or repair is complete, the plumbing inspector shall
be notified. It shall be unlawful to cover any connecting line until an
inspection has been made and the connection and the work incident thereto has
been approved by the city as a proper and suitable connection.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-1)  (Ord. 32, passed 7-11-1977; Ord. 126, passed
9-13-1983; Ord. 288, passed 3-24-1997; Ord. 538, passed 12-12-2011)



§ 50.02  METERS.



   (A)   Before any water conveyed through the city water system shall
be used or utilized on the land or premises of any person, there shall first
be installed a water meter that will accurately measure the water consumed on
the premises.



   (B)   All meters for residential housing and the other connections
as may permit the use of the same kind of water meter shall be furnished by
the city as set forth above at such time as the water connection change has
been paid. In the event special meters are required for commercial or
industrial connections, then the applicant shall furnish a meter of the type
approved by the city for the connection, and an allowance shall be made
toward the cost of the meter in an amount equal to the cost of residential
meters.



   (C)   No connection of water or sewer service shall be made to any
house or building unless the plumbing therein has been installed pursuant to
the latest Minneapolis Plumbing Code, provided that this shall apply only to
construction which has not been completed prior to this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-2)



§ 50.03  PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any persons to install private water
system or sewer system in the city except in such cases as the public water
and sewer system are not accessible to the premises where the private systems
are requested. To determine whether or not the public water and/or sewer
systems are available for connection, each person desiring to install a
private water or sewer system must first make application for connection to a
public system. Upon resolution of the City Council determining that it is not
feasible to connect the applicant’s premises to the public water or sewer
system, then the applicant shall be granted a permit to install a private
water and/or sewer system.



   (B)   Where a private sewer system has been installed before the
public sewer system was accessible to the premises served by the private
system, connection of the premises to the public system must be made within
30 days after the private system fails to function properly or within three
years after public system was accessible, whichever is sooner. It shall be
unlawful to repair or pump a private system after such time as the public
sewer system is accessible to the premises without written permission of the
Water and Sewer Department for the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-3)  (Ord. 4, passed 11-24-1975)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  IMPLIED CONSENT TO RULES, REGULATIONS, AND RATES.



   Every person applying for water or sewer service, every owner of
property for which any application is made, every person accepting water or
sewer services, and every owner of property where service is accepted
subsequent to the passage of this chapter shall be deemed upon making the
application or accepting the service to consent to all rules, regulations,
and rates as established by this chapter and as may hereafter be set forth
and adopted by the City Council by resolution or ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-4)



§ 50.05  METER READINGS.



   (A)   The City Council may provide a system of water meter reading
by any method deemed suitable to the purpose. Water bills shall be payable
monthly by the date due specified on the bill. Rates for water used for each
month are calculated by using the meter supplying each service.



   (B)   The city reserves the right to discontinue service to any
customer of the water and sanitary sewer system without notice when necessary
for repairs, additional connection or reconnection, or for nonpayment of
charges of bills, or for disregard of any rules or regulations in connection
with the use or operation of the system. Whenever any service has been
discontinued for nonpayment of charges or bills or for disregard of any other
purpose, it shall not be resumed except upon payment of the charges or bills
accrued together with interest thereon as allowed by state statutes, or
compliance with the rules and regulations previously violated and payment to
the city of a restoration fee established in the city’s fee schedule.



   (C)   All delinquent accounts that are 60 days or more past due
shall be submitted to the City Clerk who shall prepare an assessment roll
each year providing for assessment of the delinquent amounts against the
properties involved. The assessment roll shall be delivered to the City
Council for adoption before October 30 of each year. Upon adoption, the Clerk
shall certify the assessment roll to the County Auditor for collection along
with taxes.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-5)  (Ord. 458, passed 10-23-2006; Ord. 689, passed
12-11-2017)



§ 50.06  BILLING REGULATIONS.



   The City Council shall have the authority to prescribe by ordinance the
rates to be charged for water and sewer service to the customer from time to
time and may prescribe the date of billing, a discount for payment, and/or
penalty for failure to pay within the period and such further rules and
regulations relative to the use and operation of the system as it may deem
necessary from time to time through the fee schedule ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-6)  (Ord. 458, passed 10-23-2006)



§ 50.07  FAULTY METERS.



   If a meter fails to register or accurately measure the water, the
charge for water consumed shall be paid for at the established rate based
upon past average billings as determined by the city. Whenever a consumer
believes that a meter is inaccurate the customer can request a new meter be
installed. Such request shall be accompanied by a payment equal to the cost
of a new meter as listed in the fee schedule ordinance. If any such meter is
found to be inaccurate the customer shall be refunded the new meter charge.
If the meter shall be found to be accurate in its recordings or calculations
the new meter cost shall not be refunded.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-7)



§ 50.08  LEAK IN SERVICE LINE.



   Any owner, occupant, or user of a premises who shall discover a leak in
a service line to the premises shall notify the city within 24 hours. Any
water wasted due to a failure of a person to comply with this regulation
shall be estimated by the city and be charged for against the owner at the
premises at the established rate.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-8)



§ 50.09  CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   Each new building or part thereof constructed in the city which is
required by code to have sewer and water shall have its own individual sewer
and water connections to the city mains. Any shared existing services for
adjacent units of separate ownership which fail and require replacement or
substantial repairs shall at that time be separated. Connections shall be
made in accordance with standards and specifications approved by City Council.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-9)  (Ord. 139, passed 7-23-1984)



§ 50.10  PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.



   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 50.09, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater
disposal system complying with city, state, and federal regulations.



§ 50.11  WATER METER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   All applications for the installation, maintenance, and repair
of water meters shall be made to the city.



   (B)   No other person other than the city or its designee shall
maintain or repair any water meter within the city limits. Every water meter
connected to the water system shall be sealed by or under the direction of
the city, and no other person shall break or remove the seal, provided,
however, that a plumber licensed to do business in the state may break the
seal to remove the meter for necessary repairs. In all cases where a seal is
broken or a meter is removed by a licensed plumber, the plumber shall notify
the city of the fact within 24 hours after the seal is broken or the meter is
removed. Whenever any seal attached to a water meter by or under the
direction of the city is found broken, the broken condition of the seal shall
be prima facie evidence that the seal was broken contrary to the terms and
provisions in violation of this chapter.



   (C)   All water meters connected to the water system shall be
accessible to the city at any reasonable hour of any business day, and the
refusal of admission of any owner or occupant of any premises wherein a water
meter is installed after the owner or occupant has been notified that
admission is desired for the purpose of inspecting a water meter installed in
the premises shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   The meters shall be repaired from time to time as is necessary
to ensure accurate measuring of the flow of water, except that whenever a
meter has been damaged due to negligence on the part of persons other than
the employees of the city, the owner, occupant, or user of the premises or
other persons desiring the use of the water shall reimburse the city for the
expense of repairing any such meter. Upon failure to reimburse the city
within a reasonable time and upon demand therefor, the water services and
supply to the premises may be shut off or discontinued as determined to be in
the best interest of the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-10)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.12  UNLAWFUL TO TAMPER WITH METER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, alter, bypass, or
in any manner whatsoever interfere with the proper use and functioning of
water meter within the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-11)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.13  LIABILITY FOR REPAIRS.



   After the initial connection has been made to the curb stop or the
sewer lead, the applicant, owner, or the occupant or user of the premises
shall be liable for all repairs required to any water, sanitary, or storm
sewer lines necessary for connection of the premises to the street main,
including any necessary street repairs.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-12)  (Ord. 101, passed 6-8-1981)



§ 50.14  INSTALLATION OF CONNECTIONS.



   All connections to the water system and sanitary sewer system shall be
performed by a plumber licensed to do plumbing in the city, except that
nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to prohibit an individual owner
from obtaining a permit and installing the connection by his or her own
labor, provided, however, that the construction is conducted under the
regulations of this chapter and requirements of the engineer and plumbing
inspector.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-13)



§ 50.15  CITY NOT LIABLE.



   The city shall not be held liable at any time for any deficiency or
failure in the supply of water to the customer caused by shutting off the
water for repairs or connections or for any other cause whatever.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-14)



§ 50.16  STORMWATER NOT PERMITTED IN SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or user of any
premises to direct into or allow any stormwater, surface water, ground water,
or water from air conditioning systems to drain into the sanitary sewer
system of the city. This includes water from any roof, surface or ground sump
pump, foundation drain, or swimming pool. Dwellings and other buildings and
structures which require a sump pump system to discharge excess water shall
have a permanently-installed discharge line which shall not at any time
discharge water into the sanitary sewer system except as provided herein.



   (B)   A permanent installation shall be one which provides for
year-around discharge capability to either the outside of the dwelling,
building, or structure, or is connected to the city storm sewer system or
discharges to the street. It shall consist of a rigid discharge line without
valving or quick connections for altering the path of discharge and include a
check valve if connected to the city storm sewer line.



      (1)   Inspection. Every person owning improved real estate
that discharges into the city sanitary sewer system shall allow an employee
of the city or their designated representative to inspect the buildings to
confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the
sanitary sewer system. Properties found to be in compliance will receive a
certificate of compliance at the time of inspection.



      (2)   Non-compliance. Within 30 days of initial inspection,
any person, firm, or corporation having a roof, surface or ground sump pump,
foundation drain, or swimming pool and/or discharging into the sanitary sewer
system shall disconnect and/or remove same. Any disconnects or openings in
the sanitary sewer shall be closed or repaired in an effective and
workmanlike manner in accordance with § 50.13. Any person refusing to allow
his or her property to be inspected shall immediately become subject to the
surcharge hereinafter provided for. Any property found to violate this
section shall make the necessary changes to comply with this section within
30 days of the initial inspection.



      (3)   Future inspections. At any future time, the city may
conduct random inspections if the city has reason to suspect that an illegal
connection exists on a property to ensure compliance with this section.



      (4)   New construction. A sump pump and rigid pipe discharge
connection to the outside shall be required on all new construction within
the city where a ground water drainage system is part of the construction
plans.



      (5)   Temporary winter variance (November 1 through March 1).
The City Council shall have the power and duty of hearing and deciding
requests for temporary variances from the applicability of the provisions of
this section where strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of
circumstances unique to the individual property or cause a safety problem.
This does not apply to monetary hardship. Application for a temporary waiver
should be addressed in writing to the City of Monticello, Director of Public
Works. The applications shall identify the property for which the variance is
being applied for, the name of the property owner/applicant, and describe in
detail what characteristics of the subject property create undue hardship or
concern. Within 30 days after application, the city shall make its order
deciding on the matter and serve a copy of the order upon the applicant by
mail. Upon receipt of an application for variance, the city will allow the
property owner to temporarily discharge directly into the sanitary sewer
system. Employees of the city will divert the discharge and seal the
connection of the discharge to the sanitary sewer using a meter seal. The
cost for the connection to the sanitary sewer and subsequent removal will be
noted in the fee schedule ordinance. Additionally, the applicant will be
responsible for the cost to transport and treat the added flow to the
sanitary sewer at the established city rate. The total flow for the period of
the variance will be monitored by the city.



      (6)   Single-family unit surcharge. A surcharge of $75 per
month is hereby imposed and added to every sewer billing to property owners
who are not in compliance with this section within 30 days of initial
inspection. This surcharge is in addition to any other penalties that may be
incurred under this subchapter. Should a single-family unit property owner
found to be in compliance with this section and during a subsequent
inspection found to have reconnected an illegal source to the sanitary sewer,
the surcharge as listed in the fee schedule ordinance will be applied for all
months between the previous two inspections.



      (7)   Non single-family unit surcharge. A surcharge as listed
in the fee schedule ordinance is hereby imposed and added to every sewer
billing to property owners who are not in compliance with this section within
30 days of initial inspection. This surcharge is in addition to any other
penalties that may be incurred under this subchapter. Should a non
single-family unit property owner found to be in compliance with this section
and during a subsequent inspection found to have reconnected an illegal
source to the sanitary sewer, the surcharge as listed in the fee schedule
ordinance will be applied for all months between the previous two inspections.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-15)  (Ord. 271, passed 6-12-1995)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.17  EXCAVATION WORK AND TESTING OF METERS.



   All installation work or repair of connections to the water and sewer
systems, including grades, bends, and backfilling, shall be performed under
the direction and supervision of the plumbing inspector. No work shall be
covered or backfilled until directed by the inspector. All work and
excavations shall be protected by barricades and warning markers and lights
reasonable and suitable to the purpose. The city shall be held harmless of
any claim or loss as might otherwise arise for damage, loss, or injury caused
by or arising by reason of the work being performed; and the applicant
causing the work to be done shall give undertaking to the city with respect
thereto.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-16)



§ 50.18  EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   The City Council may impose emergency regulations pertaining to the
conservation of water by resolution of the Council and by giving notice by
publication or by posting in City Hall and at the public places as the
Council may direct.



   (A)   Lawn and garden watering regulations.



      (1)   Purpose. The city has limited water storage and pumping
capacity. Due to the fast growth in residential developments, this section
will promote a higher awareness of the primary use of water in the summer
lawn and garden irrigation, and regulate the watering of lawns, gardens,
grass seed, and sod.



      (2)   Odd/even schedule. A home or business address ending in
an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) may water its lawn on odd numbered calendar
days each month and an address ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8) may
water its lawn on even-numbered calendar days. The only deviations to the
odd/even watering system are apartment complexes and homeowner associations
that have been assigned odd or even watering days because of the numerous
addresses on one sprinkling system. For these complexes and associations, the
address of the bill for sprinkling water shall be used to determine odd or
even. The odd/even schedule is in effect from June 1 through September 30 of
each year until further notice. This may be deleted or modified when the city
completes construction of additional wells and water towers to improve
pumping and storage capabilities.



      (3)   Permit required. A 30-day permit may be obtained at City
Hall to water newly seeded or sodded lawns and newly planted trees.



      (4)   Rain sensors. Rain sensors are required on all
commercial, institutional, or governmental sprinkler systems. All newly
installed sprinkling systems from the date of publication of this subchapter,
including residential, will be required to have rain sensors.



      (5)   Private wells. Restrictions of this section do not apply
to property serviced by private wells, provided the sprinkling water is
pumped from a private well. Residents, commercial, institutional, or
governmental entities with private wells are required to notify City Hall
that they have a well used for watering purposes.



   (B)   Additional restrictions. In the case of a severe shortage of
water, the City Administrator and/or Public Works Director are authorized to
impose additional restrictions to provide for the safe operation of the
municipal water supply. The notice shall be posted at all city offices on the
city’s website, and in the official newspaper. The Mayor and City Council
shall be notified of the restrictions as soon as possible.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-17)  (Ord. 379, passed 6-10-2002)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.19  RIGHT TO ENTER LAND.



   The city, by any authorized employee or agent, shall have the right to
enter and be admitted to any lands and property in the city for the purpose
of inspection of materials, plumbing work, and fixtures of all kinds used by
or in connection with the water and sewer systems, in accordance with §
10.20.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-18)



§ 50.20  PRIVATE WATER NOT PERMITTED IN SYSTEM.



   Whenever any premises are connected to the water system, there shall be
maintained a complete physical separation between the water supply system and
the private water supply system so that it is impossible to intentionally or
unintentionally allow any water produced by a private system to be introduced
in the supply line from the city system.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-19)



§ 50.21  PROVISION FOR SHUT OFF OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Shut off for nonpayment. The city shall endeavor to collect
delinquent accounts promptly. In any case where satisfactory arrangements for
payment have not been made, the Public Works Department may, after the
procedural requirements of division (B) below have been complied with,
discontinue service to the delinquent customer by shutting off the water at
the stop box. When water service to any premises has been discontinued,
service shall not be restored except upon the payment of all delinquent
amounts due plus a fee for disconnection and reconnection based on a fee
schedule adopted by the City Council.



   (B)   Procedure. Water shall not be shut off under division (A)
above until notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given the
occupant of the premises involved. The notice shall be sent by certified mail
and shall state that if payment is not made before a date stated in the
notice but not less than 30 days after the date on which the notice is given,
the water supply to the premises will be shut off. The notice shall not be
sent until an account is 30 days past due. The notice shall contain amount
due and shut off date if payment is not made.



   (C)   Shut off for abandonment or vacancy.



      (1)   The Chief Building Official or the Public Works
Director, to protect the public health and safety and in order to protect the
public water supply and/or private property, may order the city water service
immediately disconnected to any property without prior notice to the owner
upon determining that any of the following conditions exist:



         (a)   The property is vacant or abandoned;



         (b)   The property is unsecured;



         (c)   The property is determined to be uninhabitable or
unsuitable for occupancy;



         (d)   Other utilities have been shut off or the city has
been provided notice of disconnection of gas or electric service; or



         (e)   Running water to the property creates an
unsanitary or unsafe condition.



      (2)   (a)   Water service shall not be re-connected to the
property until it has passed an inspection by the city and the owner pays any
re-connection fee as noted in the fee schedule ordinance.



         (b)   Upon disconnection, the city will post or leave
notice at the property indicating the date of disconnection and directions
regarding how the service may be reconnected.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-20)  (Ord. 107, passed 11-23-1981; Ord. 458, passed
10-23-2006)




USER CHARGES




§ 50.35  PURPOSE.



   For the purpose of providing monies necessary for the maintenance and
operation of the disposal system of the city, including payment of principal
and interest due or accruing on bonds and other obligations issued or
incurred to finance the maintenance and operation, there is hereby charged a
“user charge” to be collected by the city with respect to each lot,
parcel of land, building, or premises, having any connection direct or
indirect with the disposal system of the city or otherwise discharging
sewage, industrial waste, water, or other waste directly into the city
disposal system. The user charge is to be paid periodically commencing with
connection and continuing (unless for good cause waived or excused) for as
long as the premises remain connected.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-1)



§ 50.36  COMPUTATION OF USER CHARGES.



   The city shall have the discretion to establish user classification.
Each user class shall be billed by rates contained in the fee schedule
ordinance.



§ 50.37  BILLING AND ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Charges due. The Chief Financial Officer shall compute the
amount due the city for service charges and render a statement thereof
monthly to the owner or occupant of any premises served or to both. All
amounts due hereunder shall be payable to the office of the Finance
Department.



   (B)   Payment required. Payment of user charges must be made when a
connection is established, temporary or permanent, vacancy notwithstanding



   (C)   Enforcement of charges. Each charge levied by and pursuant to
this section is hereby made a lien upon the corresponding lot, land, or
premises served by a connection to the sewer system of the city. All the
charges which are more than 60 days past due, and having been properly billed
to the occupant of the premises served, shall be certified by the City Clerk
to the County Auditor by November 30 of each year. The City Clerk shall
specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served, the name
of the owner thereof which shall be certified by the Auditor on the tax rolls
against the premises in the same manner as other taxes.



   (D)   Right of action. Any charges levied by and pursuant to §
50.36, and which have not been properly billed to the owner or occupant of
any premises served, and not paid, may be recovered in a civil action by the
city in any court of competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   Application of funds. The funds received from the collection
of charges authorized by this section shall be deposited as collected in a
fund known as the Sewer Fund and shall be disbursed:



      (1)   To meet the costs of operation and maintaining the
sewage disposal pumping stations, treatment plant, and collection system; and



      (2)   To meet the costs of repair and replacement of the
sewage disposal facilities.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-3)  (Ord. 214, passed 10-28-1991)



§ 50.38  INSPECTION AND CONTROL.



   (A)   Industrial waste measurement and sampling. Any person
discharging industrial waste into the disposal system shall provide and
maintain a suitable point or points of access together with the necessary
meters and other appurtenances at an appropriate location prior to discharge
of the waste into the disposal system to permit observation, measurement, and
sampling of the waste by the city. Plans for the sampling points and
measuring equipment shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to
construction and installation of same. Sampling and measuring facilities
shall be such as to provide safe access for making inspection and
verification of their proper operating condition. The metered water supply to
a source of industrial waste may be used in lieu of a measured industrial
waste volume where it can be established that the metered water supply and
waste quantities are approximately the same or where a measurable adjustment
to the metered supply can be made to determine the waste volume.



   (B)   Industrial waste analyses. Determination of the character and
concentration of an industrial waste discharged into the disposal system
shall be made by the person discharging it or his or her designated agent.
Reports showing quantities and pertinent analytical data of the industrial
waste discharges shall be filed with the city.



   (C)   Measurement and test procedures. All measurements, tests, and
analyses of the characteristics of waste to which reference is made in these
rules and regulations shall be determined in accordance with the latest
edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American
Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. Sampling
shall be carried out by methods acceptable to and approved by the city.
Alternate methods for certain analyses may be used subject to prior written
approval by the city.



   (D)   Confidentiality of critical information.



      (1)   Any records or other information obtained by the city or
furnished by an industrial waste discharger which are certified by the
discharger to relate to:



         (a)   Production or sales figures;



         (b)   Processes or production unique to the discharge; or



         (c)   Information which would tend to affect adversely
the competitive position of the discharger shall be only for the confidential
use of the city in discharging its statutory obligations unless otherwise
authorized by the discharger.



      (2)   However, all the information may be used by the city in
compiling or publishing analyses or summaries relating to the general
condition of the public waters so long as the analyses or summaries do not
identify any discharger who has so not certified.



(Prior Code, § 7-3-4)



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 50.01 through 50.21
is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more
than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-21)



   (C)   Violators of § 50.17 will be warned the first time and a
water use surcharge as listed in the fee schedule ordinance will be billed
for a second offense; the surcharge for third and subsequent violations
within a 12-month period is listed in the fee schedule ordinance. The Public
Works Department may shut the water off for repeat offenses. The standard
turn-off and turn-on rates shall apply in addition to the surcharges.



(Prior Code, § 7-2-17)



(Ord. 362, passed 7-23-2001)



CHAPTER 51:  STORMWATER UTILITY



Section



   51.01   Stormwater utility establishment



   51.02   Purpose



   51.03   Definition



   51.04   Stormwater Utility Fund



   51.05   Establishment of stormwater utility fee



   51.06   Residential



   51.07   Non-residential



   51.08   Stormwater utility fee exemptions



   51.09   Stormwater utility adjustments



   51.10   Appeal of stormwater utility fee



   51.11   Payment of fees



   51.12   Establishment of tax lien



 



   51.99   Penalty



§ 51.01  STORMWATER UTILITY ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a public utility to be known as the
stormwater utility for the city. The stormwater utility shall be operated as
a public utility pursuant to the authority of M.S. § 444.075, as it may be
amended from time to time. Stormwater utility revenues shall be subject to
the provisions of this section and M.S. § 444.075, as it may be amended from
time to time.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a funding mechanism for the
following services:



   (A)   The administration, planning, analysis, installation,
operation, maintenance, and replacement of public drainage systems;



   (B)   The administration, planning, implementation, construction,
and maintenance of stormwater best management practices (BMPs) to reduce the
introduction of sediment and other pollutants into local water resources;



   (C)   Other education, engineering, inspection, monitoring, testing,
and enforcement activities as necessary to maintain compliance with local,
state, and federal stormwater requirements; and



   (D)   Activities necessary to maintain compliance with the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES), municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) permit requirements established by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, including preparation, implementation, and management of a
stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP).



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.03  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   IMPERVIOUS. A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards
the entry of water into the soil, and causes water to run off the surface in
greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than existed prior to
development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking
lots, storage areas, and concrete, asphalt, or gravel roads. Paths, parking,
and storage areas that consist of gravel and exposed dirt will be considered
an IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.04  STORMWATER UTILITY FUND.



   There is hereby created a Stormwater Utility Fund into which all fees,
when collected, shall be placed. Such monies shall be first used to pay
normal, reasonable, and current costs of operating and maintaining the city
stormwater system and facilities.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.05  ESTABLISHMENT OF STORMWATER UTILITY FEE.



   There shall be collected from every property in the city a stormwater
utility fee. Stormwater utility fees shall be established by ordinance. Fees
shall be based upon the operations of the stormwater utility, including an
accounting of all monies received and disbursed, together with a working
budget estimate of the needs of the utility.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.06  RESIDENTIAL.



   The stormwater utility fee for properties classified as residential
shall be calculated based on one drainage unit per residential unit.
Residential properties include single-family, multi-family, townhome, mobile
home park, and all other types of clustered residential housing, including
the residential portion of mixed-use developments and excluding lodging.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.07  NON-RESIDENTIAL.



   The stormwater utility fee for properties classified as non-residential
shall be calculated based on seven drainage units per impervious acre. Every
non-residential property shall have a minimum of at least seven drainage
units. Impervious acreage will be rounded to the nearest full acre (e.g., one
and one- half impervious acres are rounded to two acres).



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.08  STORMWATER UTILITY FEE EXEMPTIONS.



   The following land uses are exempt from stormwater utility fees:



   (A)   Public rights-of-way and parks;



   (B)   Vacant lands with no impervious surface; and



   (C)   Railroad rights-of-way.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.09  STORMWATER UTILITY ADJUSTMENTS.



   The Public Works Director, or designee, may adjust the impervious
surface acreage for non-residential parcels of land based on a demonstration
that the impervious coverage of such parcel is substantially different than
the amount previously calculated. Supporting information, including maps and
measurements to justify an adjustment, shall be supplied by the property
owner. Administrative adjustments for impervious surface calculation
differences shall be retroactive to the month said deviation is brought to
the attention of the city.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.10  APPEAL OF STORMWATER UTILITY FEE.



   If a property owner or person responsible for paying a stormwater
utility fee believes that a particular assigned fee is incorrect, such person
may request a recalculation. The City Council shall review and approve
recalculations following any appeal and its decision shall be final.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.11  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   Statements for stormwater utility fees shall be billed on the same
basis (e.g., monthly, quarterly, and the like) as other utility charges. All
fees shall be subject to established procedures for determining and
collecting customer charges. Mobile home parks shall be billed in aggregate
to the owner of the mobile home park. For other clustered residential units
such as townhomes, the city has the discretion to bill either a homeowner
association in aggregate or each homeowner. Both residential and non-
residential fees shall be applied to mixed-use developments, with charges
billed individually or in aggregate, to either tenant or property owner, at
the discretion of the city. Monthly charges apply to temporarily vacated
property. The charge is for service rendered in the month of the bill.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.12  ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX LIEN.



   Any past due stormwater utility fees will be certified to the County
Auditor for collection with real estate taxes against the property served by
the utility established in this chapter for collection as other taxes are
collected in the following year pursuant to M.S. § 444.075 subd. 3, as it
may be amended from time to time, and the city code of ordinances. In
addition, the city may have the right to bring a civil action or take other
legal remedies to collect unpaid fees.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   All stormwater fees not paid by the due date shall incur a penalty at
the same rate set forth for other delinquent utility fees in the fee schedule
ordinance.



(Ord. 718, passed 4-8-2019)



CHAPTER 52:  WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM



Section




General Provisions




   52.001   Purpose and policy



   52.002   Definitions




Regulation of Discharges




   52.015   General discharge prohibitions



   52.016   National categorical pretreatment standards



   52.017   State and local requirements



   52.018   Pretreatment facilities



   52.019   Dilution



   52.020   Accidental and slug discharges



   52.021   Sludges generated




Charges and Fees




   52.035   Purpose



   52.036   Monitoring



   52.037   Inspection



   52.038   Permit




Administration




   52.050   General user reports



   52.051   Wastewater discharge permits



   52.052   Monitoring facilities



   52.053   Inspection, sampling, and records



   52.054   Compliance reporting requirements



   52.055   Confidential information




Enforcement




   52.070   Slug or accidental discharge



   52.071   Revocation of permit



   52.072   Notification of violation



   52.073   Show cause hearing



   52.074   Legal action



   52.075   Appeal to the City Council



 



   52.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 52.001  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for discharges
into the city’s wastewater disposal system.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
wastewater disposal system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or the use or disposal of the sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
wastewater disposal system which will pass through the system inadequately
treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system; and



      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewater and sludge from the system.



   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of discharges into
the city’s wastewater disposal system through the issuance of permits to
certain users and through enforcement of the general requirements for the
other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user
reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of cost resulting from the program established herein.



   (D)   This chapter shall apply to the city and to persons outside
the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city
wastewater disposal system. This chapter is a supplement to Chapters 50, 51,
and 53 of this code of ordinances. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Public Works Director of the city wastewater disposal system shall
administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 14-1-1)



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Terms
not otherwise defined herein shall be as given in M.S. Ch. 115 and M.S. Ch.
116, as they may be amended from time to time.



   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C expressed in terms of weight and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).



   CITY. The City of Monticello or the City Council of Monticello.



   COMMERCIAL USER. A person engaged in a trade or business and who
discharges only domestic sanitary waste in amounts less than 25,000 gallons
per day or having less than 43 pounds BOD5 or 50 pound suspended solids per
day. A commercial user shall be exempt from permit filing and associated
fees. Any person discharging more than state waste quantities shall be
considered an industrial user for the purposes of this chapter.



   DIRECTOR; SUPERINTENDENT. The Director of the Public Works Department
of the city. The SUPERINTENDENT of the wastewater disposal system shall have
the same authority in the absence of the DIRECTOR.



   IMMINENT OR SUBSTANTIAL ENDANGERMENT. A condition occurring that is an
immediate danger caused by a discharge to the sewer system that is one or
more of the following:



      (1)   A toxic discharge that would cause disruption of
treatment process or prohibit or substantially limit sludge application or
disposal;



      (2)   A flammable discharge that is of sufficient quantity to,
alone or in combination with other gases or substances, create an explosive
condition;



      (3)   A discharge that, either alone or in combination with
other normally present substances, would cause toxic vapors or fumes to be
created;



      (4)   A discharge of solid or viscous materials that would
cause an immediate plugging problem in sewer or pumping mechanisms;



      (5)   Any radioactive wastes as defined by the NRC, AEC,
and/or other state and federal agencies; and/or



      (6)   Any liquid slug load greater than 25,000 gallons
discharged in one hour or less.



   INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who discharges to the city’s wastewater
disposal system liquid wastes resulting from the processes employed in
industrial, manufacturing, or from the development of any natural resource.



   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the city’s wastewater
disposal system processes or operations which causes or significantly
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s NPDES or state
disposal system permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the city in accordance with local, state, and federal rules or
regulations.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. Any
permit or requirements issued by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency
(MPCA) pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) for the purpose of regulating the discharge of
sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes under the authority of § 402 of
the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.



   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as
air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or during which the only
pollutant added to the water is heat.



   PERMIT. The wastewater discharge permit issued by the city to
industrial users.



   PERSON. Any corporation, individual, partnership, association, public
agency, and any other organization or group of individuals, public or private.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.



   PRETREATMENT. The process of reducing the amount of pollutants,
eliminating pollutants, or altering the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing the pollutants into the city’s wastewater disposal
system. The reduction, elimination, or alteration may be obtained by
physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or other means,
except by dilution as prohibited by § 52.019.



   SHALL. Is mandatory; MAY is permissive.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the city’s
wastewater disposal system which:



      (1)   Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per
average work day;



      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the city’s
wastewater disposal system; or



      (3)   Has BOD or suspended solids loading equivalent to
domestic strength sewage at the flow defined in divisions (1) or (2) above;



      (4)   Has in its wastes at the point of discharge toxic
pollutants (as defined pursuant to § 307 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1317, or state statutes and rules) in sufficient quantity, either singly or
by interaction with other pollutants, to inhibit or disrupt any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a
toxic effect in the wastewater system; or



      (5)   Has a significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal
system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or air
emissions generated by the system.



   STATE. The State of Minnesota.



   STATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT. Any permit (including any terms,
conditions, and requirements thereof) issued by the MPCA pursuant to M.S. §
115.07, as it may be amended from time to time, for a disposal system as
defined by M.S. § 115.01, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.



   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is
removable by a standard glass fiber filter.



   USER. Any person who discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s wastewater disposal system.



   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and stormwater
that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into
or permitted to enter the city’s wastewater disposal system.



   WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM or SYSTEM. Any devices, facilities,
structures, equipment, or works owned or used by the city for the purpose of
the transmission, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
industrial and domestic wastewater or necessary to recycle or reuse water,
including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection system,
pumping, power, and other equipment, and their appurtenances; extensions,
improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements
essential to provide a reliable recycled water supply such as standby
treatment units and clear well facilities; and any works, including land,
that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for
ultimate disposal of residues resulting from the treatment. The SYSTEM shall
be designed, operated, and maintained in accordance with acceptable
engineering standards.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations
of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any
portion thereof.



(Prior Code, § 14-1-2)  (Ord. 132, passed 1-23-1984)




REGULATION OF DISCHARGES




§ 52.015  GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, into the wastewater disposal system any substance which exceeds
or any other way violates the prescribed design limitations of the system.



   (B)   (1)   In addition to compliance with these limitations, no
user shall discharge to any public sewer any discharge which causes
interference as defined with the wastewater disposal system.



      (2)   Pollutants in the effluent from an industrial user shall
not be considered to cause interference where the industrial user is in
compliance with specific limitations or standards developed by federal,
state, or local governments.



      (3)   Where the industrial user is in compliance with the
specific limitations or standards and pollutants in the effluent from the
industrial user’s facility nevertheless are determined to have caused or
significantly contributed to a violation of any requirement of the city’s
NPDES or state disposal system permit and are likely to cause such a
violation in the future, the city must take appropriate action to develop and
enforce specific effluent limits for that industrial user to ensure renewed
and continued compliance with the city’s NPDES or state disposal system
permit.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-1)



§ 52.016  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   National categorical pretreatment standards promulgated by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Act shall be met
by all users which are subject to such standards in any instance where they
are more stringent than the limitations in this chapter unless the Director
has applied for and obtained from the MPCA approval to modify the specific
limits in the national categorical pretreatment standards will be considered
for submittal by the Director when the city’s wastewater treatment system
achieves consistent removal of the pollutants. CONSISTENT REMOVAL shall be
defined as in 40 C.F.R. part 403 of the General Pretreatment Regulations for
Existing and New Sources of Pollution.



   (B)   Conditional revisions of national categorical pretreatment
standards may be made by the city in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403 if
requested by the industry, in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-2)  (Ord. 132, passed 1-23-1984)



§ 52.017  STATE AND LOCAL REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met by all
users which are subject to the standards in any instance in which they are
more stringent then federal requirements and limitations or those in this
chapter or any other applicable ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-3)



§ 52.018  PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.



   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all national
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified
by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s
expense. Plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be included as part of the permit application. The review of the plans
and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the
Director prior to the user’s initiation of the changes and shall be in
compliance with the existing permit, the terms of this chapter, and all other
applicable regulations.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-4)



§ 52.019  DILUTION.



   No user shall increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained herein,
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or contained in
any state requirements.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-5)



§ 52.020  ACCIDENTAL AND SLUG DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. Where
necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner’s or user’s own cost and
expense. Plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted as part of the application. Review and approval
of the plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user
from the responsibility to modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet
the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Users shall notify the Director immediately upon having a slug
or accidental discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of this
chapter in order to enable counter measures to be taken by the Director to
minimize damage to the wastewater disposal system and receiving waters. The
notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss, or
damage to the wastewater disposal system or treatment process, or for any
fines imposed on the city on account thereof under any state or federal law.
A notice shall be permanently posted in the user’s bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a slug or
accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause
or discover a discharge are advised of the emergency notification procedure.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-6)



§ 52.021  SLUDGES GENERATED.



   Sludges, screenings, skimmings, and the like, generated by an
industrial or commercial pretreatment system shall not be placed into the
city’s wastewater disposal system. The materials shall be contained,
transported, and disposed of in accordance with all federal, state, and local
regulations.



(Prior Code, § 14-2-7)




CHARGES AND FEES




§ 52.035  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the city’s wastewater disposal system for the implementation
of the program established in this chapter. The applicable charges or fees
shall be set forth in the city’s schedule of charges and fees to be
prepared from time to time by the Director and approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 14-3-1)



§ 52.036  MONITORING.



   All cost to the city associated with problem related non-scheduled
monitoring, including equipment rental or use, sample gathering, and
laboratory costs, shall be billed to the violating user according to the
provisions of § 52.999(B).



(Prior Code, § 14-3-2)



§ 52.037  INSPECTION.



   Routine inspection and surveillance costs shall be paid through the
permit fees.



(Prior Code, § 14-3-3)



§ 52.038  PERMIT.



   The wastewater discharge permit fees shall be proportional to as listed
in the fee schedule ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 14-3-4)




ADMINISTRATION




§ 52.050  GENERAL USER REPORTS.



   The Director may require that any person discharging or proposing to
discharge wastewater to the wastewater disposal system file a quarterly
discharge report. The discharge report may include, but not be limited to,
nature of process, rates of flow, mass discharge rate, raw material and
production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of
employees, compliance status with any state or federal pretreatment
standards, or other information which relates to the generation of waste,
including wastewater constituents and concentrations in the wastewater
discharge. The reports may also include sludge disposal practices and the
chemical constituents and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials stored on
site, even though they may not normally be discharged. At a minimum, a
summary of the data indicating each industrial user’s compliance with this
chapter shall be prepared annually and submitted to the Director. In addition
to discharge reports, the Director may require information in the form of
self-monitoring reports and compliance schedules.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-1)



§ 52.051  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   Mandatory permits. All industries proposing to connect or to
commence a new discharge to the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a
wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into the
wastewater disposal system if the discharge would result in the industry
being classified as a significant industrial user. All existing significant
industrial users or industrial users subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards under § 307(b) and (c) of the Act connected to or
discharging into the wastewater disposal system shall obtain a wastewater
discharge permit within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   Permit application. Users required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the Director an application in
the form prescribed by the Director and accompanied by a fee as provided in
§§ 52.035 through 52.038. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, and
proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting or
discharging to the wastewater disposal system. The Director will evaluate the
data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 45
days of receipt of a completed application form and after evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the Director may issue a wastewater
discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.



   (C)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges, and fees established by the city. Permits shall
contain the following (where applicable):



      (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater disposal system;



      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum waste constituents and
characteristics;



      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities for each point of discharge;



      (5)   Requirements for installation, operation, and
maintenance of pretreatment facilities;



      (6)   Specifications for in-plant monitoring programs which
may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number,
types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule;



      (7)   Compliance schedules;



      (8)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports;



      (9)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the Director, but in no case
less than three years, and affording Director access thereto;



      (10)   Requirements for notification to and acceptance by the
Director of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or of any
substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents
being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;



      (11)   Requirements for notification of slug or accidental
discharges as provided in § 52.020 and reporting permit violations;



      (12)   Requirements for disposal of sludges, screenings,
skimmings, and the like; and



      (13)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to
ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (D)   Permit duration. Permits shall be recertified annually upon
submission of the annual fee as specified in § 52.038. The terms and
conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the Director
during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in
§§ 52.015 through 52.021 are modified or other just cause exists. The user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 45
days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in
the permit shall include a schedule for compliance of not less than 180 days.



   (E)   Permit modifications. Within nine months of the promulgation
of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge
permit of users subject to the standard shall be revised to require
compliance with the standard within the time frame prescribed by the
standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment
standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater
discharge permit, the user shall apply for a permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In
addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit
to the Director within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
national categorical pretreatment standard a statement indicating whether or
not the pretreatment standards are being met, and if not, whether additional
pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance is required, a schedule shall
be submitted which shall comply with applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If the information previously submitted in an application is still
current and adequate, only a letter from the user certifying such shall be
required.



   (F)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit may be
reassigned, transferred, or sold to a new owner or a new user provided that
any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions
of the existing permit, and further provided that the Director receives
notification on a form prescribed and provided by the Director of the
reassignment, transfer, or sale.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-2)



§ 52.052  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Monitoring facilities for each discharge point to allow
inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage systems shall be provided and operated by all industrial
users. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s
premises, but the Director may, when such a location would be impractical or
cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public right-of-way and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles.



   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis.
The facility and sampling measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.



   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
Director’s requirements (as per the discharge permit) and all applicable
local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be
completed within 90 days following written notification by the Director
unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the Director.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-3)



§ 52.053  INSPECTION, SAMPLING, AND RECORDS.



   (A)   The Director shall inspect the facilities of any user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all
requirements are being complied with, in accordance with § 10.20. Persons or
occupants or premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow
the Director ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, or in
the performance of any of their duties. The Director, MPCA, and EPA shall
have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are
necessary to conduct samplings, inspection, compliance monitoring, and/or
metering operations.



   (B)   Where a user has security measures in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with any security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director, MPCA, and EPA
will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities relative to the provisions of this and other
applicable ordinances.



   (C)   Wastewater discharge records shall be kept by the user for a
period of at least three years. The records shall include information
required in § 52.001 and any requirements of federal regulations.



      (1)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment
standards shall be made available by the Director to officials of the EPA or
MPCA upon request.



      (2)   Any user subject to a national categorical pretreatment
standard, after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard, or in the
case of the commencement of a new discharge to the wastewater disposal
system, shall submit to the Director during the months of June and December,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the
Director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards. In addition,
this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the
reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in §§ 52.050 or
52.051(B). The Director may agree to alter the months during which the above
reports are to be submitted.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-4)



§ 52.054  COMPLIANCE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or in the case of the commencement of a new discharge
to the wastewater disposal system, any user subject to pretreatment standards
and requirements shall submit to the Director a report indicating the nature
and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated
process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the
average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user’s
facility which are limited by pretreatment standards or requirements. The
report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the
facility into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by the user and certified to by
a qualified professional.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-6)



§ 52.055  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from applications,
permits, monitoring programs, and inspections shall be available to the
public or other government agencies without restriction unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Director that the release of the information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
of the user.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, and until
the time as the information is determined not to be confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this chapter, the NPDES permit, state disposal system permit, and/or the
pretreatment programs, provided, however, that such portions of a report
shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information. Information accepted by the Director as
confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the
general public by the Director until and unless a ten-day notification is
given to the industrial user.



(Prior Code, § 14-4-7)




ENFORCEMENT




§ 52.070  SLUG OR ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE.



   (A)   The Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service of a
user and/or a wastewater discharge permit after formal written notice to the
discharger when the suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Director,
in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, or to the wastewater disposal system, or would
cause the city to violate any condition of its NPDES or state disposal system
permit.



   (B)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop the
discharge. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with
the suspension order, the Director shall take the steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the wastewater disposal system or endangerment to any individuals.
The Director shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user
describing the causes of the slug or accidental discharge and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Director
within 15 days of the date of occurrence.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-1)



§ 52.071  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   In accordance with the procedures of §§ 52.070 through 52.075, the
Director may revoke the permit of any user which fails to factually report
the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his or her discharge,
which fails to report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics, which refuses reasonable access to the user’s premises for
the purpose of inspection or monitoring or for violation of conditions of its
permit, this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-2)



§ 52.072  NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever the Director finds that any person has violated or is
violating this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition,
limitation, or requirement contained herein, the Director may serve upon the
person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days
of the date of the notice, unless a shorter time frame is necessary due to
the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof
shall be submitted to the city by the user.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-3)



§ 52.073  SHOW CAUSE HEARING.



   (A)   Notice of hearing. If the violation is not corrected by timely
compliance, the Director may order any user which causes or allows an
unauthorized discharge to show cause in a hearing before the City Council why
the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice of the hearing
shall include proposed enforcement action and shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation or one of the persons whose name appears on the permit
application.



   (B)   Hearing officials. The City Council may itself conduct the
hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any
officer or employee of the Public Works Department to:



      (1)   Issue in the name of the City Council notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
protection of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearings;



      (2)   Take the evidence; and



      (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the City
Council for action thereon.



   (C)   Transcripts. At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public
or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges therefor.



   (D)   Issuance of orders. After the City Council has reviewed the
evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders
and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-4)



§ 52.074  LEGAL ACTION.



   If any person discharges sewage, industrial waste, or other wastes into
the city’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the
city, the City Attorney may, following the authorization of the action by the
City Council, commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable
relief.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-5)



§ 52.075  APPEAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Any interested party shall have the right to request in
writing an interpretation or ruling on any matter covered by this chapter and
shall be entitled to a written reply from the city/City Attorney.



   (B)   Any decision of the Director in the enforcement of this
chapter maybe appealed to the City Council by filing a written petition with
the City Clerk within 30 days of the Director’s ruling. The petition shall
specify in detail the matter or matters involved and every ground or basis on
which objections are made. The petition shall show the names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of all objectors and their attorney at law or
representative. The filing of a petition in accordance with the requirements
herein shall stay all proceedings unless the Director shall file within 72
hours after the filing of a petition a certificate stating that a stay would
cause peril to life or property or specifying other good reason.



   (C)   The City Council shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of
the petition or appeal and give due notice of the time and place of the
hearing to parties named in the petition as attorney or spokesperson. The
hearing shall be open to the public. Petitioners shall be given full
opportunity to present evidence in support of their petition after which the
Director may present evidence in support of his or her decision.



   (D)   The City Council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable
time and notify the attorney or representative. The minutes of the Council
shall constitute the official record of the petition, hearing, and decision.
Any party desiring a transcript of the proceedings shall furnish a qualified
court reporter at its own expense.



(Prior Code, § 14-5-6)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an
order of the City Council or who has failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter and the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder
shall be fined a fee listed in the fee schedule ordinance. Each day on which
a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover
reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, court reporters’ fees, and other
expenses of litigation by an appropriate action against the person found to
have violated this chapter or the order, rules, regulations, and permits
issued hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 14-6-1)



   (B)   Costs of damage. In addition to the civil penalties provided
for in division (A) above, any user violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage,
or other impairment to the city’s wastewater disposal system shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violation
or discharge. The Director may add to the user’s charges and fees the costs
assessed for any cleaning, repair, monitoring at user’s location, or
replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Any refusal to pay the
assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 14-6-2)



   (C)   Criminal penalties.



      (1)   Any person who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this chapter or any provision of a permit issued by the city
thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by
law.



      (2)   Any person who continues any violation of any provision
of this chapter or any provision of a permit issued by the city thereunder
beyond the time limit provided for in the Director’s written notice of
violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by
state law.



      (3)   Each day in which a violation referred to in either
divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) above continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (4)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement or
representation in any record, report, plan, or document filed with the city,
or who falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any monitoring device
or method required under this chapter or any permit issued by the city
thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished not more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by
state law.



(Prior Code, § 14-6-4)



(Ord. 132, passed 1-23-1984; Ord. 274, passed 8-14-1995; Ord. 358, passed
1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 53:  ILLICIT DISCHARGE, DETECTION, AND ELIMINATION



Section



   53.01   Statutory authorization; purpose and intent



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Applicability



   53.04   Responsibility for administration



   53.05   Ultimate responsibility



   53.06   Prohibitions



   53.07   Suspension of MS4 Access



   53.08   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   53.09   Monitoring of discharges



   53.10   Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by the use of best management practices



   53.11   Watercourse protection



   53.12   Notification of spills



   53.13   Enforcement



   53.14   Appeal of notice of violation



   53.15   Enforcement measures after appeal



   53.16   Cost of abatement of the violation



   53.17   Injunctive relief



   53.18   Compensatory action



   53.19   Violations deemed a public nuisance



   53.20   Criminal prosecution



   53.21   Remedies not exclusive



§ 53.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is provide for the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of
non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process.



   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any
user;



      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the
municipal separate storm sewer system; and



      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance, enforcement, and monitoring procedures necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter.



   (C)   This section is adopted pursuant to the authorization and
policies contained in M.S. Ch. 103B and M.S. Ch. 462, as they may be amended
from time to time; Minn. Rules parts 6120.2500 to 6120.3900; Minn. Rules Ch.
8410, 8420, and 70510.0210.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-1)  (Ord. 606, passed 12-8-2014)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE. A discharge prohibited by this chapter and
without planning or thought prior to occurrence.



   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the city
designated to enforce this chapter.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from
raw materials storage.



   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to the NDPES construction
permits. Currently, these include construction projects resulting in land
disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, including any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether the drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the storm drain system, except as exempted in § 53.07.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NDPES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A stormwater conveyance or
unified stormwater conveyance system, including, without limitation, roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, stormwater detention
facilities, curbs, gutters, ditches, natural or human-made channels, or storm
drains that:



      (1)   Is located within the corporate limits of the city;



      (2)   Is owned or operated by the state, county, the city, or
other public body; and



      (3)   Discharges to waters of the state and/or United States,
excluding publicly owned treatment works, and lawful connections thereto,
which in turn discharge into the waters of the state and/or United States.



   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. Any
permit or requirement enforced pursuant to the clean water act as amended for
the purposes of regulating stormwater discharge.



   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that
is not composed entirely of stormwater.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation, or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner’s agent.



   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution.
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and
solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid
wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded
or abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute
to pollution; floatables, pesticides, herbicides; hazardous substances and
wastes; sewage, fecal coliform, and pathogens; dissolved and particulate
metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.



   POLLUTION. Human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, thermal, and/or radiological integrity of water.



   PREMISES. Any buildings, lot, parcel of land, or portion or land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.



   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely
of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from the
precipitation.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a
site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges and/or
receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.



   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.



   WATERS OF THE STATE AND/OR UNITED STATES. All water bodies regulated by
the state and/or United States including streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands,
marshes, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems,
drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations or water, surface or
underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained
within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof, or
which may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-2)



§ 53.03  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted
by an authorized enforcement agency.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-3)



§ 53.04  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized
enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the Director of the
authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the agency.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-4)



§ 53.05  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards, therefore this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-6)



§ 53.06  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A) Prohibition of illicit discharges.



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including,
but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause
or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other
than stormwater.



      (2)   The commencement or continuance of any illicit discharge
to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows.



   (B)   Exempt discharges. The following discharges are exempt from
discharge prohibitions established by this chapter: water line flushing or
other potable water sources; landscape irrigation or lawn watering; diverted
stream flows; rising ground water; ground water infiltration to storm drains;
uncontaminated pumped ground water; foundation or footing drains (not
including active ground water dewatering systems); crawl space pumps; air
conditioning condensation; springs; non-commercial washing of vehicles;
natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows; dechlorinated swimming pools;
fire fighting activities; and any other water source not containing
pollutants:



      (1)   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized
enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety;



      (2)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a
verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of
the test; and



      (3)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater
discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full
compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted for any discharge to the storm drain system.



   (C)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance, or continued
existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows
a connection to continue.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.07  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.



   (A)   Emergency cease and desist orders. When the city finds that
any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person’s past
violations are likely to recur, and that the person’s violation(s) has
(have) caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4
or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or
to the environment, the city may issue an order to the violator directing it
immediately to cease and desist all violations and directing the violator to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and



      (2)   Take appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Any person notified of
an emergency order directed to it under this division (A) shall immediately
comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a
discharger’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency
order, the city may take the steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to
persons or to the environment, including immediate termination of a
facility’s water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility
services. The city may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it
has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the authorized enforcement agency
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination
proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this chapter. A person
that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting
imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing
the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence, to the authorized enforcement agency within seven days of
receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the violator.



   (B)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations.
The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person
when a suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the
environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters
of the state and/or United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency
may take the steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the
MS4 or waters of the state and/or United States, or to minimize danger to
persons.



   (C)   Suspension due to detection of illicit discharges.



      (1)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this
chapter may have their MS4 access terminated if the termination would abate
or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify
a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may
petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing.



      (2)   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to a premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior
approval of the authorized enforcement agency.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-8)  (Ord. 606, passed 12-8-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.08  INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of the permit.
Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-9)



§ 53.09  MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that
have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity and
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, in accordance with §
10.20. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of
the authorized enforcement agency.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination, and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility the devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized
enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility’s
stormwater discharge.



      (4)   The city has the right to require the discharger to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to
measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing the access shall be borne by the
operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a
permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of
this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit
to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable
access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity
authorized or required by this chapter.



      (7)   If the city has been refused access to any part of the
premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he or she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement
agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-10)  (Ord. 606, passed 12-8-2014)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 53.10  REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS
BY THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.



   The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices
for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters
of the state and/or United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or
industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable
protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes
into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of
these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for
a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit
discharge, may be required to implement, at the person’s expense,
additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge
of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with
all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of
stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable,
shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs
shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary
for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-11)



§ 53.11  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or the
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that the structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-12)



§ 53.12  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of any known or
suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system,
or water of the state and/or United States the person shall take all
necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of the
release. In the event of a release of hazardous materials, the person shall
immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous
materials, the person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in
person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Public Works Director, City of Monticello within
three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited
materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner
or operator of the establishment shall also retain an on-site written record
of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. The records
shall be retained for at least three years.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-13)



§ 53.13  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Warning notice. When the city finds that any person has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or any order
issued hereunder, the city may serve upon that person or business a written
warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred
and requesting the discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to
seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation
and/or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way
relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring
before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this division (A)
shall limit the authority of the city staff to take any action, including
emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a
warning notice.



   (B)   Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. The notice of violation shall contain:



      (1)   The name and address of the alleged violator;



      (2)   The address when available or a description of the
building, structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has
occurred;



      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;



      (4)   A description of the remedial measures necessary to
restore compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for the completion
of the remedial action;



      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or
may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is
directed;



      (6)   A statement that the determination of violation may be
appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of
service of notice of violation; and



      (7)   A statement specifying that, should the violator fail to
restore compliance within the established time schedule, the work will be
done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense
thereof shall be charged to the violator. The notice may require without
limitation:



         (a)   Monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



         (b)   Elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



         (c)   Abatement of pollution and hazards;



         (d)   Restoration of affected property;



         (e)   Payment of fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs;



         (f)   Implementation of source control or treatment
BMPs; and



         (g)   Other actions as deemed necessary by the city.



   (C)   Deadline for restoration. If abatement of a violation and/or
restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a
deadline within which the remediation or restoration must be completed.
Notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or
restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a
designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall
be charged to the violator.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-14)  (Ord. 606, passed 12-8-2014)



§ 53.14  APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination
of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received
within 14 calendar days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on
the appeal before the appropriate authority or his or her designee shall take
place within 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice of
appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or its designee shall be
final.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-15)



§ 53.15  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within
seven calendar days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the
decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the
authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property
and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property, in accordance with § 10.20. It shall
be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to
enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.16  COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.



   Within 30 calendar days after abatement of the violation, the owner of
the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount of the assessment within 30 calendar days. If the amount due is
not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the
municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city by reason of the violation.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-17)



§ 53.17  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated
or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations
or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 53.18  COMPENSATORY ACTION.



   In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized
by this chapter, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator
alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance
at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, and the like.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-19)



§ 53.19  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In addition to the enforcement of processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at
the violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or
otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance may be taken.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-20)



§ 53.20  CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.



   (A)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this
chapter shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the
law.



   (B)   The enforcement agency may recover all attorneys’ fees,
court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this chapter,
including sampling and monitoring expenses.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-21)



§ 53.21  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law, and it
is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek
cumulative remedies.



(Prior Code, § 7-10-22)



CHAPTER 54:  GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND RECYCLING



Section



   54.01   Definitions



   54.02   Dump regulations



   54.03   Incinerator; license fee



   54.04   Dumping only in permitted places



   54.05   Officer responsible



   54.06   Revocation



   54.07   Garbage/refuse/recycling services



   54.08   Compost facilities



   54.09   Ownership of recyclable materials set out for curb-side
collection



 



   54.99   Penalty



§ 54.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPOSTABLE BAG. A paper or plastic bag that meets the American Society
for Testing Materials Standard Specification for Compostable Plastics (D6400).



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any inspector or any other representative duly
appointed by the City Council.



   GARBAGE. All animal and vegetable waste and all putrescible matter.



   PRIVATE DUMP. All parcels of land on which nonputrescible refuse is
accepted for deposit or permitted to be deposited regardless of whether a
charge is made therefor.



   RECYCLING. The process of collecting and preparing recyclable materials
and reusing the materials in their original form or using them in
manufacturing processes that do not cause the destruction of recyclable
materials in a manner that precludes further use.



   REFUSE. All waste substances, including garbage.



   SANITARY LAND FILL. A type of operation in which refuse is deposited by
plan on a specified portion of open land, is compacted by forces applied by
mechanical equipment, and then is covered by a layer of earth, ashes, or
suitable covering material to a depth of at least two feet.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-1)



§ 54.02  DUMP REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The following regulations shall be observed by any person to
whom a permit is issued by the city for the operation of all a sanitary
landfill or dump.



   (B)   These regulations shall govern the operation of all the
city-approved sanitary landfills and dumps, and any failure to observe these
regulations shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the permit by
the City Council.



      (1)   All garbage and other refuse accepted by the landfill
permit holder shall be thoroughly compacted by equipment of a size and weight
capable of producing a downward or ground pressure of at least five pounds
per square inch. The equipment shall have sufficient weight and capacity to
carry out all necessary operations to the satisfaction of the enforcement
officer. Sufficient auxiliary equipment shall be maintained on the site or
otherwise available to permit operation in case of a breakdown.



      (2)   Mixed refuse material shall be spread out on the working
face of the landfill so that the depth does not exceed a maximum depth of two
feet prior to its compaction.



      (3)   The areas shall be continually policed to prevent fire
and the blowing of papers, shall be neat and sanitary at all times, and shall
be covered at the end of each day’s operation, as well as when wind
conditions warrant it through the day, with sufficient material to prevent
blowing papers and unsightly conditions. The size of the active face on which
refuse is being currently deposited shall be kept to a minimum.



      (4)   Cover material will consist of earth, loam, clay, sand,
or a mixture of at least 50% earth and other inert materials such as ashes,
cinders, or gravel. A minimum depth of 12 inches of compacted cover and final
spread cover material shall be kept on all inactive faces of the landfill at
all times. The active faces of the landfills should be covered at the end of
each day’s operation or as otherwise directed by the inspector.



      (5)   When the landfill or dump has been brought up to two
feet below the desired finished grade, it shall be covered with at least 24
inches of compacted cover material graded and seeded in a manner as to
prevent erosion.



      (6)   Where the “trench system” of sanitary landfill is
used, successive paralleled trenches must be at least two feet apart.



      (7)   All garbage and refuse material existing on the site at
the time the permit is issued either in the form of an open dump or any other
form shall be collected, compacted, and covered with cover material at least
one foot in depth if below the desired finished grade or with inert material
at least two feet in depth at the finished grade. This cover operation shall
be completed within 15 working days after the issuance of a special permit
for the sanitary landfill.



      (8)   The permittee or operator shall erect such temporary or
permanent fences or take other measures as may be necessary to reasonably
control blowing of paper and other materials from the landfill or dump.



      (9)   Any material salvaged from the landfill or dump must be
handled and stored in a manner as to prevent rat harborage and permit proper
operation of the landfill or dump. The salvaged material must be removed to a
location at least 200 feet from the working surface so as not to interfere
with the compacting and covering. All salvaged material must be completely
removed from the site every 24 hours unless provision is made for temporary
storage within an enclosed, roofed, and rat-proof structure approved by the
inspector.



      (10)   Burning of any materials deposited in a dump or
landfill is expressly prohibited, except that in the case of tree limbs,
wooden crates, which burn readily without smouldering or producing offensive
odors, may be burned in a separate place at least 200 feet away from the area
where refuse is being compacted and covered, provided precautions are taken
to confine the fire and the burning is done in a manner as not to create a
nuisance condition. All burning shall be restricted to the hours between
11:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.



      (11)   Adequate fire fighting equipment shall be available at
all times on the site or the operator shall furnish the inspector with proof
of fire fighting equipment between the operator and the local fire district.



      (12)   No fill shall be placed in stream beds or other areas
where streams would be obstructed or where erosion by the stream would remove
cover material. There shall be no seepage or drainage of any material from
the fill of a nature as would constitute an odor nuisance or health hazard or
pollute any watercourse.



      (13)   The permit holder shall provide an access road approved
by the inspector that is passable in all types of weather conditions to the
dumping site.



      (14)   The license holder shall also provide an auxiliary fill
site available and ready for use during periods of heavy rain or snowfall and
when the area being filled and covered may not be reached because of the
weather condition. The permit holder shall also take precautions to eliminate
excess dust in dry weather.



      (15)   Insects and rodents on the site shall be controlled and
exterminated as directed by the inspector.



      (16)   The permit holder shall cease operations and close the
landfill between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and on Sundays and
holidays.



      (17)   For good and sufficient reasons, the City Council may
grant exceptions to the above operating procedures and standards or may
impose additional requirements subject to specific site conditions.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-4)



§ 54.03  INCINERATOR; LICENSE FEE.



   If a permittee wishes to install an incinerator at a dump or landfill,
he or she shall apply to the City Council for permission to do so. The
Council shall refer the request to the Planning Commission and engineer for
recommendations as to whether an incinerator shall be permitted and, if so,
what conditions, if any, shall be imposed in connection with the incinerator.
After receiving the reports, the Council may grant or deny the request for
the incinerator; and if the request is granted, conditions may be imposed in
connection with the operation of the incinerator. If the request is granted,
the annual license fee shall be increased by $25.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-5)



§ 54.04  DUMPING ONLY IN PERMITTED PLACES.



   No person, including those persons hauling or disposing of garbage or
refuse, trash, or other rubbish for a fee, shall deposit or dispose of any
garbage, trash, or other refuse on any property in the city not operated
under a permit issued by the City Council. Each sanitary landfill or dump
shall display a prominent sign containing the words “Approved Sanitary
Landfill or Dump Operated Under Permit No.        issued by the City of
Monticello”.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-6)



§ 54.05  OFFICER RESPONSIBLE.



   The officer responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter shall be appointed by the City Council. He or she shall provide
adequate and frequent inspections of the sanitary landfill sites and to this
end shall be authorized to call upon the Planning Commission for assistance
in making inspections. He or she shall notify any permit holder who is
violating the provisions of this subchapter of the specific manner in which
the subchapter is being violated. Unless the violation is corrected within 24
hours after notice in writing to the permit holder by the inspector, the
inspector shall notify the Council of any violation of the provisions of this
subchapter that the Council may, after a public hearing to which the violator
shall have been invited, suspend or revoke any permit for noncompliance or
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or when satisfied that
the landfill or dump constitutes a real menace and nuisance to the health,
safety, and welfare of the immediate residents in the neighborhood in which
it is located. In the event the permit holder refuses to correct the
violation within 24 hours after notice in writing by the inspector, the
inspector may, if he or she deems it necessary in the interest of public
health, enter upon the premises of the dump or landfill and, either with the
equipment and by employees of the license holder, or with the city-owned or
leased equipment and city employees, do the work as is necessary to correct
any condition violative of this subchapter, and which in his or her opinion
if left uncorrected may be hazardous to the public health. The cost to the
city of correcting the condition in privately owned dumps or landfills shall
be assessed against the permit holder who shall be required to pay all the
costs and expenses of the city in correcting the conditions.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-7)



§ 54.06  REVOCATION.



   Any permit or license granted hereunder may be revoked or suspended at
any time for any failure to pay the license fee or the cost of correcting
hazardous conditions as hereinbefore set forth or whenever, in the opinion of
the inspector, the continuance of the landfill or other means of final
disposal of refuse would endanger the health, welfare, or safety of the
public, provided that no such permit or license shall be revoked or suspended
except for to pay the fee, or the cost of correcting hazardous conditions as
herein provided except after public hearing before the City Council after the
notice of the hearing, and the purpose thereof shall have been sent to the
permit holder at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing, at which
hearing any person interested in the landfill shall have the right to be
heard.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-8)



§ 54.07  GARBAGE/REFUSE/RECYCLING SERVICES.



   (A)   Service rates. The city operates an organized garbage
collection and disposal program for all residential properties within the
city under the authority of M.S. Ch. 443, as it may be amended from time to
time. The city hereby establishes a per unit service charge for
garbage/refuse/recycling collection and related services for each residential
property unit that is individually served.



      (1)   A service charge for garbage/refuse/recycling
collection, disposal, and container rental provided to residential units
within the city shall be billed at the rates as established by City Council.



      (2)   Recycling services are provided for all residential
units in the city as per the city’s requirements under the city recycling
plan.



      (3)   Garbage/refuse/recycling bills shall be payable monthly
with the utility bill by the date specified on the bill. Mobile home parks
shall be billed in aggregate to the owner of the mobile home park. For other
clustered individually served residential units such as townhomes, the city
has the discretion to bill either a home owner association in aggregate or
each homeowner. Monthly charges apply to temporarily vacated property. The
charge is for service rendered in the month of the bill. Penalties will be
assessed on delinquent garbage/refuse/recycling charges at the same rate as
other utility charges.



   (B)   Delinquent garbage/refuse/recycling accounts.



      (1)   All charges for garbage/refuse/recycling service shall
be due by the due date stated on the utility bill. Any bill not paid by the
due date shall be deemed delinquent. Thereafter, the delinquent
garbage/refuse/recycling service charge shall be certified to the City Clerk
who shall prepare an assessment roll each year providing for assessment of
the delinquent amounts against the properties involved. The assessment roll
shall be delivered to the City Council for adoption before October 30 of each
year. Upon the adoption, the City Clerk shall certify the assessment roll to
the County Auditor for collection along with taxes.



      (2)   The city reserves the right to discontinue service to
any customer for nonpayment of charges or bills whose account is more than 60
days past due. The discontinuance of service shall not be made without
written notice. If service is disconnected, it shall not be resumed except
upon payment of the charges or bills accrued together with interest and
penalty thereon.



   (C)   Revision of garbage/refuse/recycling rates and recycling plan.
The City Council reserves the right to adjust the rates charged from time to
time and to amend the city’s garbage/refuse/recycling policy.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-9)  (Ord. 195, passed 8-27-1990; Ord. 214, passed
10-28-1991; Ord. 317, passed 9-28-1998; Ord. 520, passed 9-13-2010; Ord. 688,
passed 12-11-2017)



§ 54.08  COMPOST FACILITIES.



   (A)   Only yard waste and compostable bags, as specifically
identified on the bag as ASTM 6400, may be accepted at the compost facility.



   (B)   All residents who bag their leaves for curbside pickup are
required to use compostable bags (identified on the bag as ASTM 6400).



(Ord. 694, passed 3-12-2018)



§ 54.09  OWNERSHIP OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS SET OUT FOR CURB-SIDE COLLECTION.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this subchapter is to prevent the
unauthorized collection of materials that are designated as recyclables and
set out as part of the city’s curb-side recycling program. The theft of
these materials will deprive the contractor of their market value and forces
overall costs to go up. These costs will eventually be passed on to the
citizens of the city. The city will also be deprived of credit for recycling
tonnage reported to the county and the state.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CONTRACTOR. Any person/firm that has entered into a written
contract with the city for the collection of garbage, rubbish, recyclables,
and yard waste.



      CURB-SIDE RECYCLING PROGRAM. The organized collection of items
designated as recyclable by the contractor in accordance with the city’s
plan.



      ITEMS DESIGNATED AS RECYCLABLE. Items agreed upon by the city and
the contractor to be collected in the curb-side recycling program.



      SET OUT FOR COLLECTION. The placing of materials designated as
recyclables by the residents of the city at curb side for collection by the
contractor.



      UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION (SCAVENGING). The collection by any
person(s) other than the contractor or his or her authorized representative
of materials that are designated as recyclables and set out for collection by
the residents.



   (C)   Prohibition of unauthorized collection of materials set out
for the curb-side recycling program.



      (1)   The materials designated as recyclable shall be the sole
property of the city from the time of set out for collection by the resident
or when placed in the designated containers in the case of multiple units
until collection by the contractor. At the time of collection, items
designated as recyclable shall become the sole property of the contractor.



      (2)   The designation of recyclables shall be accomplished by
mutual agreement between the city and the contractor.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person(s) other than the
authorized contractor or his or her representative to collect any items that
are designated as recyclables and set out for collection as part of the
city’s curb-side recycling program.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-10)  (Ord. 182, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 358, passed
1-8-2001)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 54.01 through 54.09
is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more
than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 7-6-10)  (Ord. 182, passed 10-23-1989; Ord. 358, passed
1-8-2001)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS



      71.   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section




Traffic Regulations




   70.01   Act adopted



   70.02   Parking and stopping



   70.03   Removal of vehicles



   70.04   Owner



   70.05   Protection and preservation of city streets



   70.06   Street names



   70.07   Unreasonable acceleration and erratic driving



   70.08   Parking in regard to snow plowing and/or removal



   70.09   Unlawful purposes for parking (overnight lodging)




Boulevards




   70.20   Purpose



   70.21   Definition



   70.22   Allowable uses



   70.23   Prohibited uses



   70.24   Maintenance




Registration of Vehicles and Operators




   70.35   Motor vehicles; application



   70.36   Driver’s licenses; application



   70.37   Definitions



 



   70.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Fire lanes, see §§ 95.15 and 95.16



   Nuisances, see Chapter 91



   Recreational motor vehicles, see Chapter 71



   Streets and sidewalks, see Chapter 94




TRAFFIC REGULATIONS




§ 70.01  ACT ADOPTED.



   The regulatory provisions of M.S. Ch. 169, as it may be amended from
time to time, are hereby adopted as a traffic ordinance regulating the use of
highways, streets, and alleys within the city and are hereby incorporated in
and made a part of this subchapter as complete as if set out here in full.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-1)



§ 70.02  PARKING AND STOPPING.



   (A)   Except for the city or county on its own rights-of-way, no
person shall utilize any portion of any local public right-of-way, including
the traveled street, boulevard, or public parking lot for the storage or
parking of any object or material which is not a licensed, operable motor
vehicle, passenger vehicle, or motorcycle as defined by M.S. § 169.011,
subd. 42, 44, and 52, as they may be amended from time to time, except as may
be explicitly permitted on a temporary period of time by the City Council or
its designated representative.



   (B)   Properly licensed, operable motor vehicles, passenger
vehicles, and motorcycles may be parked in the public street where permitted
but not on the boulevard portion of the public right-of-way subject to the
further requirements of local parking regulations and applicable state
statutes. A trailer of any type, properly licensed or not, is not considered
a motor vehicle or part thereof when disconnected from its tow vehicle:



      (1)   On a sidewalk or boulevard between sidewalk and roadway;



      (2)   On a crosswalk;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at any intersection;



      (5)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



      (6)   Within 30 feet of any arterial stop sign or sign
indicating the direction for travel;



      (7)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street or highway;



      (8)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping,
standing, or parking;



      (9)   In any manner on any street or highway so as to
interfere with or interrupt the passage of other vehicles;



      (10)   Along the curb adjacent to any school property from
8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days when school is in session;



      (11)   On any street or roadway between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. from November 15 through April 15, except physicians on
emergency calls;



      (12)   On any city street for more than 72 consecutive hours;
and/or



      (13)   On any city street for more than the posted time limit
as established by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-2)  (Ord. 65, passed 3-12-1979; Ord. 193, passed
5-14-1990; Ord. 449, passed 8-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.03  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.



   Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle has been parked or
stopped in violation of any regulation contained herein, the officer is
hereby authorized to move the vehicle, provide for the removal of the vehicle
and the impounding of the same, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same. Any removal and/or impounding of the
vehicle shall be at the expense of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-3)



§ 70.04  OWNER.



   For the purposes of this section, the term OWNER shall mean the person,
firm, or corporation who holds legal title on the date of any alleged
violation as evidenced by the official records of the state’s Secretary of
State. Copies of any of the files or records of the Secretary of State
certified as being true copies shall be received in evidence with the same
force and effect as the originals, shall be admissible without further
foundation, and shall be prima facie evidence as to the ownership of the
vehicle, but nothing herein contained shall exclude or prohibit the
introduction of other evidence bearing on the issue of ownership.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-4)



§ 70.05  PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF CITY STREETS.



   (A)   Tractors or other types of vehicles with lugs. Tractors or
other vehicles with lugs thereon or any other type of farm machinery that is
not equipped with rubber tires are hereby prohibited from using bituminous
treated streets or parking lots in the city; and whoever drives such a
vehicle upon the streets whereby the streets or parking lots shall be damaged
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Load limits on city streets or parking lots. It shall also be
unlawful for any person or persons, firm, or corporation to drive any vehicle
over streets or parking lots having an axle weight load in excess of five
tons during periods of the year when county road restrictions are not in
effect. During periods of county road restriction or on streets designed for
more than five tons, the current city street design map adopted by the City
Council shall take precedence over the five ton limit and can be more or less
restrictive. Any person, firm, or corporation wishing to drive vehicles in
excess of above mentioned weight over any of the streets of the city shall
first apply to the City Administrator for his or her permission. The Council
may designate certain streets to be used regularly by such persons, firm, or
corporation in the operation of their business, outlining certain routes that
the vehicles are to follow and that no deviation from the routes will be
permissible.



   (C)   Trucks operating on residential streets. It will be unlawful
for any person or persons, firms, or corporations to operate a truck of over
12,000 pounds gross weight on residential streets except those trucks that
are actually engaged in making deliveries or pickups at residential
dwellings. Further, they will utilize state highways or designated truck
routes wherever possible when making these deliveries or pickups. All other
truck traffic not making deliveries or pickups will utilize only state
highways or designated truck routes. Trucks making deliveries or pickups on
residential streets will adhere to the provisions of division (B) above.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-5)  (Ord. 146, passed 4-8-1985; Ord. 358, passed
1-8-2001)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.06  STREET NAMES.



   Street names have been adopted according to the official city map on
file at City Hall.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-6)  (Ord. 26, passed 12-27-1976)



§ 70.07  UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION AND ERRATIC DRIVING.



   (A)   Unreasonable acceleration.



      (1)   Unreasonable acceleration by any motor vehicle upon any
public highway, street, parking lot, alley, or other public property within
the limits of the city, except when an emergency creates the necessity for
such operation, is prohibited.



      (2)   UNREASONABLE ACCELERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE is hereby
defined as acceleration which unnecessarily breaks traction between a tire or
tires and the driving surface, thereby causing a squealing or screeching
sound by the tire or tires or the unnecessary throwing of sand or gravel by
the tire or tires or both.



   (B)   Erratic driving. No person shall drive a vehicle on a public
highway, street, parking lot, alley, or other public property at erratic or
irregular and changing speeds so as to create a hazard to himself or herself
or other persons or property or so interfere with other traffic in the area.



   (C)   Exhibition driving.



      (1)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle upon
any public highway, street, parking lot, alley, or other public property
within the limits of the city which causes unnecessary engine noise or
backfire, nor shall anyone between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
parade a motor vehicle upon any public highway, street, parking lot, alley,
or other public property within the limits of the city.



      (2)   PARADE A MOTOR VEHICLE is hereby defined as driving or
operating a motor vehicle up, down, or up and down, the same highway, street,
parking lot, alley, or other public property more than three times within a
30-minute period.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-7)  (Ord. 42, passed 10-10-1977; Ord. 164, passed
10-11-1988; Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.08  PARKING IN REGARD TO SNOW PLOWING AND/OR REMOVAL.



   (A)   After a snowfall, all streets in the city shall be cleared of
all motor vehicles and parts thereof for the purposes of snow plowing and/or
removal until all streets are plowed.



   (B)   Any motor vehicle or parts thereof left on any street or
boulevard in the city in a way as to impede the performance of the city
and/or state snowplow shall be dealt with under § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-8)  (Ord. 155, passed 4-13-1987)



§ 70.09  UNLAWFUL PURPOSES FOR PARKING (OVERNIGHT LODGING).



   No person shall park a vehicle upon the park and ride lot for the
purpose of camping, sleeping, or inhabiting the lot.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-9)  (Ord. 624, passed 9-28-2015)  Penalty, see § 70.99




BOULEVARDS




§ 70.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to protect public rights-of-way in
the city from encroachments.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-1)



§ 70.21  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOULEVARD. The portion of the public right-of-way not used for street
purposes.



   CLUSTER CONCEPT. Mailboxes in groups of four or more with groups no
closer than 200 feet to another group, and placed at locations and
configurations as approved by the City Street Superintendent and/or U.S. Post
Master.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-2)



§ 70.22  ALLOWABLE USES.



   Following are allowable uses of a boulevard:



   (A)   Trees or shrubs as regulated by § 92.48;



   (B)   Mailboxes for U.S. Postal Service, provided all installations
of mailboxes in new subdivisions are of the “cluster” concept;



   (C)   Driveway accesses as regulated by city’s zoning ordinance;



   (D)   Sidewalks when constructed according to specifications as set
forth and approved by the City Engineer; and



   (E)   Advertising/newspaper boxes or tubes under the following
conditions.



      (1)   The advertising/newspaper boxes or tubes must be of an
all-purpose/universal type without any advertising, whether individual or
cluster concept.



      (2)   (a)   The following subdivisions/areas may continue
to have one advertising/newspaper box per parcel until the time as the U.S.
Postal Service or developer converts individual mail boxes to the
“cluster” box concept:



            1.   East County Road 39;



            2.   Hart Boulevard;



            3.   Anders Wilhelm and Balboul Estates; and



            4.   West County Road 75.



         (b)   Upon conversion of mail boxes to the cluster
concept all advertising/newspaper boxes must also be clustered.



      (3)   In all new subdivisions or areas where the U.S. Postal
Service, developer, or owner installs cluster mail boxes, all
advertising/newspaper boxes shall be allowed by the cluster concept only.



      (4)   All advertising/newspaper boxes, whether individual or
clustered, shall be maintained by the installer and shall be repaired or
replaced within ten days upon written notice by the city, or the city will
have the box or boxes removed at the owner’s expense. The city shall not be
responsible for damage to any box erected within the boulevard.



      (5)   All mailboxes including posts, supports, and clusters
for U.S. Postal Service and advertising are the responsibility of the
properties included in the mailbox.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-3)  (Ord. 154, passed 4-13-1987; Ord. 156, passed
6-22-1987; Ord. 254, passed 8-8-1994)



§ 70.23  PROHIBITED USES.



   All uses of a boulevard not listed in § 70.22 are prohibited unless a
permit has been approved by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-4)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.24  MAINTENANCE.



   Property owners abutting a boulevard are responsible for maintenance.



(Prior Code, § 8-5-5)  (Ord. 48, passed 4-10-1977)




REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES AND OPERATORS




§ 70.35  MOTOR VEHICLES; APPLICATION.



   Every motor vehicle used or operated on any highway within the city
shall be registered in compliance with the provisions of M.S. Ch. 168, as it
may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 9-2-1)



§ 70.36  DRIVER’S LICENSES; APPLICATION.



   Every person who is required by M.S. Ch. 171, as it may be amended from
time to time, to be licensed in order to operate a vehicle or a motor vehicle
upon a highway within the state shall at all times while operating a vehicle
or motor vehicle on any highway within the city have in his or her immediate
possession, a license issued in compliance with the provisions of M.S. Ch.
171, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 9-2-2)



§ 70.37  DEFINITIONS.



   The words and phrases HIGHWAY, MOTOR VEHICLE, OWNER, PERSON, and
VEHICLE shall have the meanings ascribed to them by M.S. Ch. 168 and Ch. 171,
as they may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 9-2-3)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any violation of the statutes adopted by reference in § 70.01
is a violation of the ordinance when it occurs within the city. Any person
thus violating any provision of § 70.01 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum penalty for a
misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. If a minimum fine or imprisonment is
prescribed by the state’s Highway Traffic Act, being M.S. Ch. 169, as it
may be maned from time to time, for the offense or if the offense be
classified as a petty misdemeanor, the penalty and/or classification shall
apply to a person convicted of the same offense under § 70.01.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-1)



   (C)   Any person violating any provision of § 70.05 is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-5)



   (D)   Any person violating any provision of § 70.07 is guilty of a
petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the
maximum penalty as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 9-1-7)



   (E)   The owner and operator of any motor vehicle operated in
violation of § 70.35, and any person violating § 70.36 hereof, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than
the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. If a
minimum fine or imprisonment is prescribed by state law for an offense or if
the offense be classified as petty misdemeanor, the penalty and/or
classification shall apply to the person convicted of the offense under §§
70.35 or 70.36.



(Prior Code, § 9-2-4)



(Ord. 164, passed 10-11-1988; Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 71:  RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLES



Section



   71.01   Purpose and intent



   71.02   Definitions



   71.03   Permitted operation of a recreational motor vehicle



   71.04   Restrictions of recreation motor vehicles



   71.05   Designation of public areas for use



   71.06   Minimum equipment requirements



   71.07   Compliance



 



   71.99   Penalty



§ 71.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for
the use of recreational motor vehicles on public and private property in the
city. It is intended to protect life, property, and to prevent public
nuisances. No section hereafter shall be construed to minimize regulations
set forth in M.S. Ch. 168 (Motor Vehicle Registration), as it may be amended
from time to time, M.S. Ch. 169 (Motor Vehicle Operation)/(Driver License
Regulations), as it may be amended from time to time, and M.S. §§ 84.81 et
seq. (Snowmobile Regulations), as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-1)



§ 71.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Has the meaning given in M.S. § 84.92,
subd. 8 , as it may be amended from time to time.



   CLASS 1 ATV. An ATV that has a total dry weight of less than 900 pounds.



   CLASS 2 ATV. An ATV that has a total dry weight of 900 to 1,500 pounds.



   DRIVER-OPERATOR. Every person who drives or operates and is in actual
physical control of a recreational vehicle.



   MOTORIZED GOLF CART. A vehicle usually three or four wheeled, which is
self-propelled and is designed to be used to provide transportation on a golf
course.



   OWNER. A person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or
title to a recreational motor vehicle entitled to the use or possession
thereof.



   RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE (RMV). A self-propelled vehicle designed for
travel on snow, ice, or natural terrain steered by wheels, skis, or runners.
Snowmobiles, Class 1 ATV, Class 2 ATV, UTV, golf carts, go-carts, mini-bikes,
dune buggies, and trail bikes are all RMVs.



   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice
steered by skis or runners.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-2)



§ 71.03  PERMITTED OPERATION OF A RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE.



   The following recreational motor vehicles shall be specifically
permitted.



   (A)   Class 2 ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated for general
recreational use as a direct route for access to and from the operator’s
residence for the purpose of entering or leaving the city.



   (B)   Class 2 ATV may operate on the extreme right hand side of the
right-of-way of streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public
motor vehicular travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the city and
follow all regulations described in M.S. § 84.928, subd. 1 , as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (C)   Snowmobiles may operate on the extreme right hand side of the
right-of-way streets, roadways, or alleys that are used for other public
motor vehicular travel and that are under the jurisdiction of the city and
follow all regulations described in M.S. § 84.87, subd. l , as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (D)   Owner-operator must present proof of registration of the Class
2 ATV if the registration is required by M.S. § 84.922 , as it may be
amended from time to time.



   (E)   Owner-operator must hold valid insurance complying with M.S.
§ 65B.48, subd. 5 , as it may be amended from time to time.



   (F)   Class 2 ATVs and snowmobiles shall obey all city and state
traffic laws when operating vehicles on city streets.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-3)



§ 71.04  RESTRICTIONS OF RECREATION MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Recreational motor vehicles shall not be allowed, except as
specifically permitted in this chapter.



   (B)   It is a misdemeanor for any person to operate any recreational
motor vehicle as listed below.



      (1)   Class 2 ATVs and snowmobiles may operate with the
following restrictions:



         (a)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
within 300 feet of a residence, except that on Friday and Saturday nights and
evenings preceding Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s the hours shall
be 1:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.;



         (b)   At a rate of speed greater than reasonable,
prudent, or proper under all the surrounding circumstance, but in no case
exceeding 15 mph for snowmobiles and 20 mph for Class 2 ATV;



         (c)   On publicly owned land, including school, city
street, park property, playgrounds, or recreation areas, nor on any sidewalks
or pathways in the city provided for pedestrian and/or bicycle travel;



         (d)   Class 2 ATVs cannot be operated on the road ditch
bottom or outside ditch slope unless on a trail designated for Class 2 ATV;



         (e)   At any place in a careless, reckless, or negligent
manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property or
to cause injury or damage thereto;



         (f)   On private property or another without specific
permission of the owner or person in control of the property;



         (g)   While under the influence of alcohol or drugs as
defined in M.S. § 169A.20, as it may be amended from time to time;



         (h)   So as to intentionally chase, run over, or kill
any animal;



         (i)   On any roadway, shoulder, or inside bank or slope
of any city trunk, county state aid, or county highway in the city, except as
provided in this chapter, nor shall operation on any such highway be
permitted where the roadway directly abuts a public sidewalk or walkway; and



         (j)   Without headlight and taillight lighted at all
times if the vehicle is equipped with headlight and taillight.



      (2)   All other recreational motor vehicles, including, but
not limited to, Class 1 ATVs, motorized golf cars, go-carts, mini-bikes, dune
buggies, and utility task vehicles, are not permitted on any city street,
county or state highway, sidewalk, pathway, trail, recreational area, or any
other public area, nor on any private property of another without permission
to do so by the owner of the property.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-4)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.05  DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC AREAS FOR USE.



   The City Council may designate areas for use of recreational motor
vehicles by approval of a majority of the members of the Council upon public
notice being given.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-5)



§ 71.06  MINIMUM EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Standard mufflers shall be properly attached and in constant
operation to reduce the noise of operation of the motor to the minimum
necessary for operation. No person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass,
straight pipe, or similar device on a recreational motor vehicle motor. The
exhaust system shall not emit or produce a sharp popping or crackling sound.



   (B)   Brakes shall be adequate to control the movement of and to
stop and hold under any conditions of operation.



   (C)   At least one clear lamp shall be attached to the front with
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a distance of at least
100 feet ahead during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions. The head lamp shall be so that glaring rays are not projected
into the eyes of an oncoming vehicle operator. It shall also be equipped with
at least one red tail lamp having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet
to the rear during the hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
This equipment shall be required and shall be in operating condition when the
vehicle is operated between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and
one-half hour before sunrise, or at times of reduced visibility.



   (D)   Snowmobiles require reflective material at least 16 square
inches on each side, forward of the handlebars, so as to reflect a beam of
light at a 90-degree angle.



   (E)   Helmet and seat belts are required.



      (1)   A person less than 18 years of age shall not ride as a
passenger or as an operator of a recreational vehicle regulated herein on
public land, public waters, or on a public road right-of-way unless wearing a
safety helmet approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



      (2)   A person less than 18 years of age shall not ride as a
passenger or as an operator of a vehicle regulated herein without wearing a
seat belt when a seat belt has been provided by the manufacturer.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-6)



§ 71.07  COMPLIANCE.



   It is unlawful for an owner-operator to permit a recreational motor
vehicle contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-7)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 9-3-8)  (Ord. 685, passed 11-27-2017)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   NUISANCES



      92.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



      93.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      95.   FIRE PREVENTION



      96.   PUBLIC GATHERINGS



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




Dogs and Other Domestic Animals




   90.001   Definitions



   90.002   Enforcement



   90.003   Right of entry



   90.004   Running at large prohibited



   90.005   Wild or vicious animals prohibited



   90.006   Animal Control Officer



   90.007   Interfering with Animal Control Officer



   90.008   Rabies vaccination requirements



   90.009   Impoundment of rabies suspects



   90.010   Confinement of animals with history of biting



   90.011   Abandonment of animals



   90.012   Dog license required



   90.013   Dog license fee and application



   90.014   Unauthorized use of dog license receipts, tags of
inoculation certificates



   90.015   Limit on number of dogs and cats



   90.016   Dog tags



   90.017   Impounding dogs



   90.018   Impounding stray dogs



   90.019   Disposition of certain diseased or dangerous dogs or other
animals



   90.020   Redemption of dogs and other animals



   90.021   Possession of nuisance animals



   90.022   Dogs disturbing the peace; enforcement



   90.023   Cleaning up litter



   90.024   Dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs



   90.025   Permits for commercial dog kennels; permits for keeping
more than three dogs over the age of six months




Animals; Fowl




   90.040   Animals kept within city limits



   90.041   Stables



   90.042   Animals, fowl within city limits; permits



   90.043   Application for permit



   90.044   Duration of permit; fee



   90.045   Conditions for keeping animals; revocation



   90.046   Refusal to grant permit



   90.047   Pens; yards



   90.048   Animals, fowl at large



   90.049   Manure




Beekeeping




   90.060   Definitions



   90.061   Purpose



   90.062   Colony location



   90.063   Colony density



   90.064   Required conditions



   90.065   Registration



   90.066   Inspections



   90.067   Appeal and hearing procedure




Trapping




   90.080   Purpose



   90.081   Definitions



   90.082   Violations



   90.083   Exceptions



 



   90.999   Penalty




DOGS AND OTHER DOMESTIC ANIMALS




§ 90.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person contracted with by the City Council,
designated as such by it, to perform the duties prescribed by this subchapter
as an independent contractor.



   AT LARGE. When a dog it is off the property of the person owning,
harboring, or keeping a dog and it is not under restraint.



   CITATION. A notice or complaint issue by the Animal Control Officer to
the owner of any animal apprising the owner of one or more violations of this
subchapter.



   COMMERCIAL KENNEL. A place where more than three dogs of over six
months age are kept for purposes of breeding, sale, or boarding.



   DOG KENNEL. Any place, building, tract of land, boat, or vehicle
wherein or whereupon dogs are kept, congregated, or confined, the dogs having
been obtained from municipalities, dog pounds, dog auction, or by advertising
for unwanted dogs, or dogs abandoned or stolen.



   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or acting as custodian of
a dog or other domesticated animal.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, or corporation.



   PREMISES. Any building, structure, shelter, or land whereon dogs or
other animals are kept or confined.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL OR ANIMALS. Any animal or animals which:



      (1)   If dog or dogs is/are repeatedly found at large;



      (2)   Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;



      (3)   Is/are vicious animal(s);



      (4)   Causes fouling of the air by odor;



      (5)   Causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or
surroundings;



      (6)   By virtue of number of types of animals maintained are
offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare;



      (7)   Excessively makes disturbing noises;



      (8)   Molests passer(s)by or passing vehicles; or



      (9)   Attacks other domestic animals.



   UNDER RESTRAINT. On the premises of the person harboring or keeping the
dog; within a private motor vehicle of a person owning, harboring, or keeping
the dog; or controlled by a leash not exceeding six feet in length.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Place for the treatment, hospitalization, surgery,
care, and boarding of animals or birds, which place is owned and operated by
a licensed veterinarian.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL OR ANIMALS. Any animal or animals which constitute a
physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more
attacks of such severity as to cause property damage or physical injury,
however slight.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-1)



§ 90.002  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by the Animal
Control Officer and those officers designated in this subchapter. The Animal
Control Officer and Wright County Sheriff’s office may issue citations for
violations of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-2)



§ 90.003  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Animal Control Officer shall have the right to enter upon any
premises at all reasonable times, in accordance with § 10.20, for the
purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this subchapter where there is a
reasonable belief that a violation of this subchapter has been committed.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-3)



§ 90.004  RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.



   No dog shall be allowed by its owner to run at large, and every owner
of a dog shall cause the same to be:



   (A)   Confined to the owner’s property by training, fencing, or
leashing, and females in heat shall be confined in an enclosure and so kept
and confined therein during the entire period and until the dogs shall not
attract other dogs on account thereof;



   (B)   While in any public place such as a school, playground, or a
park, to be on a leash, chain, or cord of not more than six feet in length
and in the custody of a person of sufficient age to adequately control the
dog at all times; and



   (C)   While in all other areas such as on a public street or in an
automobile, to be in the custody of a person of sufficient age to adequately
control the dog at all times and to have and keep the dog under control.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-5)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.005  WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep or allow to be kept any place in the city an
animal of a ferocious or vicious character, habit, or disposition, or any
animal which is wild by nature.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-6)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.006  ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   (A)   The City Council may appoint or designate an Animal Control
Officer to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and to perform the
duties in connection with the enforcement thereof as the City Administrator
or the code of ordinances may direct. The City Administrator may authorize,
at the times as he or she may deem necessary, persons designated under Animal
Control Officer to purchase equipment for the purpose of capturing and
conveying to an animal pound all animals in violation of this code.



   (B)   The designee shall be under the supervision of the Animal
Control Officer and the City Administrator and may be authorized to issue
violation tags and to carry and display appropriate badges or identification.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-7)



§ 90.007  INTERFERING WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   No person shall in any manner molest, hinder, or interfere with the
Animal Control Officer or designee employed directly or by contract with the
city to capture animals and convey them to the animal pound while the person
is engaged in the occupation. Whoever violates this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-8)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.008  RABIES VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All dogs and cats, over the age of six months, kept, harbored,
maintained, or transported within the city shall have current vaccinations
given by a licensed veterinarian for rabies.



   (B)   A copy of certificate of vaccination shall be provided to the
Animal Control Officer or designee.



§ 90.009  IMPOUNDMENT OF RABIES SUSPECTS.



   (A)   Any dog or cat not vaccinated in accordance with §§ 90.008
and 90.010 which has bitten any person and caused an abrasion or puncture of
the skin of a person shall be seized and impounded under the supervision of a
licensed veterinarian or at the city contract kennel facility for a period of
not less than ten days. If, after a complete examination by a veterinarian
the dog or cat has no clinical sign of rabies, it may be released to the
owner upon the condition that the owner have the animal vaccinated as
required by §§ 90.008 and 90.010 and licensed as required by § 90.013. In
the case of a stray, the animal shall be disposed of in accordance with
applicable laws. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person having custody
or control of any dog or cat not vaccinated in accordance with §§ 90.008
and 90.010 and which has bitten any person to refuse to release the dog or
cat and make it immediately available to the Animal Control Officer for the
purpose of quarantine.



   (B)   Any dog or cat vaccinated in accordance §§ 90.008 and 90.010
which has bitten any person shall be confined by the owner or other
responsible person in such manner as the Animal Control Officer may direct
and for a period of not less than ten days. The Animal Control Officer or
authorized representative shall conduct a mid-term and terminal examination
of the animal. If no signs of rabies are observed by the Animal Control
Officer, the domestic animal may be released from confinement. It shall be
unlawful for any owner or person in custody or control of any vaccinated dog
or cat which has bitten any person to refuse or fail to quarantine the dog or
cat as required by this division (B). The Animal Control Officer or his or
her agent shall seize any dog or cat not quarantined in accordance with this
division (B).



   (C)   Any other animal which has bitten any person and caused an
abrasion or puncture of the skin of a person shall be seized and impounded
under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or at the city contract
kennel facility for a period of not less than ten days. If after a complete
examination by a veterinarian the animal has no clinical signs of rabies, the
animal may, with the approval of the Animal Control Officer, be released to
the owner. In the case of an unclaimed animal, it shall be disposed of in
accordance with applicable laws. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person
in custody or control of any animal which has bitten any person to refuse to
release the animal and make it immediately available to the Animal Control
Officer for the purpose of quarantine.



   (D)   Any rabies suspect impounded or confined under this section
which is found to be sick or diseased shall be reported immediately in
writing to the Animal Control Officer by the attending veterinarian or
operator of the quarantine facility. The Animal Control Officer shall then
take possession of the animal for the purposes of determining if it is
suffering from rabies.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-11)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.010  CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS WITH HISTORY OF BITING.



   Every fierce, dangerous, or vicious animal, including dogs, that has a
history of biting a human or any domestic animal, shall be confined by the
owner within a building or secure, covered enclosure. The animal shall not be
taken out of the building or secure, covered enclosure unless muzzled and on
a leash.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-12)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.011  ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful to abandon any dog or other animal within this
city.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-13)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.012  DOG LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall own, harbor, or keep a dog over six months of
age within the city unless a current license for the dog has been obtained.
The license shall be issued for a two-year period and shall expire on
December 31 of the last year of the license issued. A late payment charge, in
the amount set by the City Council from time to time, shall be assessed for
failure to apply for a renewal license by March 1 of the year of expiration
of the current license. The City Administrator may pro-rate the amount of the
license fee of one who owns, harbors, or keeps a dog over six months of age
for less than a full two-year period.



   (B)   The license fee for the keeping of a dog over six months of
age may be waived on application by a person who shall certify that he or she
is over the age of 65 years and has an annual income not in excess of $5,000.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-14)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.013  DOG LICENSE FEE AND APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be required of each person owning, keeping, or
harboring a dog to pay a license fee to the City Administrator or Animal
Control Officer as imposed by this section, except as provided in § 90.011
herein. The license fee for any dog shall be computed at the rate duly set by
the City Council. Each application for the license shall include a statement,
signed by the person applying for the license, which certifies that the dog
has been inoculated for rabies not more than 24 months preceding the date of
application. Receipt of license which includes the color, breed, age, sex,
and weight of the dog shall be provided by the owner for inspection upon the
request of the Animal Control Officer or Wright County Sheriff.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to service dogs
or dogs used for police activity.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-15)



§ 90.014  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF DOG LICENSE RECEIPTS, TAGS OF INOCULATION
CERTIFICATES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use for any dog a license
receipt, license tag, or a rabies inoculation certificate issued to another
person or dog.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-16)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.015  LIMIT ON NUMBER OF DOGS AND CATS.



   (A)   Generally. Except for kennels licensed under this section the
following limits on animals will apply. For the purposes of this section, the
term HOUSEHOLD refers to a single-family residence or single unit of a town
home, condominium, apartment, or comparable structure which is rented,
leased, or used as a single unit. This section shall not be construed to
limit the ability of apartment managers, landlords, town home associations,
or other representative of property owners to impose greater restrictions.



   (B)   Dogs. No household shall keep, maintain, or otherwise house
more than a total of three dogs over the age of six months within any
household in the city.



   (C)   Cats. No household shall keep, maintain, or otherwise house
more than a total of four cats over the age of six months within any
household in the city.



   (D)   Congregate limit. No household shall keep, maintain, or
otherwise house more than five domestic animals - combination of dogs and
cats unless authorized by a residential or commercial kennel license.



§ 90.016  DOG TAGS.



   The City Administrator or designee shall procure a sufficient number of
metallic tags for delivery of one such tag to the person paying the license
fee. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the dog for which the tag
was obtained to permanently attach the tag to the collar of the dog in a
manner that the tag may be readily seen. The tag is not transferrable to any
other dog or to a new owner of the dog. If a tag is lost or stolen, the owner
may obtain a new tag by surrendering the license receipt for the first tag
and by paying an additional fee as duly set by the City Council from time to
time.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-17)



§ 90.017  IMPOUNDING DOGS.



   The Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound any dogs found in
the city without the tag provided for by this subchapter or dogs running at
large. To enforce this subchapter, the Animal Control Officer may enter upon
any private premises in pursuit of a dog running at large, in accordance with
§ 10.20. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to interfere with
the Animal Control Officer engaged in taking a dog hereunder for impounding
or to refuse to surrender a dog to the Animal Control Officer for confinement
as required.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-18)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.018  IMPOUNDING STRAY DOGS.



   (A)   The Animal Control Officer may seize or impound any dog found
astray on public property or claimed to be astray by the owner of the
premises upon which the animal may be found, provided that the owner of the
premises demands the seizure or impoundment and agrees in writing to
indemnify and hold harmless the city from any claim for damages by the owner
of the dog.



   (B)   Disposition of the impounded stray shall thereafter be
pursuant to the provisions as found in this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-19)



§ 90.019  DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN DISEASED OR DANGEROUS DOGS OR OTHER
ANIMALS.



   (A)   Any dog or other animal displaying symptoms of being rabid may
be seized at any place or time and shall be confined in the city dog pound or
other appropriate place designated for the purpose by the City Council from
time to time at the expense of the owner until found to be free from rabies.



   (B)   If any dog or other animal appears to be diseased, vicious,
dangerous, rabid, or has been exposed to rabies, and the dog or other animal
cannot be taken up and impounded without serious risk, the dog or other
animal my be killed if reasonably necessary for the safety of any person or
persons.



   (C)   When any dog or other animal has bitten any person wherein the
skin has been punctured or the services of a doctor are required, a report of
the incident shall be made to the Wright County Sheriff’s office and Animal
Control Officer by the owner or custodian of the biting dog or animal or the
person bitten, or his or her parent or guardian, within 24 hours of the bite.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-20)



§ 90.020  REDEMPTION OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.



   (A)   The city, upon the impounding of any dog or other animal, may
condition redemption of the dog from impounding upon payment of the required
impounding fee as duly set by the City Council from time to time, plus the
cost of boarding for each day of said dog or other animal that has been
confined in the pound, together with the payment for a current license for
the dog if no current license has been issued.



   (B)   If at the end of six days after the impounding the dog or
other animal has not been redeemed, it may be sold at private sale, or the
keeper of the pound may dispose of the dog or other animal in a humane manner
or pursuant to the terms of M.S. § 346.37, as it may be amended from time to
time.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-21)



§ 90.021  POSSESSION OF NUISANCE ANIMALS.



   No person shall keep, own, harbor, or otherwise possess within the city
an animal which is a public nuisance animal or vicious animal.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-22)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.022  DOGS DISTURBING THE PEACE; ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in possession,
or harbor any canine which howls, yelps, or barks to the reasonable annoyance
of another person or persons. Any person violating this section who, upon
first requested by an Animal Control Officer or any duly authorized assistant
to stop or prevent the annoyance and refuses to comply with the request, will
be issued a citation and, if the officer deems it necessary to stop the
annoyance, may have the canine taken to the city animal pound. Any canine
placed in the pound may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of the fee
prescribed. If not reclaimed, it may be disposed of in the proper manner.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-23)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.023  CLEANING UP LITTER.



   (A)   The owner of any dog, or any person having the custody or
control of any dog, shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the
animal and disposing of the feces in a sanitary manner. More than six piles
of feces in the yard may result in a violation tag being issued.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person owning, keeping, or harboring a
dog to cause or permit the dog to be on property, public or private, not
owned or possessed by the person without having in his or her immediate
possession a device for the removal of feces and depository for the
transmission of excrement to a proper receptacle located on the property
owned or possessed by the person.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person in control of, causing, or
permitting any dog to be on any property, public or private, not owned or
possessed by the person, to fail to remove feces left by the dog to a proper
receptacle located on property owned or possessed by the person. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to service dogs or dogs used for
police activity.



   (D)   Any Animal Control Officer or any duly authorized officer or
agent authorized by the City Administrator may issue citations.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-24)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.024  DANGEROUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.



   (A)   Adoption by reference of state law and county ordinance. The
provisions of M.S. Ch. 347 (§§ 347.50 through 347.65), as it may be amended
from time to time, and county Ord. 10-01, as they may be amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted by reference as fully as if set out herein, and
shall be administered and enforced by the city’s Animal Control Officer and
Wright County Sheriff’s office and designated pursuant to that law and
ordinance.



   (B)   Conflict of laws. When any provisions of this subchapter,
county ordinance, or state laws applicable to dangerous or potentially
dangerous dogs are in conflict, the provisions that impose the greater
restrictions or protections shall apply.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-25)  (Ord. 511, passed 4-12-2010)



§ 90.025  PERMITS FOR COMMERCIAL DOG KENNELS; PERMITS FOR KEEPING MORE THAN
THREE DOGS OVER THE AGE OF SIX MONTHS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      COMMERCIAL KENNEL. A place where more than three dogs thereof are
kept for the business of selling, boarding for a fee, breeding for sale, or
some other enterprise intended primarily for profit-making purposes. The term
COMMERCIAL KENNEL shall not include pet stores, pet grooming shops, or animal
hospitals.



   (B)   License required.



      (1)   No person shall own, harbor, or keep upon a premises
more than three dogs over the age of six months unless in a commercial kennel
duly licensed under this section.



      (2)   No person shall keep or maintain a commercial kennel in
the city except upon obtaining a permit from the City Council. Commercial
kennel licenses shall only be granted in an agricultural zoning district as a
conditional use.



   (C)   Applications. The application shall be made to the City Zoning
Administrator and shall contain the following:



      (1)   The location of the premises of the kennel along with
the home and work telephone numbers of the licensee and one other person who
could be contacted in the absence of the licensee;



      (2)   The maximum number and species of adult dogs to be kept
on the premises. The term ADULT as used herein shall include any animal over
six months of age;



      (3)   A site plan showing the location, size, and type of all
structures for housing, fencing, and runs for dogs. Separate housing and runs
for dogs shall be a minimum of 50 feet from any neighboring habitable
dwelling and a minimum of ten feet from any property line. If dogs are kept
primarily within a building, the applicant shall so state;



      (4)   Whether the applicant anticipates breeding the animals
and, if so, how often and the expected size of the litters;



      (5)   The method to be used to keep the premises in a sanitary
condition;



      (6)   The method used to keep the animals quiet; and



      (7)   An agreement by the applicant that the premises may be
inspected by the Animal Control Officer at all reasonable times. An
inspection of the premises prior to licensing and during the licensing period
shall be required.



   (D)   Issuance and conditions. The City Zoning Administrator shall
refer the application to the Animal Control Officer for review and
recommendation to the Planning Commission and City Council prior to Council
and Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall conduct a
public hearing. The issuance of a license shall take into consideration the
following: adequacy of housing and runs for the animals; the methods to be
used for sanitation and to maintain quiet; the quality and height of the
fencing; and, with particularity, any violations during the previous license
period, if applicable. The Council and Planning Commission may impose such
conditions as it shall deem necessary and appropriate to carry out the intent
of this subchapter.



   (E)   Design.



      (1)   Kennels or shelter floors and walls shall be constructed
of impervious and easily cleanable materials and all structures, areas, and
appurtenances so designed as to facilitate frequent and easy cleaning. With
regard to private kennels where dogs are kept indoors, this shall apply to
the portions of the principal structure to which the dogs are confined, fed,
and cleaned.



      (2)   All areas shall be adequately and properly ventilated
and have ample light and heat, either natural or artificial.



      (3)   Every kennel or shelter shall be suitably enclosed or
fenced in such a manner as to prevent the running at large or escape of the
animals confined therein. No dogs may be tethered.



      (4)   Doors, windows, and other openings shall be screened.



      (5)   The premises shall be provided with adequate, safe, and
approved sewer, water, and plumbing facilities.



      (6)   Enclosure shall be of sufficient size to allow each dog
to turn around fully and stand, sit, and lie in a comfortable, normal
position. The floors of the enclosure shall be constructed so as to prevent
injury to the dog’s legs and feet.



      (7)   Disposal facilities shall be provided to minimize
vermin, infestation, odors, and disease hazards.



      (8)   Adequate storage and refrigeration shall be provided to
protect food supplies against contamination and deterioration.



   (F)   Operation and conditions. All kennels and shelters shall be
maintained in a clean, healthful, sanitary, and safe condition so as not to
create a health hazard or public nuisance. Kennels shall be operated in a
humane manner.



   (G)   Revocation. If a license fails to comply with the statements
made in the application or with any reasonable conditions imposed by the City
Council, or violates any other provision of this subchapter, the licensee
shall be notified by mail and given ten days to remedy any defects or
defaults. If the condition be not remedied in the ten days, the Council may
revoke the license.



   (H)   Tags. Licensees shall affix an identification tag to all dogs
owned by or under the control of the licensee. The identification tags shall
at a minimum contain the name, address, and telephone number of the licensee.



   (I)   Rabies vaccination. A licensee shall cause every dog in the
kennel to be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with anti-rabies vaccine.
Puppies shall be so vaccinated at or before the age of 16 weeks and again at
the age of one year. Adult animals shall be so vaccinated at least once in
every 24-month period or as often as needed under the type of vaccine used to
ensure immunity.



   (J)   License fees. The license is non-transferable. The fee for
kennel license shall be at a rate as set by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-26)  (Ord. 169, passed 3-13-1989; Ord. 277, passed
3-25-1996; Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 494, passed 1-26-2009)




ANIMALS; FOWL




§ 90.040  ANIMALS KEPT WITHIN CITY LIMITS.



   (A)   No members of the equestrian family (horses, mules), bovine
family (cows, bulls), sheep, poultry, or fowl (chickens, turkeys, ducks)
unless permitted, swine (including Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs), goats, bees
unless permitted, and other animals associated with a farm, ranch, or stable
shall be kept within the city limits, except in an outlying district where
there are not more than three residences, other than that occupied by the
owner or occupant of the premises upon which the animals are kept, within a
distance of 500 feet of the structure housing or enclosing the animal, unless
a special written permit therefor is issued by the Animal Control Officer and
the City Clerk after an inspection of the premises and a finding of fact to
the effect that no nuisance shall be created thereby. The special permit
shall be issued for the keeping of any such animals on any lot only in the
following two cases:



      (1)   Where the animals were being lawfully kept on the lot
prior to enactment hereof; and



      (2)   Where the animals were being lawfully kept on the lot
after the enactment hereof in an area in which there were not three
residences within a distance of 500 feet of the structure enclosing the
animals, and subsequently other residences were built bringing the structure
housing the animals within a restricted district. The permit shall be for the
term of one year and shall not be renewed without a re-inspection.



   (B)   All animals, other than those specifically allowed and
permitted by this subchapter, shall be prohibited within the city limits.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-1)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.041  STABLES.



   (A)   Every stable or other building wherein any animal listed in §
90.040 is kept shall be constructed of such material and in such manner that
it can be kept clean and sanitary at all times.



   (B)   Every stable or other building occupied by authority of a
special permit shall, if located within 200 feet of any tenement or apartment
house, hotel, restaurant, boarding house, retail food store, building used
for school, religious, or hospital purposes, or residence other than that
occupied by the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the creatures
are kept, be provided with a water-tight and fly-tight receptacle for manure
of such dimension as to contain all accumulations of manure, which receptacle
shall be emptied sufficiently often and in a manner as to prevent its
becoming a nuisance. The receptacle shall be kept securely covered at all
times except when open during the deposit or removal of manure or refuse. No
manure shall be allowed to accumulate except in the receptacle.



   (C)   The Animal Control Officer shall, if he or she deems the
measures necessary in order to avoid a nuisance, require that any building be
screened tightly against flies and/or that it be provided with running water,
drain sewer connection, flooring impervious to water, and that other measures
be taken as may be necessary to ensure proper protection to public health and
safety as conditions precedent to the issuance of any special permit.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-2)



§ 90.042  ANIMALS, FOWL WITHIN CITY LIMITS; PERMITS.



   (A)   No person shall anywhere in the city keep, harbor, or maintain
care, custody, or control over any small animal such as a rabbit or any fowl,
such as a chicken, turkey, or duck, or any pigeon, without obtaining a permit
therefor issued by the Animal Control Officer and the City Clerk.



   (B)   The Animal Control Officer and the City Clerk may grant any
permit pursuant to this section after the applicant has sought the written
consent of the property owners adjoining the applicant’s real estate. The
written consent shall be required on the first and initial application and as
often thereafter as the Animal Control Officer deems necessary.



   (C)   Roosters are prohibited within the city.



   (D)   No permit shall be issued for more than six hen fowl.



   (E)   No permit shall be granted to keep any animal, fowl, or pigeon
within a dwelling unit or part thereof, nor on any real estate which contains
three or more dwelling units.



   (F)   This section shall not apply to dogs or cats or to
veterinarians or licensed pet shops or licensed kennels.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-3)  (Ord. 615, passed 4-27-2015)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.043  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Any person desiring a permit under this chapter shall make written
application therefor to the City Clerk upon a form prepared by the City
Clerk, which application shall describe the real estate upon which it is
desired to keep the animals and shall require the giving of such information
by the applicant as the city may request. The application shall contain a
statement by the applicant that he or she will at all times keep the animals
in accordance with all conditions prescribed by the Animal Control Officer,
and failure to obey the conditions shall be a violation of this chapter and
shall be cause for cancellation of the permit by the Animal Control Officer
and the City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-4)



§ 90.044  DURATION OF PERMIT; FEE.



   (A)   Each permit issued hereunder shall expire one year after the
issuance unless revoked.



   (B)   The annual fee for a permit shall be as stated in the fee
schedule, which shall be paid at the time the application is submitted.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-5)



§ 90.045  CONDITIONS FOR KEEPING ANIMALS; REVOCATION.



   The Animal Control Officer may prescribe general conditions for the
keeping of animals or fowl and specific conditions as to a particular animal
or fowl or particular premises as in his or her judgment is necessary to
safeguard public health and the general welfare. The Animal Control Officer
may revoke any permit granted pursuant to this chapter if any condition is
violated or if any pet becomes a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-6)



§ 90.046  REFUSAL TO GRANT PERMIT.



   The Animal Control Officer and City Clerk may refuse a permit to keep
or maintain animals or fowl hereunder for failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and shall refuse a permit if in his or her
judgment the animals or fowl should not be kept upon the premises described
in the application for permit. If any permit be refused, the fee paid with
the application shall be retained by the city to pay its expenses in the
investigation and consideration thereof.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-7)



§ 90.047  PENS; YARDS.



   All structures, pens, coops, or yards wherein animals or fowl are kept
or permitted to be shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
devoid of all rodents and vermin, and free from objectionable odors. The
interior walls, ceilings, floors, partitions, and appurtenances of all the
structures shall be whitewashed or painted as the Animal Control Officer
shall direct. The Animal Control Officer, upon the complaint of any
individual, shall inspect any structure or premises and issue any order as
may be necessary to carry out the provisions hereof.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-8)



§ 90.048  ANIMALS, FOWL AT LARGE.



   No person shall permit any horses, mules, donkeys, ponies, cattle,
sheep, goats, swine, rabbits, chickens, geese, ducks, or turkeys of which he
or she is the owner, caretaker, or custodian to be at large within the city.
Any creature shall be deemed to be AT LARGE when it shall be off the premises
owned or rented by its owner and unaccompanied by the owner or an agent or
employee of the owner.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-9)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.049  MANURE.



   No manure shall be dumped or left on any street, alley, sidewalk, or on
any open area or lot in any inhabited portion of the city. Manure shall not
be used to grade in whole or in part any sidewalk, street, open area, or lot
in the section unless the manure is completely covered with at least four
inches of dirt.



(Prior Code, § 6-3-10)  (Ord. 170, passed 3-13-1989; Ord. 557, passed
4-9-2012)  Penalty, see § 90.999




BEEKEEPING




§ 90.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of bees on a single lot.



   BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
honey bees or a person who owns or controls a lot on which a colony is
located whether or not the person is intentionally keeping honey bees.



   BEEKEEPING EQUIPMENT. Anything used in the operation of an apiary, such
as hive bodies, supers, frames, top and bottom boards and extractors.



   COLONY. An aggregate of honey bees consisting principally of workers,
but having, when perfect, one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and
honey.



   FLYWAY BARRIER. A barrier that raises the flight path of bees as they
come and go from a hive.



   HIVE. The receptacle inhabited by a colony.



   HONEY BEE. All life stages of the common domestic HONEY BEE. This
definition does not include wasps, hornets, African subspecies, or
Africanized hybrids.



   NUCLEUS COLONY. A small quantity of honey bees with a queen housed in a
smaller than usual hive box designed for a particular purpose, and containing
no supers.



   SUPER. A box that holds the frames where bees will store the honey.



   SWARMING. The process where a queen bee leaves a colony with a large
group of worker bees in order to form a new honey bee colony.



   UNUSUAL AGGRESSIVE BEHAVIOR. Any instance in which unusual aggressive
characteristics such as stinging or attacking without provocation occurs.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-1)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 90.061  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Honey bees are an asset to the community and important in the
pollination of plants and in the production of honey and other products.



   (B)   The purpose and intent of this subchapter it to permit and
establish requirements for the keeping of honey bee colonies, hives, and
equipment within the city.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-2)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 90.062  COLONY LOCATION.



   (A)   Hives cannot be located in the front yard and must be located
a minimum of ten feet from the rear or side property lines and 25 feet from
public rights-of-way unless further restricted elsewhere in this code. A
corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards. Hive openings shall
face in toward subject property’s backyard.



   (B)   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in removable frames, which
shall be kept in sound and usable condition.



   (C)   For each colony permitted to be maintained under this section,
there may also be maintained upon the same apiary lot, one nucleus colony in
a hive structure not to exceed one standard nine and five- eighths-inch
depth, ten-frame hive body with no supers.



   (D)   A flyway barrier at least six feet in height shall shield any
part of a property line that is within 30 feet of a ground hive. The flyway
barrier shall consist of a wall, fence, dense vegetation, or a combination
thereof, and it shall be positioned to transect both legs of a triangle
extending from an apex at the hive to each end point of the part of the
property line to be shielded.



   (E)   Rooftop apiaries are allowed but shall not be located closer
than 15 feet from a principal building on an abutting lot.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-3)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 90.063  COLONY DENSITY.



   (A)   Every lot or parcel of land in the city shall be limited to
the following number of colonies based on the size of the apiary lot:



      (1)   One-half acre or smaller is allowed two colonies;



      (2)   More than one-half acres to three-quarters of an acre is
allowed four colonies;



      (3)   More than three-quarters of an acre to one acre is
allowed six colonies;



      (4)   More than one acre to five acres is allowed eight
colonies; and



      (5)   More than five acres, there is no restriction on the
number of colonies and no registration is required.



   (B)   If any beekeeper removes honey bees from locations where they
are not desired, that person shall not be considered in violation if the
person temporarily houses the honey bees on the apiary site of a beekeeper
registered under this section for no more than 30 days and remains at all
times in compliance with the other provisions in this section.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-4)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 90.064  REQUIRED CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Honey bee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable
frames, which shall be kept in sound and useable condition.



   (B)   A constant supply of water shall be provided for all hives,
except during the dormant period.



   (C)   Materials from a hive or colony which might encourage the
presence of honey bees, such as wax comb, shall be promptly disposed of in a
sealed container or placed within a building or other bee-proof enclosure.



   (D)   Beekeeping equipment shall be maintained in good condition.
Unused beekeeping equipment must be protected to prevent occupancy by
swarming honey bees.



   (E)   Hives shall be continuously managed to provide adequate living
space for their resident honey bees in order to prevent swarming.



   (F)   In any instance in which a colony exhibits unusual aggressive
behavior, it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to promptly implement
appropriate actions to address the behavior.



   (G)   Honey may not be sold from any residential property unless a
permit has been obtained and required conditions met in accordance with the
city’s zoning code.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-5)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 90.065  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Residents seeking approval to keep and raise honey bees shall
submit an application, application fee, and site plan. Registration is not
required for sites over five acres in size.



   (B)   If the beekeeper relocates a hive or colony to a new apiary
site, the beekeeper shall apply for an updated registration, prior to the
relocation, on the form provided by the city.



   (C)   The beekeeping registration shall be valid January 1 through
December 31 of each calendar year following initial issuance and must be
renewed by the registrant prior to expiration each year by submitting a
renewal form to the City Clerk.



   (D)   The applicant for the license must notify all residents of the
property if the applicant is not the owner or operator and the owner or
operator must be an additional signatory on the license application.
Notification is not required for renewal of the license.



   (E)   (1)   Upon receipt of application, the city will send
written notice to property owners living within 200 feet of applicant.



      (2)   Any objections to the registration must be made in
writing and received within ten days.



      (3)   If any written objection is received, the application
must be referred to the City Administrator.



      (4)   The application must be denied if the city receives a
written objection from an adjacent property owner that includes medical
documentation by a licensed physician of an allergy to honey bee venom.



   (F)   Applicants for a beekeeping license shall provide proof of
applicable training or provide a waiver indicating how required experience
has been obtained.



   (G)   The fees for the registration will be determined by the City
Council in the city’s fee schedule.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-6)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)



Cross-reference:



   Fees, see Chapter 36



§ 90.066  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon initial registration, annual renewal, or any updated
registration, each beekeeper must allow for an inspection by the Animal
Control Officer of the site.



   (B)   Upon prior notice to the owner of the apiary site, city staff
or Animal Control Officer shall have the right to inspect any apiary, in
accordance with § 10.20.



   (C)   In the case of a complaint regarding the apiary, the apiary
site may be inspected without prior notice.



   (D)   The Animal Control Officer or designated city staff may refuse
to grant or revoke a license if the honey bees become a nuisance as
determined by the city or the Animal Control Officer.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-7)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)



§ 90.067  APPEAL AND HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Registrations issued under this section may be denied,
revoked, or non-renewed due to any of the following:



      (1)   The keeping of honey bees in a manner which constitutes
a nuisance to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public as
determined by the Animal Control Officer;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or a false statement contained
in the registration application or during the course of the registered
activity; and/or



      (3)   Any violation of the applicable provisions in this
subchapter.



   (B)   (1)   Notice of approval, denial, revocation, or
non-renewal must be made in writing to the registrant and to any person
opposing the application for initial registration specifying the reason(s)
for the action.



      (2)   The registrant or any person opposing the application
may request a hearing with the City Council within 14 days of the date of the
notification letter.



(Prior Code, § 6-8-8)  (Ord. 634, passed 4-11-2016)




TRAPPING




§ 90.080  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to preclude the potential harm
that may be inflicted upon people, particularly children, and to prevent the
maiming, unselective catching, and destruction of wild animals and birds and
domestic animals that come in contact with traps.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-1)



§ 90.081  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TRAP. Any mechanical device or snare which seeks to hold, capture, or
kill an animal.



   TRAPPING. The setting or laying or otherwise using of a trap in the
platted residential areas and parks of the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-2)



§ 90.082  VIOLATIONS.



   Trapping in all areas within the city, including parks areas, is
prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-3)  Penalty, see § 90.999



§ 90.083  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to the use of
any trap specifically designed to kill rats, mice, gophers, or moles.



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to the use of
cage type live traps employed for the control of nuisance animals as long as
the traps are tended each 12 hours.



   (C)   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to
representatives of the city, county, or state who may, in the course of their
duties, be required to use a trap to trap, snare, kill, or otherwise restrain
the free movement of any wildlife, animal, or bird for humane or authorized
purposes.



   (D)   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to teachers
trapping for educational programs or scientists for the purpose of studying
animals, wildlife, or birds which will be returned to their natural
environment uninjured.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-5)  (Ord. 204, passed 2-11-1991)



§ 90.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Whoever violates § 90.017 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Any person who violates § 90.024, a county ordinance, or
state law applicable to dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-25)



   (D)   Any person who maintains a kennel without first obtaining a
license therefor in violation of § 90.025 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 6-2-26)



   (E)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 90.080 through
90.083 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished not
more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 7-8-4)



(Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001; Ord. 511, passed 4-12-2010)



CHAPTER 91:  NUISANCES



Section




Public Nuisances




   91.01   General policy



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Nuisances unlawful



   91.04   Public nuisance



   91.05   Exception



   91.06   Abatement




Disposal of Unclaimed Property




   91.20   Definitions



   91.21   Disposal of property other than motor vehicles



   91.22   Disposal of motor vehicles



   91.23   Deposit of net proceeds




Air Quality




   91.35   Adoption of standards and regulations



 



   91.99   Penalty




PUBLIC NUISANCES




§ 91.01  GENERAL POLICY.



   It is determined that the uses, structures, activities, and factors
described with this subchapter, if allowed to exist, will tend to be harmful
to the public welfare, safety, and morals. No person shall maintain or permit
to be maintained any public nuisance identified within this subchapter on
property in the city that is owned, leased, rented, occupied, or otherwise in
the control of the person.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-1)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Where terms are not defined this subchapter but are defined in the
International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) or elsewhere in the city code,
the terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.



   PREMISES. Include any yard, lot, parcel, sidewalk, boulevard, street,
highway, alley, park, playground, restaurant, café, church, school, any car
or other motor vehicle, parking lot, drive-in, building used for business,
commercial, or industrial purposes, washroom or lavatory, apartment hallway,
or other location whether public or private in the city.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Whoever by act or failure to act does any of the
following is guilty of maintaining a PUBLIC NUISANCE:



      (1)   Annoy, injure, or endanger the safety, health, comfort,
or repose of the public;



      (2)   Offend public decency;



      (3)   Unlawfully interfere with, obstruct, or tend to obstruct
or render dangerous for passage, a lake, navigable river, bay, stream, basin,
public park, square, street, alley, or highway; and



      (4)   In any way render a considerable number of persons
insecure in life or in use of property.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-2)



§ 91.03  NUISANCES UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or association
to maintain any public nuisance defined in this subchapter and it shall
further be unlawful to do any act that is defined as a public nuisance in
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-3)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.04  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   (A)   Misdemeanors. The following nuisances are declared to be
misdemeanors:



      (1)   Unwholesome substance that is brought in, deposited,
left, dumped, or allowed to accumulate within the city;



      (2)   Junk vehicles: a JUNK VEHICLE is a vehicle without a
valid current license, or without a valid current registration (if
applicable), or which is apparently inoperable located outside an enclosed
building in a residential area including, but not limited to, automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, trailers, all-terrain vehicles, and
watercraft;



      (3)   Pest harborage:



         (a)   All exterior property shall be free from rodent
harborage and infestation;



         (b)   Boxes, lumber, scrap metal, and similar materials
shall not be allowed to accumulate outside a structure in a manner that
attracts an infestation of pests; and



         (c)   Materials permitted and approved for exterior
storage shall be neatly stacked.



      (4)   Garbage and rubbish:



         (a)   All household garbage, offal, dead animals, animal
and human waste, and waste materials;



         (b)   Accumulations of litter, glass, scrap materials
(such as wood, metal, paper, and plastics), junk, combustible materials,
stagnant water, plastic bags, or trash; and



         (c)   Accumulations of clothing and any other items not
designed for outdoor storage.



      (5)   Non-trash items;



         (a)   Accumulations of wood pallets;



         (b)   Accumulations of vehicle parts or tires;



         (c)   All construction and building materials unless the
materials are being used at the time in the construction of a building, in
which case the construction must be permitted and on a continuous
uninterrupted basis;



         (d)   All appliance or appliance parts;



         (e)   All indoor or upholstered furniture of a type of
material which is deteriorated by exposure to outdoor elements; and



         (f)   All other non-trash items which:



            1.   Are of a type or quantity inconsistent with
the normal and usual use;



            2.   Are of a type or quantity inconsistent with
then intended use of the property; or



            3.   Are likely to obstruct or impede the
necessary passage of fire or other emergency personnel.



      (6)   Fertilizer and burial of waste:



         (a)   No person shall leave, deposit, or cause to be
placed on any private ground any garbage; and



         (b)   Sewage, waste, debris, carcass, or other substance
or matter which is offensive or unhealthy by decomposition unless the same be
buried at least three feet under the surface of the ground; provided, that
the use of manure and phosphorous fee fertilizer in the normal course for
agriculture or horticulture is permitted.



      (7)   Engaging within the city in any trade or employment
which is hurtful to the inhabitants or dangerous to the public health, or
injurious to neighboring property, or from which obnoxious odors arise, or
undue noise emanates, and specifically no person shall operate a dump or
garbage dumping area or rendering plant except the specific activity be
authorized by the issuance of a permit as hereinafter provided;



      (8)   Causing or permitting garbage, tin cans, or refuse to be
thrown or scattered upon any street, alley, highway, parkway, boulevard, or
real estate;



      (9)   Causing or permitting detached structures not requiring
a building permit that do not conform to the following requirements:



         (a)   All such detached structures shall be constructed
of uniform building grade material;



         (b)   All sides, roof, and floor shall be securely
fastened to the interior frame of the detached structure;



         (c)   All surfaces of the detached structures shall be
stained, sealed, or painted;



         (d)   Exterior metal surfaces shall be treated with
materials designed to resist corrosion;



         (e)   Structures that do not have slab floors shall have
a rodent barrier that extends eight inches under the surface of the ground
along the perimeter of the outside wall of the structure;



         (f)   All the detached structures shall be permanently
anchored to the ground;



         (g)   Storage sheds erected after the adoption of the
zoning ordinance shall meet district setback requirements; and



         (h)   Detached structures shall be erected in the side
or rear yard of any residence.



      (10)   Consumption of beer, wine, or liquor in public except
as provided by law;



      (11)   Strewing, scattering, littering, throwing, or disposing
of any garbage or refuse onto any premises except into receptacles provided
for such purposes;



      (12)   Marking with ink, paint, chalk, or other substance, or
posting handbills on, or in any other manner defacing or injuring any public
or private building or place within the city, or marking, defacing, or
injuring fences, trees, lawns, or fixtures appurtenant to or located on the
site of the buildings, or posting handbills on the fences, trees, or
fixtures, or place a sign anywhere on any site except as permitted by the
owner thereof;



      (13)   Lingering about the doorway of any building, or sitting
or lingering upon the steps, window sills, railing, fence, or parking area
adjacent to any building in a manner as to obstruct or partially obstruct
ingress to or egress from the building or in a manner to annoy the owner or
occupant;



      (14)   Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
otherwise causing an obstruction or interference with premises or rendering
any premise dangerous for passage except in cases of emergency;



      (15)   Failing or refusing to vacate or leave any premises
after being requested or ordered, either orally, in writing, or by posted
sign, to do so by the owner, agent, manager, or person in charge thereof, or
by any law enforcement agent or official, and also the return at any time
thereafter to any such premises after having been so requested or ordered to
vacate or leave the premises;



      (16)   Maintaining nuisance vegetation as follows:



         (a)   In any area the existence of any noxious or
poisonous vegetation such as poison ragweed or other poisonous plants, or any
weed, grass, brush, or plants which are a fire hazard or otherwise
detrimental to the health or appearance of the neighborhood;



         (b)   In any area within 100 feet of the nearest
building, the existence of weeds or grass in excess of eight inches in height
or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush; or



         (c)   In any area on an occupied lot, the existence of
weeds or grass in excess of eight inches in height or any accumulation of
dead weeds, grass, or brush.



      (17)   All other conditions or things that are likely to cause
injury to the person or property of anyone; and



      (18)   Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, or cinders in
unreasonable quantities.



   (B)   Petty misdemeanors. The following nuisances are declared to be
petty misdemeanors:



      (1)   Racing the motor of any motor vehicle so as to cause
unnecessary and unreasonable noise;



      (2)   Causing, producing, or creating any unnecessary and
unreasonable notice by shouting, mechanical means, the blowing of motor
vehicle horns, or any similar noise;



      (3)   Improper or annoying use of spot lights onto persons or
premises;



      (4)   Using profane, abusive, indecent, or threatening
language in public; and



      (5)   Occupying a standing motor vehicle in an area generally
reserved for parking or occupies a standing motor vehicle while the vehicle
is double parked.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-4)  (Ord. 602, passed 10-13-2014)



§ 91.05  EXCEPTION.



   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to the hauling or
accumulation or spreading of manure for the purposes of agriculture provided
the public health, safety, and welfare is not adversely affected thereby.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-5)



§ 91.06  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Notice. Whenever the officer who is charged with enforcement
determines that a public nuisance is being maintained or exists on premises
in the city, the officer shall notify the owner and occupant of the premises
of the fact and order that the nuisance be terminated and abated. The owner
of the property will be determined as shown by the records of the office of
the County Recorder. The notice shall be served in person or by regular mail.
If the premises is not occupied and the owner is unknown, the notice may be
served by posting it on the premises. The notice shall specify the steps to
be taken to abate the nuisance and the time, not exceeding five business days
for any grass or weed nuisance and not exceeding 20 days for all other
nuisances, to either correct the violation or appeal to the City Council for
a determination that the complained of activity does not violate the
subchapter.



   (B)   Accelerated abatement. For second or successive violations
concerning grass, weeds, and other vegetation in a calendar year, the city
will, without additional notice, correct the conditions creating the
violations and assess the cost therefor against the property.



   (C)   Recovery of cost. The owner of the premise on which a nuisance
has been abated by the city shall be personally liable for the city’s cost
of abatement, including administrative costs. As soon as the work has been
completed and the cost determined, the city shall prepare a bill for the cost
and mail it to the owner. Thereupon, the amount shall be immediately due and
payable to the city.



   (D)   Assessment. If the nuisance is a public health or safety
hazard on private property, the growth of weeds on private property or
outside the traveled portion of streets, or unsound or insect-infected trees,
the City Clerk shall, on or before September 1 next following abatement of
the nuisance, list the total unpaid charges along with all other charges as
well as other charges for current services to be assessed under M.S. §
429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, against each separate lot or
parcel to which the charges are attributable. The City Council may then
spread the charges against the property under that statute and other
pertinent statutes for certification to the County Auditor and collection
along with current taxes the following year or in annual installments, not
exceeding ten, as the Council may determine in each case.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-6)  (Ord. 602, passed 10-13-2014)




DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY




§ 91.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.



   NET PROCEEDS. The sale price of any item of property or of a motor
vehicle, less any costs of handling, storage, and sale.



   PROPERTY. All forms of tangible personal property.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-1)



§ 91.21  DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY OTHER THAN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Property lawfully coming into the possession of the city and its duly
designated agent in the course of its municipal operation and remaining
unclaimed by the owner thereof for at least three months thereafter may be
sold by the city to the highest bidder at public auction or sale following
one week published notice thereof.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-2)



§ 91.22  DISPOSAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Motor vehicles impounded by the city and its duly designated
agents or otherwise lawfully coming into its possession during the course of
its municipal operations and remaining unclaimed by the owner thereof may be
sold by the city to the highest bidder at public auction or sale following
one week published notice thereof.



   (B)   Prior to the disposal of any motor vehicle, the city shall
mail to the registered owner, if any, as shown by the records of the
state’s Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notice of its possession and intent to
dispose of the motor vehicle.



   (C)   No sale of a motor vehicle shall be conducted until the motor
vehicle has been in possession of the city for a period of not less than 30
days after the mailing of notice to the registered owner, if any, as provided
herein.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-3)



§ 91.23  DEPOSIT OF NET PROCEEDS.



   The net proceeds of the sale of any property or of a motor vehicle,
whether by public auction or sale, shall be deposited in the General Fund of
the city, subject to the right of the former owner of the property or of the
motor vehicle to the payment of the net sale proceeds from the General Fund
upon application and satisfactory proof of ownership within six months of the
sale.



(Prior Code, § 6-6-4)




AIR QUALITY




§ 91.35  ADOPTION OF STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Ambient Air Quality Standards and Air Pollution Control
Regulations, as published by the state’s Pollution Control Agency and in
effect this date, be and the same hereby are adopted by reference by the city.



   (B)   Three copies of the regulations shall be marked as official
copies and filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the
City Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 7-5-1)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Violation of §§ 91.01 through 91.06 shall have the
penalties provided in § 10.99.



      (2)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation of §§
91.01 through 91.06 shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.



      (3)   Each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 7-1-7)  (Ord. 496, passed 3-23-2009)



CHAPTER 92:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section




Prohibiting Fertilizers with Phosphorus




   92.01   Purpose



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Regulations



   92.04   Exceptions



   92.05   Impervious surfaces and drainage ways




Sidewalk Repair, Maintenance, and Special Assessments




   92.20   Maintenance by owner



   92.21   Inspection



   92.22   Notice of hearing



   92.23   Notice to repair



   92.24   City to make repairs



   92.25   Assess cost



   92.26   Hearing on assessment



   92.27   Assessment roll



   92.28   Appeal from assessment



   92.29   Certification to County Auditor



   92.30   Time of snow removal and ice control




Trees and Shrubs




   92.45   Purpose



   92.46   Prohibited trees



   92.47   Order to treat or remove



   92.48   Regulations for planting in public places



   92.49   Requirements applicable to trees in new subdivisions



   92.50   Shade tree disease and insect control



   92.51   Abuse or mutilation



 



   92.99   Penalty




PROHIBITING FERTILIZERS WITH PHOSPHORUS




§ 92.01  PURPOSE.



   The city has considered data that indicates that water quality of
lakes, rivers, and streams within the community may be maintained or improved
if the city is able to regulate the amount of lawn fertilizer and other
chemicals entering these bodies of water as a result of stormwater runoff or
other causes. The purpose of this subchapter is to set forth regulations that
will aid the city in managing and protecting its water resources.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-1)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The individual responsible for overseeing the
requirements of the city code. For purposes of this subchapter, the
ADMINISTRATOR shall be the Director of Public Works or his or her designee.



   FERTILIZER. A substance containing one or more recognized plant
nutrients that is used for its plant nutrient content and designed for use or
claimed to have value in promoting plant growth. FERTILIZER does not include
animal and vegetable manures that are not manipulated, marl, lime, limestone,
and other products exempted by rule by the state’s Commissioner of
Agriculture.



   PESTICIDE. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent,
destroy, repel, or mitigate a pest, and a substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-2)



§ 92.03  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Time of application. Neither commercial applicators nor
noncommercial applicators may apply lawn fertilizer when the ground is frozen
or when conditions exist which will promote or create runoff.



   (B)   Sample analysis cost. The cost of analyzing fertilizer samples
taken from commercial applicators shall be paid by the commercial applicators
if the sample analysis indicates that phosphorus content exceeds the levels
authorized herein.



   (C)   Fertilizer content. No person shall apply any lawn fertilizer,
liquid or granular, within the city which contains any amount of phosphorus
or other compound containing phosphorus, such as phosphate, except:



      (1)   The naturally occurring phosphorous in unadulterated
natural or organic fertilizing products such as yard waste compost; or



      (2)   As otherwise provided in § 92.04.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-3)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.04  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The prohibition against use of fertilizer containing any
quantity of phosphorus set forth under § 92.03 shall not apply to:



      (1)   Newly established turf and lawn areas during first
growing season; or



      (2)   Turf and lawn areas which have been confirmed by soil
testing to be below phosphorus levels established by the University of
Minnesota Extension Services. The lawn fertilizer application shall not
contain an amount of phosphorus in excess of that which is recommended in the
soil test evaluation.



   (B)   Phosphorus applied as lawn fertilizer pursuant to the
aforementioned exemptions shall be watered into the soil so that it is
immobilized and protected from loss by runoff.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-4)



§ 92.05  IMPERVIOUS SURFACES AND DRAINAGE WAYS.



   No person shall apply fertilizer to impervious surfaces, areas within
drainage ditches, or waterways.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-5)  Penalty, see § 92.99




SIDEWALK REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS




§ 92.20  MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.



   Pursuant to M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time, the
primary responsibility for keeping and maintaining the public sidewalk of the
city in front of each parcel of land abutting thereon clean and in such state
of repair as not to be dangerous to public travel is hereby imposed upon the
owner of each abutting parcel of land.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-1)



§ 92.21  INSPECTION.



   The Public Works Director shall inspect the public sidewalks within the
city or cause the same to be inspected by some competent person under his or
her supervision and direction at least once in each year and shall, from time
to time, report in writing to the City Council any sidewalks believed by him
or her to be in such disrepair as to be dangerous to the public travel
thereon, giving therein the information as to enable the locating of each
alleged defective sidewalk.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-2)



§ 92.22  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   Upon receipt of the report, the City Council shall, by resolution, set
a date for a public hearing on the report and cause at least two weeks’
written notice of the hearing to be given by mail, addressed to the owner of
each parcel of land abutting upon the portion of any sidewalk alleged in the
report to be in such disrepair as to be dangerous to public travel thereon,
the notice to be addressed to the owner at the address shown on the last
general assessment roll of city real estate.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-3)



§ 92.23  NOTICE TO REPAIR.



   (A)   If the City Council shall find upon the hearing or any
adjournment thereof that the sidewalks embraced within the report, or any of
them, are in such disrepair as to be dangerous to the public travel thereon,
it shall direct the Public Works Director to send or cause to be sent a
written notice of the defect to the owner of each parcel of land abutting
upon any defective sidewalk, directing him or her to cause the sidewalk in
front of his or her parcel of land to be repaired at his or her own cost and
expense in the manner recommended by the Public Works Director within 30 days
from the date of the notice.



   (B)   The notice shall further state that if the sidewalk is not so
repaired by him or her, the city will proceed to make the repairs and assess
the cost thereof against the abutting parcels of land. For good reason shown,
the Public Works Director is authorized to extend the time given to any owner
with which to make the repairs.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-4)



§ 92.24  CITY TO MAKE REPAIRS.



   (A)   If any repair is not made by the owner of the abutting parcel
of land within the time and in the manner specified in the notice to him or
her or any extension thereof granted by the Public Works Director, the city
may then proceed to make the repair under contract or by its employees under
the supervision and direction of the Public Works Director or of some
competent person in his or her office assigned thereto.



   (B)   Careful and adequate records of the cost of each repair shall
be maintained showing the cost in time employed and of materials used in
effecting the repair.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-5)



§ 92.25  ASSESS COST.



   After any repair or any group of repairs to be made by the city has
been completed, the Public Works Director shall certify to the City Council
the total cost thereof, and thereupon the Council shall determine by
resolution the amount of the total cost the city will pay, if any, other than
the amount, if any, which it will pay as a property owner and the amount to
be assessed. The resolution shall then be filed with the City Clerk. The City
Clerk, with the assistance of the Public Works Director or other qualified
person selected by the Council, shall calculate the proper amount to be
assessed against each abutting parcel of land in front of which any of such
repairs have been made by the city on the basis of the cost thereof and shall
prepare a proposed assessment roll and deliver it to the Council.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-6)



§ 92.26  HEARING ON ASSESSMENT.



   Upon receipt by the City Council of the proposed assessment roll, it
shall, by resolution, set a date for a public hearing thereon and file the
proposed assessment roll with the City Clerk where it shall be open to public
inspection. Thereupon the City Clerk, under the direction of the Council,
shall cause to be published once in the legal newspaper of the city a notice
of the public hearing giving the date, time, and place thereof, stating the
general nature of the improvement and that written or oral objections to the
assessments will be considered at the hearing. The notice shall be published
at least one week before the date of the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-7)



§ 92.27  ASSESSMENT ROLL.



   (A)   At the meeting or any adjournment thereof, the City Council
shall consider the objections made, if any, to the proposed assessments, may
amend the proposed assessment roll in respect to a particular parcel of land
but shall not increase the assessment, and may then adopt by resolution the
proposed assessment roll as made or as amended.



   (B)   Upon the adoption, the assessment roll shall be filed with the
City Clerk, and upon the filing the amount assessed thereby against the
respective parcels of land included therein, together with accrued interest
at such rate per annum as the City Council may from time to time fix by
resolution, shall become a lien thereon and continue until the assessment is
fully paid.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-8)



§ 92.28  APPEAL FROM ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   Any person being aggrieved by any assessment may appeal
therefrom to the District Court of the county wherein the property is located
by serving upon the City Clerk, within ten days after the filing of the
assessment roll in the Administrator’s office, a notice of appeal stating
the grounds of the appeal and giving a bond for $250 conditioned that he or
she will diligently prosecute the appeal, pay all costs and disbursements
which may be adjudged against him or her, and abide by the order of the
court, and by filing a copy of the notice with proof of service thereof on
the City Clerk with the court within two days after the service upon the City
Clerk.



   (B)   (1)   The appeal shall be placed upon the calendar for the
next general term of the court commencing more than ten days after the filing
of the copy of the notice with the court, and the appeal shall be tried as
other appeals in such cases.



      (2)   Upon an appeal being perfected, the City Clerk shall
omit the parcel in respect of which the appeal is taken from the duplicate
assessment roll to be certified to the County Auditor, as provided in §
92.29, until the appeal is disposed of by the court.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-9)



§ 92.29  CERTIFICATION TO COUNTY AUDITOR.



   On or before November 30, the City Clerk shall transmit a certified
duplicate of the assessment roll so adopted to the County Auditor of the
county in which any parcel of land subject to the lien is situated, setting
forth the amount of the assessment, together with interest computed to the
first Monday in January of the succeeding calendar year.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-10)



§ 92.30  TIME OF SNOW REMOVAL AND ICE CONTROL.



   The owner or occupant of every building or tract of land within the
city fronting upon any street having a sidewalk abutting upon such premises
shall clear the sidewalk of snow within 48 hours following the termination of
any snowfall of two inches or more or control the formation of ice from any
cause. If the snow is not removed or ice is not controlled by the owner or
occupant within the time specified herein, the same shall be removed or
controlled under the direction of the Public Works Director and the city
shall be reimbursed for the expense of the removal by the property owner
within 30 days per the current city fee schedule. If payment is not received
by the due date, the costs shall be levied against the property owner as a
special assessment and collected as in the case of other special assessments.



(Prior Code, § 8-1-11)  (Ord. 153, passed 4-13-1987; Ord. 492, passed
1-12-2009; Ord. 507, passed 1-11-2010)




TREES AND SHRUBS




§ 92.45  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect and promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city by regulating
the planting and maintenance of trees in order to protect trees and to
prevent and abate hazardous and nuisance conditions within the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-1)



§ 92.46  PROHIBITED TREES.



   It is lawful to plant only highly disease resistant species within the
city limits with the approval of the City Forester.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-2)  (Ord. 29, passed 5-9-1977; Ord. 495, passed
1-26-2009; Ord. 661, passed 2-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.47  ORDER TO TREAT OR REMOVE.



   The city may order the trimming, treatment, or removal of trees or
plants upon public or private property when they shall determine that the
action is necessary to the public safety or necessary to prevent the spread
of disease or of insects harmful to trees and shrubs.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-3)



§ 92.48  REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   Approval required. No tree shall be planted or placed on
public property or right-of-way without the approval of the City Forester.



   (B)   Permits.



      (1)   No person shall plant or remove trees or shrubs in
public places without first filling out an application and obtaining a permit
from the city.



      (2)   The following provisions apply to the issuance of
permits where required for planting in public places.



         (a)   Application data. The application required herein
shall state the number of trees or plants to be planted or set out, the
location, and specific name of each tree or plant.



         (b)   Standards for issuance. A permit shall be issued
if it is found that the proposed plantings will be in the best interest of
the community.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-4)  (Ord. 661, passed 2-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.49  REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO TREES IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS.



   (A)   In new subdivisions, on lots with frontage on a single
right-of-way, it is required that two trees be planted per platted lot if no
trees are in existence. For lots with frontage on more than one right-of-way,
it is required that four trees be planted per platted lot if no trees are in
existence. Two trees must be planted in the boulevard adjoining each yard
having street frontage.



   (B)   In subdivision plantings, not less than two or more than three
species of trees shall be planted in any block, and neither less than 20% nor
more than 50% of the total trees planted in a block may be of the same
species. Only trees listed in § 92.46 shall be planted.



   (C)   Required trees shall be planted in the boulevard at a location
ranging from four feet to ten feet from the curb. Precise location within
this range to be determined by the city.



   (D)   Required subdivision trees must have a trunk diameter of at
least two inches at one foot above the ground.



   (E)   Required subdivision trees must be protected and supported by
tree guards of approved type.



   (F)   No required subdivision tree shall be planted in soil too poor
to ensure the growth of the tree unless 27 cubic feet (three feet x three
feet x three feet) of soil is removed and replaced with suitable loam.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-5)  (Ord. 267, passed 3-27-1995; Ord. 287, passed
3-24-1997)



§ 92.50  SHADE TREE DISEASE AND INSECT CONTROL.



   (A)   Forester duties. The powers and duties of the City Forester as
set forth in this code are hereby conferred upon the Park Superintendent. It
is the duty of the Forester to coordinate, under the direction and control of
the City Council, all activities of the municipality relating to the control
and prevention of shade tree disease. The City Forester shall recommend to
the Council the details of a program for the control of shade tree disease
and perform the duties incident to such a program adopted by the Council.



   (B)   Program. It is the intention of the City Council to conduct a
program of plant pest control pursuant to the authority granted by M.S. §
18G13, as it may be amended from time to time. This program is directed
specifically at the control and elimination of Dutch elm disease fungus, elm
bark beetles, oak wilt, emerald ash borer and other tree diseases; and is
undertaken at the recommendation of the Commissioner of Agriculture and the
Council in the conduct of this program.



   (C)   Nuisance declared. The prevention, control, and abatement of
Dutch elm disease, oak wilt disease, emerald ash borer, and other tree
diseases is necessary for the protection, preservation, and conservation of
public and private lands and the investment and benefit therein, and to
protect and promote the general welfare of the public and this community.
Therefore, the following conditions are hereby found and declared to be a
public nuisance wherever they exist in the city:



      (1)   Any living or dead elm tree or part thereof infected to
any degree with the Dutch elm disease fungus Certatocystits ulmi (Buisman)
Moreau or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles Scolytus multistriatus
(Eichhh) or Hylugropinus rufipes (Marsh);



      (2)   Any dead elm tree or part thereof, including logs,
branches, stumps, firewood, or other elm material from which the bark has not
been removed or burned;



      (3)   Any living or dead oak tree or part thereof infected to
any degree with the oak wilt fungus (Ceratocytis fagacearum); and/or



      (4)   Any living or dead fraxinus spp tree or part thereof
infected to any degree with the insect emerald ash borer (Agrilus
planipennix) or any other tree species infected with a disease.



   (D)   Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to permit any
public nuisance as defined in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(4) above to remain
on any premises owned or controlled by such person within the city. The
nuisances may be abated in the manner prescribed by this subchapter.



   (E)   Inspection and investigation.



      (1)   The Forester shall inspect all premises and places
within the city as often as practicable to determine whether any condition
declared in division (C) above to be a public nuisance exists thereon.



      (2)   All reported incidents of infestation of Dutch elm
fungus, the presence of elm bark beetles, of infection by the oak wilt fungus
or the presence of emerald ash borer, or other tree infestations shall be
promptly investigated.



   (F)   Entry on private premises. The Forester or his or her duly
authorized agents may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for
the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned him or her under this
subchapter, in accordance with § 10.20.



   (G)   Diagnosis. The Forester shall, upon finding conditions
indicating Dutch elm disease or other infestation, immediately send
appropriate specimens or samples to the Commissioner of Agriculture for
analysis or take other steps for diagnosis as may be recommended by the
Commissioner. Except as provided in division (J) below, no action to remove
infected trees or wood shall be taken until positive diagnosis of the disease
has been made.



   (H)   Abatement generally. No action to remove, destroy and dispose,
or require the removal, destruction, and disposal of elm trees, wood infected
with Dutch elm fungus, oak trees infected by oak wilt fungus or fraxinus spp
(ash) trees or fraxinus spp (ash) wood harboring emerald ash borer shall be
taken until a reasonably certain diagnosis of the disease has been made. When
such reasonably certain diagnosis has been made, the infected tree or wood
shall be removed, destroyed, and disposed of in a manner which will
effectively destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the Dutch
elm or oak wilt disease fungus, or the spread of emerald ash borer
populations or other tree diseases will be handled by the recommendations of
the Commissioner of Agriculture.



      (1)   Presence of elm bark beetles or emerald ash borer. When
the presence of elm bark beetles has been discovered in or upon any living
elm tree but the presence of Dutch elm disease fungus is not then or
thereafter diagnosed, the tree shall be treated in a manner which will
effectively destroy and prevent as full as possible the spread of the elm
bark beetle. When the presence of emerald ash borer has been discovered in or
upon a living fraxinus (ash) tree, the tree shall be treated in a manner
which will effectively destroy and prevent as full as possible the spread of
the emerald ash borer. If the treatment is not or, because of the extent of
infestation, cannot be effective, the tree shall be removed, destroyed, and
disposed of.



      (2)   Dead elm or fraxinus (ash) trees, logs, stumps, and the
like. Standing dead elm trees, elm logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other
raw material from which the bark has not been removed and which are not
infected with Dutch elm disease fungus, shall have the bark removed,
destroyed, and disposed of or shall be treated in a manner which will
effectively destroy and prevent as fully as possible the spread of the elm
bark beetle, emerald ash borer or other diagnosed tree diseases. If the
treatment is not effective, or, because of the extent of infestation, cannot
be effective, the trees, logs, branches, stumps, firewood, or other raw elm
material shall be removed, destroyed, and disposed of.



      (3)   Specifications and procedures. The City Forester shall
establish specifications and procedures for the removal, destruction, and
disposal of trees and wood infected with Dutch elm disease fungus, oak wilt
fungus, or emerald ash borer for treating live elm or fraxinus (ash) tree
infested with elm bark beetles or emerald ash borers, and for removing,
destroying, and disposing of elm or fraxinus (ash) trees, logs, branches,
stumps, firewood, and other raw elm material. The specifications and
procedures shall be consistent with current specifications and procedures
designated or approved by the Commissioner of Agriculture.



   (I)   Abatement on private or government property.



      (1)   Whenever a nuisance as defined in division (C) above is
found to exist on private property outside any public way in the city, or
upon property owned and controlled by a governmental unit other than the
city, the owner or person in control of the property shall be notified in
writing by mail or by personal delivery that the condition exists. Once the
letter is received by the property owner, it is their responsibility to
contact the Public Works Department and arrange actions for removal. The
notice states that if the nuisance is not abated by the owner or person in
control of the property within 20 days after receipt of the notice, in the
manner prescribed by the City Forester, the city by and through its City
Council may enter upon the premises and abate the nuisance.



      (2)   If the owner or person in control of any private
premises upon which a nuisance exists does not abate or eliminate the same
within 30 days after receipt of notification, the City Council, its officers,
employees, and agents shall proceed to have the nuisance properly abated or
eliminated.



   (J)   Abatement on city property. Nuisances as defined in division
(C) above which exist upon property owned or controlled by the city,
including public street rights-of-way, shall be abated or eliminated by the
City Council forthwith in accordance with established specifications and
procedures.



   (K)   Cost of abatement. If, pursuant to division (I) above, the
City Council orders the removal or abatement of a nuisance, the City Forester
shall report the cost of the removal or abatement to the Council and the
expense thereof plus an amount determined by the Council to reimburse the
city for its cost of inspection and eradication shall be assessed by the
Council upon the lot or lots on which the nuisance was located, notice being
first given by publication in the official paper of the time and place that
the assessment shall be made. The assessment procedure shall be as prescribed
by M.S. § 429.101, as it may be amended from time to time, and the
assessment shall be a lien on the lot or lots, and shall be returned and
collected in the same manner as other city taxes.



   (L)   Procedures for removal of infected trees and wood.



      (1)   Whenever the Forester finds with reasonable certainty
that infestation defined in division (C) above exists in any tree or wood in
any public or private place in the city, he or she shall proceed as follows:



         (a)   If the Forester finds that the danger of
infestation of other elm trees is not imminent because of elm dormancy, he or
she shall make a written report of his or her findings to the City Council
which shall proceed by:



            1.   Abating the nuisance as a public improvement
under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time; or



            2.   Abating the nuisance as provided in division
(L)(2) below.



         (b)   If the Forester finds that danger of infestation
of other elm trees is imminent, the Forester shall notify the property owner
by mail and/or by leaving notice at the property and that the nuisance will
be abated within a specified time, not less than five days from the date of
mailing of the notice. The Forester shall immediately report the action to
the City Council; and after the expiration of the time limited by the notice,
the Forester may abate the nuisance.



      (2)   Upon receipt of the Forester’s report required by
division (L)(1)(a), the City Council shall by resolution order the nuisance
abated. Before action is taken on a resolution, the Council shall publish
notice of its intention to meet to consider taking action to abate the
nuisance. This notice shall be mailed to affected property owners and
published once not less than one week prior to the meeting. The notice shall
state the time and place of the meeting, the streets affected, action
proposed, the estimated cost of the abatement, and the proposed basis of
assessment, if any, of costs. At the hearing or adjournment thereof, the
Council shall hear property owners with reference to the scope and
desirability of the proposed project. The Council shall thereafter adopt a
resolution confirming the original resolution with the modifications as it
considers desirable and provide for the doing of the work by day labor or by
contract.



      (3)   The Forester shall keep a record of the costs of
abatements done under this section and shall report monthly to the City Clerk
all work done for which assessments are to be made stating and certifying the
description of the land, lots, and parcels involved and the amount chargeable
to each.



      (4)   On or before September 1 of each year, the City Clerk
shall list the total unpaid charges for each abatement against each separate
lot or parcel to which they are attributable under this subchapter. The City
Council may then spread the charges or any portion thereof against the
property involved as a special assessment under M.S. § 429.101, as it may be
amended from time to time, and other pertinent statutes for certification to
the County Auditor and collection the following year along with current taxes.



      (5)   The City Council has determined that the health of the
trees within the municipal limits is threatened by a fatal disease known as
Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, or emerald ash borer, or other fatal tree
disease. It has further determined that the loss of these trees growing upon
public and private property would substantially depreciate the value of
property within the city and impair the safety, good order, general welfare,
and convenience of the public. It is declared to be the intention of the
Council to control and prevent the spread of this disease, and this
subchapter is being enacted for that purpose. It is declared to be the
intention of the Council to establish a policy for sharing in the cost of
replacement tree(s) in the amount of up to $50 per property.



   (M)   Spraying elm trees. Whenever the Forester determines that any
elm tree or elm wood within the city is infected with Dutch elm fungus, the
Forester may treat all nearby high value elm trees with an effective elm bark
beetle destroying concentrate. Treating activities authorized by this section
shall be conducted in accordance with technical and expert opinions and plans
of the Commissioner of Agriculture and under the supervision of the
Commissioner and his or her agents whenever possible.



   (N)   Transporting elm wood prohibited. It is unlawful for any
person to transport within the city any bark-bearing elm wood without having
obtained a permit from the Forester. The Forester shall grant permits only
when the purposes of the subchapter will be served thereby.



   (O)   Interference prohibited. No person shall prevent, delay, or
interfere with the Forester or the Foresters agents while they are engaged in
the performance of duties imposed by this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-6)  (Ord. 492, passed 1-26-2009; Ord. 495, passed
1-26-2009; Ord. 661, passed 2-13-2017; Ord. 611, passed 2-13-2017)  Penalty,
see § 92.99



§ 92.51  ABUSE OR MUTILATION.



   No person shall damage, cut, carve, kill, or injure the bark of any
tree or plant on any public property; attach any rope, wire, or other
contrivance to any tree or plant on public property; dig in or otherwise
disturb public grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural
beauty or usefulness of any area or public property; cause or permit any wire
charged with electricity or any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance harmful
to trees or plants to come in contact with them.



(Prior Code, § 8-3-7)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person violating §§ 92.01 through 92.05 shall be guilty
of a petty misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 7-9-6)  (Ord. 378, passed 5-28-2002)



CHAPTER 93:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section




Parks and Cemeteries




   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Observation of posted rules



   93.03   Parking



   93.04   Refuse



   93.05   Fires



   93.06   Snowmobiles



   93.07   Speed limit



   93.08   Park and cemetery hours



   93.09   Cemetery rules and regulations




PARKS AND CEMETERIES




§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect and promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the city by regulating the use of city
parks and cemeteries.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-1)



§ 93.02  OBSERVATION OF POSTED RULES.



   All posted rules and regulations by the city must be observed in
addition to those contained in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-2)



§ 93.03  PARKING.



   Parking is allowed only in defined areas. Parking is prohibited on
grass or walk paths.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.04  REFUSE.



   Refuse must be disposed of properly.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-4)



§ 93.05  FIRES.



   Fires are only allowed in barbecue pits or fireplaces and all other
fires are prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.06  SNOWMOBILES.



   Snowmobiles are not allowed in cemeteries or the West Riverside Park.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.07  SPEED LIMIT.



   All vehicular traffic in city parks and cemeteries is limited to a
speed of 10 mph.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-7)



§ 93.08  PARK AND CEMETERY HOURS.



   All city parks shall be open to the public one-half hour before sunrise
to one-half hour after sunset daily.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-8)  (Ord. 81, passed 7-14-1980)



§ 93.09  CEMETERY RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   City Council shall adopt rules and regulations for Riverside Cemetery.
The city’s Parks Commission shall be responsible for reviewing and making
recommendations on an annual basis to the Council concerning the rules and
regulations and the fees charged for cemetery services. All rules and
regulations governing Riverside Cemetery shall be as set forth in the
policies document approved by the Council on October 22, 2001 and all
revisions thereto as approved by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 8-6-10)  (Ord. 367, passed 10-22-2001)



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




Right-of-Way Regulations




   94.01   Findings, purpose, and intent



   94.02   Election to manage the right-of-way



   94.03   Definitions



   94.04   Administration



   94.05   Registration and right-of-way occupancy



   94.06   Registration information



   94.07   Reporting obligations



   94.08   Permit requirement



   94.09   Permit applications



   94.10   Issuance of permit; conditions



   94.11   Right-of-way permit fees



   94.12   Right-of-way patching and restoration



   94.13   Joint applications



   94.14   Supplementary applications



   94.15   Other obligations



   94.16   Denial of permit



   94.17   Installation requirements



   94.18   Inspection



   94.19   Work done without a permit



   94.20   Supplementary notification



   94.21   Revocation of permits



   94.22   Mapping date



   94.23   Location and relocation of facilities



   94.24   Pre-excavation facilities location



   94.25   Damage to other facilities



   94.26   Right-of-way vacation



   94.27   Indemnification and liability



   94.28   Abandoned and unusable facilities



   94.29   Appeal



   94.30   Reservation of regulatory and police powers




Skateboards, Roller Skates/Blades, and Scooters




   94.45   Definitions



   94.46   Prohibited areas



   94.47   Observation of rules of the road



 



   94.99   Penalty




RIGHT-OF-WAY REGULATIONS




§ 94.01  FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.



   (A)   To provide for the health, safety and welfare of its citizens,
and to ensure the integrity of its streets and the appropriate use of the
rights-of-way, the city strives to keep its rights-of-way in a state of good
repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances.



   (B)   Accordingly, the city hereby enacts this new subchapter of
this code relating to right-of-way permits and administration. This
subchapter imposes reasonable regulation on the placement and maintenance of
facilities and equipment currently within its rights-of-way or to be placed
therein at some future time. It is intended to complement the regulatory
roles of state and federal agencies. Under this subchapter, persons
excavating and obstructing the rights-of-way will bear financial
responsibility for their work. Finally, this subchapter provides for recovery
of out-of-pocket and projected costs from persons using the public
rights-of-way.



   (C)   This subchapter shall be interpreted consistently with 1997
Session Laws, Chapter 123, substantially codified in M.S. §§ 237.16,
237.162, 237.163, 237.79, 237.81, and 238.086 (the “Act”), as they may be
amended from time to time, and the other laws governing applicable rights of
the city and users of the right-of-way. This subchapter shall also be
interpreted consistent with Minn. Rules parts 7819.0050 through 7819.9950 and
Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 where possible. To the extent any provision of this
subchapter cannot be interpreted consistently with the Minnesota Rules, that
interpretation most consistent with the Act and other applicable statutory
and case law is intended. This subchapter shall not be interpreted to limit
the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general
ordinances necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-1)



§ 94.02  ELECTION TO MANAGE THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under state and federal
statutory, administrative, and common law, the city hereby elects, pursuant
M.S. § 237.163, subd. 2(b), as it may be amended from time to time, to
manage rights-of-way within its jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-2)



§ 94.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED FACILITY. A facility no longer in service or physically
disconnected from a portion of the operating facility, or from any other
facility, that is in use or still carries service. A facility is not
ABANDONED unless declared so by the right-of-way user or by the city. A
facility is considered ABANDONED after 12 months of non-use.



   APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way.



   CITY. The city of Monticello, Minnesota. For purposes of § 94.28, CITY
also means the city’s elected officials, officers, employees, and agents.



   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace a small wireless facility on, under, within, or adjacent to an
existing wireless support structure that is owned privately or by a local
government unit.



   COMMISSION. The state’s Public Utilities Commission.



   CONGESTED RIGHT-OF-WAY. A crowded condition in the subsurface of the
public right-of-way that occurs when the maximum lateral spacing between
existing underground facilities does not allow for construction of new
underground facilities without using hand digging to expose the existing
lateral facilities in conformance with M.S. § 216D.04, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time, over a continuous length in excess of 500 feet.



   CONSTRUCTION PERFORMANCE BOND. Any of the following forms of security
provided at the permittee’s option:



      (1)   Individual project bond;



      (2)   Cash deposit;



      (3)   Security of a form listed or approved under M.S. §
15.73, subd. 3, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Letter of credit, in a form acceptable to the city;



      (5)   Self-insurance, in a form acceptable to the city; and



      (6)   A blanket bond for projects within the city, or other
form of construction bond, for a time specified and in a form acceptable to
the city.



   DEGRADATION. A decrease in the useful life of the right-of-way caused
by excavation in or disturbance of the right-of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct the right-of-way earlier than would be required if the excavation
or disturbance did not occur.



   DEGRADATION COST. Subject to Minn. Rules part 7819.1100, means the cost
to achieve a level of restoration, as determined by the city at the time the
permit is issued, not to exceed the maximum restoration shown in plates 1 to
13, set forth in Minn. Rules parts 7819.9900 to 7819.9950.



   DEGRADATION FEE. The estimated fee established at the time of
permitting by the city to recover costs associated with the decrease in the
useful life of the right-of-way caused by the excavation, and which equals
the degradation cost.



   DELAY PENALTY. The penalty imposed as a result of unreasonable delays
in right-of-way excavation, obstruction, patching, or restoration as
established by permit.



   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Works and Engineering of the city.



   DEPARTMENT INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the city to carry out
inspections related to the provisions of this subchapter.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Public Works of the city,
or his or her designee.



   EMERGENCY. A condition that:



      (1)   Poses a danger to life or health, or of a significant
loss of property; or



      (2)   Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities
in order to restore service to a customer.



   EQUIPMENT. Any tangible asset used to install, repair, or maintain
facilities in any right-of-way.



   EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of a right-of-way.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must
be obtained before a person may excavate in a right-of-way. An EXCAVATION
PERMIT allows the holder to excavate that part of the right-of-way described
in the permit.



   EXCAVATION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by an applicant to cover
the costs as provided in § 94.12.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES. Any tangible asset in the right-of-way required
to provide utility service.



   FIVE-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next five years.



   HIGH DENSITY CORRIDOR. A designated portion of the public right-of-way
within which telecommunications right-of-way users having multiple and
competing facilities may be required to build and install facilities in a
common conduit system or other common structure.



   HOLE. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length less than the width of the pavement.



   LOCAL REPRESENTATIVE. A local person or persons, or designee of the
person or persons, authorized by a registrant to accept service and to make
decisions for that registrant regarding all matters within the scope of this
subchapter.



   MANAGEMENT COSTS or RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT COSTS.



      (1)   The actual costs a local government unit incurs in
managing its public rights-of-way, and includes such costs, if incurred, as
those associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and
verifying right-of-way or small wireless facility permit applications;
inspecting job sites and restoration projects; maintaining, supporting,
protecting, or moving user equipment during public right-of-way work;
determining the adequacy of right-of-way restoration; restoring work
inadequately performed after providing notice and the opportunity to correct
the work; and revoking right-of-way or small wireless facility permits.



      (2)   MANAGEMENT COSTS do not include:



         (a)   Payment by a telecommunications right-of-way user
for the use of the public right-of-way;



         (b)   Unreasonable fees of a third-party contractor used
by a local government unit as part of managing its public rights-of-way,
including, but not limited to, any third-party contractor fee tied to or
based upon customer counts, access lines, revenue generated by the
telecommunications right-of-way user, or revenue generated for a local
government unit; or



         (c)   The fees and cost of litigation relating to the
interpretation of this section or M.S. § 237.163, as it may be amended from
time to time, or any ordinance enacted under those sections, or the local
unit of government’s fees and costs related to appeals taken pursuant to
M.S. § 237.163, subd. 5, as it may be amended from time to time.



   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is no larger
than 24 inches long, 15 inches wide, and 12 inches high, and whose exterior
antenna, if any, is no longer than 11 inches.



   OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to
hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit which, pursuant to this subchapter, must
be obtained before a person may obstruct a right-of-way, allowing the holder
to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of that
right-of-way, for the duration specified therein.



   OBSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the city by a permittee to cover
the costs as provided in § 94.12.



   PATCH or PATCHING.



      (1)   A method of pavement replacement that is temporary in
nature.



      (2)   A PATCH consists of:



         (a)   The compaction of the subbase and aggregate base;
and



         (b)   The replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement
for a minimum of two feet beyond the edges of the excavation in all
directions.



      (3)   A PATCH is considered full restoration only when the
pavement is included in the city’s five-year project plan.



   PAVEMENT. Any type of improved surface that is within the public
right-of-way and that is paved or otherwise constructed with bituminous,
concrete, aggregate, or gravel.



   PERMIT. Has the meaning given RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT in M.S. § 237.162,
as it may be amended from time to time.



   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to excavate or obstruct a
right-of-way has been granted by the city under this subchapter.



   PERSON. An individual or entity subject to the laws and rules of this
state, however organized, whether public or private, whether domestic or
foreign, whether for profit or nonprofit, and whether natural, corporate, or
political.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane or public sidewalk in which the city
has an interest, including other dedicated rights-of-way for travel purposes
and utility easements of the city. A RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include the
airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to cellular or other nonwire
telecommunications or broadcast service. (Note: this definition does not
include other public grounds that may be the subject of other city
requirements.)



   REGISTRANT. Any person who:



      (1)   Has or seeks to have its equipment or facilities located
in any right-of-way; or



      (2)   In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use,
the right-of-way or place its facilities or equipment in the right-of-way.



   RESTORATION COST. The amount of money paid to the city by a permittee
to achieve the level of restoration according to plates 1 to 13 of state’s
Public Utilities Commission rules.



   RESTORE or RESTORATION. The process by which an excavated right-of-way
and surrounding area, including pavement and foundation and turf, is returned
to the same condition and life expectancy that existed before excavation.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) PERMIT. The excavation permit, the obstruction
permit, or the small wireless facility permit, or all types of ROW PERMIT
authorized by law or ordinance, depending on the context, required by this
subchapter.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.



      (1)   A telecommunications right-of-way user as defined by
M.S. § 237.162, subd. 4, as it may be amended from time to time; or



      (2)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the
right-of-way that is used or intended to be used for providing utility
service, and who has a right under law, franchise, or ordinance to use the
public right-of-way.



   SERVICE or UTILITY SERVICE. Includes:



      (1)   Those services provided by a public utility as defined
in M.S. § 216B.02, subds. 4 and 6, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (2)   Services of a telecommunications right-of-way user,
including transporting of voice or data information;



      (3)   Services of a cable communications systems as defined in
M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (4)   Natural gas or electric energy or telecommunications
services provided by the city;



      (5)   Services provided by a cooperative electric association
organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be amended from time to time; and



      (6)   Water and sewer, including service laterals, steam,
cooling, or heating services.



   SERVICE LATERAL. An underground facility that is used to transmit,
distribute, or furnish gas, electricity, communications, or water from a
common source to an end-use customer. A SERVICE LATERAL is also an
underground facility that is used in the removal of wastewater from a
customer’s premises.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. Includes:



      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:



         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all its exposed elements could fit within
an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY, excluding electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, battery backup power systems, grounding
equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, cable, conduit, vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and any equipment
concealed from public view within or behind an existing structure or
concealment, is in aggregate no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.



      (2)   A micro wireless facility.



   SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to excavate or obstruct
more of the right-of-way than allowed in, or to extend, a permit that had
already been issued.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USER.



      (1)   A person owning or controlling a facility in the public
right-of-way, or seeking to own or control a facility in the public
right-of-way, that is used or is intended to be used for providing wireless
service, or transporting telecommunications or other voice or data
information.



      (2)   A cable communication system defined and regulated under
M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from time to time, and telecommunications
activities related to providing natural gas or electric energy services, a
public utility as defined in M.S. § 216B.02, as it may be amended from time
to time, a municipality, a municipal gas or power agency organized under M.S.
Ch. 453 or Ch. 453A, as they may be amended from time to time, or a
cooperative electric association organized under M.S. Ch. 308A, as it may be
amended from time to time, are not TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY USERS for
the purposes of this section and M.S. § 237.163, as it may be amended from
time to time, except to the extent these entities are offering wireless
services.



   TEMPORARY SURFACE. The compaction of subbase and aggregate base and
replacement, in kind, of the existing pavement only to the edges of the
excavation. It is temporary in nature except when the replacement is of
pavement included in the city’s two-year plan, in which case it is
considered full restoration.



   TRENCH. An excavation in the pavement, with the excavation having a
length equal to or greater than the width of the pavement.



   TWO-YEAR PROJECT PLAN. Shows projects adopted by the city for
construction within the next two years.



   UTILITY POLE. A pole that is used in whole or in part to facilitate
telecommunications or electric service.



   WIRELESS FACILITY.



      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables the provision
of wireless services between user equipment and a wireless service network,
including:



         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless service;



         (b)   A radio transceiver, antenna, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and



         (c)   A small wireless facility.



      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:



         (a)   Wireless support structures;



         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities; or



         (c)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cables:



            1.   Between utility poles or wireless support
structures; or



            2.   That are not otherwise immediately adjacent
to or directly associated with a specific antenna.



   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or by means
of a mobile device, that is provided using wireless facilities. WIRELESS
SERVICE does not include services regulated under Title VI of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, including a cable service under 47
U.S.C. § 522, clause (6).



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A new or existing structure in a public
right-of-way designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless
facilities, as reasonably determined by a local government unit.



   WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY. A facility used to transport communications
data by wire from a wireless facility to a communications network.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-3)



§ 94.04  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Director is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the rights-of-way, right-of-way permits, and the ordinances
related thereto. The Director may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-4)



§ 94.05  REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Registration. Each person who occupies or uses, or seeks to
occupy or use, the right-of-way or place any equipment or facilities in or on
the right-of-way, including persons with installation and maintenance
responsibilities by lease, sublease, or assignment, must register with the
city. Registration will consist of providing application information.



   (B)   Registration prior to work. No person may construct, install,
repair, remove, relocate, or perform any other work on, or use any facilities
or any part thereof, in any right-of-way without first being registered with
the city.



   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be construed to repeal or
amend the provisions of §§ 70.20 through 70.24. However, nothing herein
relieves a person from complying with the provisions of the M.S. Ch. 216D,
Gopher One Call Law, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-5)



§ 94.06  REGISTRATION INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information required. The information provided to the city at
the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Each registrant’s name, Gopher One Call registration
certificate number, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and telephone
and facsimile numbers;



      (2)   The name, address and e-mail address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a local representative. The local
representative or designee shall be available at all times. Current
information regarding how to contact the local representative in an emergency
shall be provided at the time of registration; and



      (3)   A certificate of insurance or self-insurance:



         (a)   Verifying that an insurance policy has been issued
to the registrant by an insurance company licensed to do business in the
state, or a form of self-insurance acceptable to the city; and



         (b)   Verifying that the registrant is insured against
claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for property
damage arising out of the:



            1.   Use and occupancy of the right-of-way by the
registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and permittees;



            2.   Placement and use of facilities and equipment
in the right-of-way by the registrant, its officers, agents, employees, and
permittees, including, but not limited to, protection against liability
arising from completed operations, damage of underground facilities, and
collapse of property;



            3.   Naming the city as an additional insured as
to whom the coverages required herein are in force and applicable and for
whom defense will be provided as to all such coverages;



            4.   Requiring that the city be notified 30 days
in advance of cancellation of the policy or material modification of a
coverage term;



            5.   Indicating comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage, worker’s compensation, and umbrella coverage
established by the city in amounts sufficient to protect the city and the
public and to carry out the purposes and policies of this subchapter;



            6.   The city may require a copy of the actual
insurance policies;



            7.   If the person is a corporation, a copy of the
certificate is required to be filed under M.S. Ch. 302A, as it may be amended
from time to time, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and



            8.   A copy of the person’s order granting a
certificate of authority from the state’s Public Utilities Commission or
other applicable state or federal agency, where the person is lawfully
required to have the certificate from the Commission or other state or
federal agency.



   (B)   Notice of changes. The registrant shall keep all of the
information listed above current at all times by providing to the city
information as to changes within 15 days following the date on which the
registrant has knowledge of any change.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-6)



§ 94.07  REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Operations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall, at the time of registration and
by December 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan
for underground facilities with the city. The plan shall be submitted using a
format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by
the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the
frequency of excavations and obstructions of rights-of-way. The plan shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:



         (a)   The locations and the estimated beginning and
ending dates of all projects to be commenced during the next calendar year
(in this section, a “next-year project”); and



         (b)   To the extent known, the tentative locations and
estimated beginning and ending dates for all projects contemplated for the
five years following the next calendar year (in this section, a “five-year
project”).



      (2)   The term PROJECT in this section shall include both
next-year projects and five-year projects.



      (3)   By January 1 of each year, the city will have available
for inspection in the city’s office a composite list of all projects of
which the city has been informed of the annual plans. All registrants are
responsible for keeping themselves informed of the current status of this
list.



      (4)   Thereafter, by February 1, each registrant may change
any project in its list of next-year projects, and must notify the city and
all other registrants of all changes in the list. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a registrant may at any time join in a next-year project of
another registrant listed by the other registrant.



   (B)   Additional next-year projects. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the city will not deny an application for a right-of-way permit for failure
to include a project in a plan submitted to the city if the registrant has
used commercially reasonable efforts to anticipate and plan for the project.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-7)



§ 94.08  PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in this code, no
person may obstruct, excavate, or place any structure in any right-of-way
without first having obtained the appropriate right-of-way permit from the
city to do so. All work completed as part of a right-of-way permit shall
conform to the city’s general specifications and standard detail plates for
street and utility construction, and the city’s design manual.



      (1)   Excavation permit. An excavation permit is required by a
registrant to excavate that part of the right-of-way described in the permit
and to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of the
right-of-way by placing facilities described therein, to the extent and for
the duration specified therein.



      (2)   Obstruction permit. An obstruction permit is required by
a registrant to hinder free and open passage over the specified portion of
right-of-way by placing equipment described therein on the right-of-way, to
the extent and for the duration specified therein. An obstruction permit is
not required if a person already possesses a valid excavation permit for the
same project.



      (3)   Small wireless facility permit. A small wireless
facility permit is required by a registrant to place a new wireless support
structure or to collocate a small wireless facility in a public right-of-way
managed by the city. A separate collocation agreement is required to
collocate a small wireless facility on existing city structures. A maximum of
15 small wireless facilities may be consolidated onto one permit application,
provided that all of the facilities:



         (a)   Are located within a two-mile radius;



         (b)   Consist of substantially similar equipment; and



         (c)   Are to be placed on similar types of wireless
support structures.



   (B)   Permit extensions. No person may excavate or obstruct the
right-of-way beyond the date or dates specified in the permit unless:



      (1)   The person makes a supplementary application for another
right-of-way permit before the expiration of the initial permit; and



      (2)   A new permit or permit extension is granted.



   (C)   Delay penalty. In accordance with Minn. Rules part 7819.1000,
subd. 3 and notwithstanding division (B) above, the city shall establish and
impose a delay penalty for unreasonable delays in right-of-way excavation,
obstruction, patching, or restoration. The delay penalty shall be established
from time to time by City Council resolution.



   (D)   Permit display. Permits issued under this subchapter shall be
conspicuously displayed or otherwise available at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-8)



§ 94.09  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Application for a permit is made to the city.



   (B)   Right-of-way permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with, the requirements of the
following provisions:



      (1)   Registration with the city pursuant to this subchapter;



      (2)   Submission of a completed permit application form,
including all required attachments, and scaled drawings showing the location
and area of the proposed project and the location of all known existing and
proposed facilities;



      (3)   Payment of money due the city for:



         (a)   Permit fees, estimated restoration costs, and
other management costs;



         (b)   Prior obstructions or excavations;



         (c)   Any undisputed loss, damage, or expense suffered
by the city because of applicant’s prior excavations or obstructions of the
rights-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; and



         (d)   Franchise fees or other charges, if applicable.



      (4)   Payment of disputed amounts due the city by posting
security or depositing in an escrow account an amount equal to at least 110%
of the amount owing; and



      (5)   Posting an additional or larger construction performance
bond for additional facilities when applicant requests an excavation permit
to install additional facilities and the city deems the existing construction
performance bond inadequate under applicable standards.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-9)



§ 94.10  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this subchapter, the city shall issue a permit.



   (B)   Conditions. The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the
issuance of the permit and the performance of the applicant thereunder to
protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to protect the
right-of-way and its current use. In addition, a permittee shall comply with
all requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including, but not
limited to, M.S. §§ 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation
Notice System), as they may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch.
7560.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-10)



§ 94.11  RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Fee schedule. See Chapter 36 of this code of ordinances.



   (B)   Excavation permit fee. The city shall establish an excavation
permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the following costs:



      (1)   The city management costs; and



      (2)   Degradation costs, if applicable.



   (C)   Obstruction permit fee. The city shall establish the
obstruction permit fee and shall be in an amount sufficient to recover the
city management costs.



   (D)   Small wireless facility permit fees. The city shall establish
the permit fee in an amount sufficient to recover the city management costs
or collect the maximum fees authorized by law.



   (E)   Payment of permit fees. No permit shall be issued without
payment of excavation, obstruction, or small wireless facility permit fees.
The city may allow applicant to pay the fees within 30 days of billing.



   (F)   Non refundable. Permit fees that were paid for a permit that
the city has revoked for a breach as stated in § 94.21 are not refundable.



   (G)   Application to franchises. Unless otherwise agreed to in a
franchise, management costs may be charged separately from and in addition to
the franchise fees imposed on a right-of-way user in the franchise.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-11)



§ 94.12  RIGHT-OF-WAY PATCHING AND RESTORATION.



   (A)   Timing. The work to be done under the excavation permit, and
the patching and restoration of the right-of-way as required herein, must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit, increased by as many days
as work could not be done because of circumstances beyond the control of the
permittee or when work was prohibited as unseasonal or unreasonable under §
94.16.



   (B)   Patch and restoration. Permittee shall patch its own work. The
city may choose either to have the permittee restore the right-of-way or to
restore the right-of-way itself.



      (1)   City restoration. If the city restores the right-of-way,
permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If,
following the restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee’s improper
backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing,
all costs associated with correcting the defective work.



      (2)   Permittee restoration. If the permittee restores the
right-of-way itself, it shall at the time of application for an excavation
permit post a construction performance bond in accordance with the provisions
of Minn. Rule part 7819.3000.



      (3)   Degradation fee in lieu of restoration. In lieu of
right-of-way restoration, a right-of-way user may elect to pay a degradation
fee. However, the right-of-way user shall remain responsible for patching and
the degradation fee shall not include the cost to accomplish these
responsibilities.



   (C)   Standards. The permittee shall perform excavation,
backfilling, patching and restoration according to the standards and with the
materials specified by the city and shall comply with Minn. Rules part
7819.1100.



   (D)   Duty to correct defects. The permittee shall correct defects
in patching or restoration performed by permittee or its agents. The
permittee upon notification from the city, shall correct all restoration work
to the extent necessary, using the method required by the city. The work
shall be completed within five calendar days of the receipt of the notice
from the city, not including days during which work cannot be done because of
circumstances constituting force majeure or days when work is prohibited as
unseasonable or unreasonable under § 94.16.



   (E)   Failure to restore. If the permittee fails to restore the
right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or
fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all restoration required by the
city, the city at its option may do the work. In that event the permittee
shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the
right-of-way. If permittee fails to pay as required, the city may exercise
its rights under the construction performance bond.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-12)



§ 94.13  JOINT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Joint application. Registrants may jointly apply for permits
to excavate or obstruct the right-of-way at the same place and time.



   (B)   Shared fees. Registrants who apply for permits for the same
obstruction or excavation, which the city does not perform, may share in the
payment of the obstruction or excavation permit fee. In order to obtain a
joint permit, registrants must agree among themselves as to the portion each
will pay and indicate the same on their applications.



   (C)   With city projects. Registrants who join in a scheduled
obstruction or excavation performed by the city, whether or not it is a joint
application by two or more registrants or a single application, are not
required to pay the excavation or obstruction and degradation portions of the
permit fee, but a permit would still be required.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-13)



§ 94.14  SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Limitation on area. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the area of the right-of-way specified in the permit. No permittee may do any
work outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any
permittee which determines that an area greater than that specified in the
permit must be obstructed or excavated must before working in that greater
area:



      (1)   Make application for a permit extension and pay any
additional fees required thereby; and



      (2)   Be granted a new permit or permit extension.



   (B)   Limitation on dates. A right-of-way permit is valid only for
the dates specified in the permit. No permittee may begin its work before the
permit start date or, except as provided herein, continue working after the
end date. If a permittee does not finish the work by the permit end date, it
must apply for a new permit for the additional time it needs, and receive the
new permit or an extension of the old permit before working after the end
date of the previous permit. This supplementary application must be submitted
before the permit end date.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-14)



§ 94.15  OTHER OBLIGATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with other laws. Obtaining a right-of-way permit
does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits,
licenses, and authority and to pay all fees required by the city or other
applicable rule, law, or regulation. A permittee shall comply with all
requirements of local, state, and federal laws, including, but not limited
to, M.S. § 216D.01 through 216D.09 (Gopher One Call Excavation Notice
System), as they may be amended from time to time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560.
A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes
and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done
in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who does the work.



   (B)   Prohibited work. Except in an emergency, and with the approval
of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be done when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for the work.



   (C)   Interference with right-of-way. A permittee shall not so
obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water
through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with. Private
vehicles of those doing work in the right-of-way may not be parked within or
next to a permit area, unless parked in conformance with city parking
regulations. The loading or unloading of trucks must be done solely within
the defined permit area unless specifically authorized by the permit.



   (D)   Trenchless excavation. As a condition of all applicable
permits, permittees employing trenchless excavation methods, including, but
not limited to, horizontal directional drilling, shall follow all
requirements set forth in M.S. Ch. 216D, as it may be amended from time to
time, and Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 and shall require potholing or open cutting
over existing underground utilities before excavating, as determined by the
Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-15)



§ 94.16  DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   The city may deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements and
conditions of this subchapter or if the city determines that the denial is
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare or when necessary to
protect the right-of-way and its current use. Denials will be provided in
writing and in accordance with statutory requirements.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-16)



§ 94.17  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The placement of any structures or facilities, the excavation,
backfilling, patching, and restoration, and all other work performed in the
right-of-way shall be done in conformance with Minn. Rules parts 7819.1100
and 7819.5000 and other applicable local requirements, in so far as they are
not inconsistent with the M.S. §§ 237.162 and 237.163, as they may be
amended from time to time. Installation of service laterals shall be
performed in accordance with Minn. Rules Ch. 7560 and this subchapter.
Service lateral installation is further subject to those requirements and
conditions set forth by the city in the applicable permits and/or agreements
referenced in § 94.23(B). Wireless support structures shall not exceed 50
feet in height. To the extent possible, all ground mounted equipment shall be
installed underground or in locations and in a manner to minimize
interference with traffic, pedestrians, and other users of the right of way
or the appearance of abutting properties.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-17)



§ 94.18  INSPECTION.



   (A)   Notice of completion. When the work under any permit hereunder
is completed, the permittee shall furnish a completion certificate in
accordance Minn. Rules part 7819.1300.



   (B)   Site inspection. Permittee shall make the work-site available
to the city and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution of and upon completion of the work.



   (C)   Authority of Director.



      (1)   At the time of inspection, the Director may order the
immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life,
health, safety, or well-being of the public.



      (2)   The Director may issue an order to the permittee for any
work that does not conform to the terms of the permit or other applicable
standards, conditions, or codes. The order shall state that failure to
correct the violation will be cause for revocation of the permit. Within ten
days after issuance of the order, the permittee shall present proof to the
Director that the violation has been corrected. If the proof has not been
presented within the required time, the Director may revoke the permit
pursuant to § 94.22.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-18)



§ 94.19  WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Emergency situations.



      (1)   Each registrant shall immediately notify the Director of
any event regarding its facilities that it considers to be an emergency. The
registrant may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary to respond to
the emergency. Excavators’ notification to Gopher State One Call regarding
an emergency situation does not fulfill this requirement. Within two business
days after the occurrence of the emergency, the registrant shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith, and fulfill the
rest of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this
subchapter for the actions it took in response to the emergency.



      (2)   If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a
registrant’s facilities, the city will attempt to contact the local
representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary
to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the
registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.



   (B)   Non-emergency situations. Except in an emergency, any person
who, without first having obtained the necessary permit, obstructs or
excavates a right-of-way must subsequently obtain a permit and, as a penalty,
pay double the normal fee for the permit, pay double all the other fees
required by the city code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to
correct any damage to the right-of-way, and comply with all of the
requirements of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-19)



§ 94.20  SUPPLEMENTARY NOTIFICATION.



   If the obstruction or excavation of the right-of-way begins later or
ends sooner than the date given on the permit, permittee shall notify the
city of the accurate information as soon as this information is known.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-20)



§ 94.21  REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   (A)   Substantial breach. The city reserves its right, as provided
herein, to revoke any right-of-way permit without a fee refund, if there is a
substantial breach of the terms and conditions of any statute, ordinance,
rule or regulation, or any material condition of the permit. A substantial
breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The violation of any material provision of the
right-of-way permit;



      (2)   An evasion or attempt to evade any material provision of
the right-of-way permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens;



      (3)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for a right-of-way permit;



      (4)   The failure to complete the work in a timely manner,
unless a permit extension is obtained or unless the failure to complete work
is due to reasons beyond the permittee’s control; or



      (5)   The failure to correct, in a timely manner, work that
does not conform to a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to §
94.19.



   (B)   Written notice of breach. If the city determines that the
permittee has committed a substantial breach of a term or condition of any
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or any condition of the permit, the
city shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy the violation.
The demand shall state that continued violations may be cause for revocation
of the permit. A substantial breach, as stated above, will allow the city, at
its discretion, to place additional or revised conditions on the permit to
mitigate and remedy the breach.



   (C)   Response to notice of breach. Within 24 hours of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall provide the city with a plan,
acceptable to the city that will cure the breach. Permittee’s failure to so
contact the city, or permittee’s failure to timely submit an acceptable
plan, or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the approved plan,
shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit. Further, permittee’s
failure to so contact the city, or permittee’s failure to submit an
acceptable plan, or permittee’s failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall automatically place the permittee on probation for one
full year.



   (D)   Cause for probation. From time to time, the city may establish
a list of conditions of the permit, which if breached will automatically
place the permittee on probation for one full year, such as, but not limited
to, working out of the allotted time period or working on right-of-way
grossly outside of the permit authorization.



   (E)   Automatic revocation. If a permittee, while on probation,
commits a breach as outlined above, permittee’s permit will automatically
be revoked and permittee will not be allowed further permits for one full
year, except for emergency repairs.



   (F)   Reimbursement of city costs. If a permit is revoked, the
permittee shall also reimburse the city for the city’s reasonable costs,
including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with the revocation.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-21)



§ 94.22  MAPPING DATE.



   (A)   Information required. Each registrant and permittee shall
provide mapping information required by the city in accordance with Minn.
Rules parts 7819.4000 and 7819.4100. Within 90 days following completion of
any work pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall provide the Director
accurate maps and drawings certifying the “as-built” location of all
equipment installed, owed, and maintained by the permittee. The maps and
drawings shall include the horizontal and vertical location of all facilities
and equipment and shall be provided consistent with the city’s electronic
mapping system, when practical or as a condition imposed by the Director.
Failure to provide maps and drawings pursuant to this division (A) shall be
grounds for revoking the permit holder’s registration.



   (B)   Service laterals. All permits issued for the installation or
repair of service laterals, other than minor repairs as defined in Minn.
Rules part 7560.0150 subpart 2, shall require the permittee’s use of
appropriate means of establishing the horizontal locations of installed
service laterals and the service lateral vertical locations in those cases
where the Director reasonably requires it. Permittees or their subcontractors
shall submit to the Director evidence satisfactory to the Director of the
installed service lateral locations. Compliance with this division (B) and
with applicable Gopher State One Call Law and Minnesota Rules governing
service laterals installed after December 31, 2005 shall be a condition of
any city approval necessary for:



      (1)   Payments to contractors working on a public improvement
project including those under M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to
time; and



      (2)   City approval under development agreements or other
subdivision or site plan approval under M.S. Ch. 462, as it may be amended
from time to time. The Director shall reasonably determine the appropriate
method of providing the information to the city. Failure to provide prompt
and accurate information on the service laterals installed may result in the
revocation of the permit issued for the work or future permits to the
offending permittee or its subcontractors.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-22)



§ 94.23  LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Compliance with regulations. Placement, location, and
relocation of facilities must comply with the Act, with other applicable law,
and with Minn. Rules parts 7819.3100, 7819.5000, and 7819.5100, to the extent
the rules do not limit authority otherwise available to cities.



   (B)   Corridors.



      (1)   The city may assign a specific area within the
right-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that is or, pursuant to current technology, the city
expects will someday be located within the right-of-way. All excavation,
obstruction, or other permits issued by the city involving the installation
or replacement of facilities shall designate the proper corridor for the
facilities at issue.



      (2)   Any registrant who has facilities in the right-of-way in
a position at variance with the corridors established by the city shall, no
later than at the time of the next reconstruction or excavation of the area
where the facilities are located, move the facilities to the assigned
position within the right-of-way, unless this requirement is waived by the
city for good cause shown, upon consideration of such factors as the
remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs, and hardship to the registrant.



   (C)   Nuisance. One year after the passage of this subchapter, any
facilities found in a right-of-way that have not been registered shall be
deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has
at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, abating the nuisance or
taking possession of the facilities and restoring the right-of-way to a
useable condition.



   (D)   Limitation of space. To protect health, safety, and welfare,
or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its current use, the city
shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional
facilities within the right-of-way. In making such decisions, the city shall
strive to the extent possible to accommodate all existing and potential users
of the right-of-way, but shall be guided primarily by considerations of the
public interest, the public’s needs for the particular utility service, the
condition of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and
future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have
been determined to be in the public interest.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-23)



§ 94.24  PRE-EXCAVATION FACILITIES LOCATION.



   In addition to complying with the requirements of M.S. §§ 216D.01
through 216D.09 (One Call Excavation Notice System), as they may be amended
from time to time, before the start date of any right-of-way excavation, each
registrant who has facilities or equipment in the area to be excavated shall
mark the horizontal and vertical placement of all the facilities. Any
registrant whose facilities are less than 20 inches below a concrete or
asphalt surface shall notify and work closely with the excavation contractor
to establish the exact location of its facilities and the best procedure for
excavation.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-24)



§ 94.25  DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.



   (A)   When the city does work in the right-of-way and finds it
necessary to maintain, support, or move a registrant’s facilities to
protect it, the city shall notify the local representative as early as is
reasonably possible. The costs associated therewith will be billed to that
registrant and must be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.



   (B)   Each registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing
any facilities in the right-of-way which it or its facilities damage. Each
registrant shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
facilities of another registrant caused during the city’s response to an
emergency occasioned by that registrant’s facilities.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-25)



§ 94.26  RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATION.



   If the city vacates a right-of-way that contains the facilities of a
registrant, the registrant’s rights in the vacated right-of-way are
governed by Minn. Rules part 7819.3200.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-26)



§ 94.27  INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.



   By registering with the city, or by accepting a permit under this
subchapter, a registrant or permittee agrees to defend and indemnify the city
in accordance with the provisions of Minn. Rule part 7819.1250.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-27)



§ 94.28  ABANDONED AND UNUSABLE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Discontinued operations. A registrant who has determined to
discontinue all or a portion of its operations in the city must provide
information satisfactory to the city that the registrant’s obligations for
its facilities in the right-of-way under this subchapter have been lawfully
assumed by another registrant.



   (B)   Removal. Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any
right-of-way shall remove it from that right-of-way, unless this requirement
is waived by the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-28)



§ 94.29  APPEAL.



   (A)   A right-of-way user that:



      (1)   Has been denied registration;



      (2)   Has been denied a permit;



      (3)   Has had a permit revoked;



      (4)   Believes that the fees imposed are not in conformity
with M.S. § 237.163, subd. 6, as it may be amended from time to time; or



      (5)   Disputes a determination of the Director regarding §
94.23(B) may have the denial, revocation, fee imposition, or decision
reviewed, upon written request, by the City Council.



   (B)   The City Council shall act on a timely written request at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, provided the right-of-way user has
submitted its appeal with sufficient time to include the appeal as a regular
agenda item. A decision by the Council affirming the denial, revocation, or
fee imposition will be in writing and supported by written findings
establishing the reasonableness of the decision.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-29)



§ 94.30  RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.



   A permittee’s rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers
of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances as necessary to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the public.



(Prior Code, § 8-11-30)




SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES/BLADES, AND SCOOTERS




§ 94.45  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any area of the city within a B-3 (highway
business) zoning district or B-4 (regional business) zoning district.



   OPERATE. To ride on or control the operation of a skateboard, roller
skates/blades, or scooter.



   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a skateboard, roller skates/blades, or scooter.



   ROLLER SKATES/BLADES. A shoe with wheels attached or a device with
wheels which is designated to be attached to a shoe.



   SCOOTER. A foot-operated vehicle consisting of a narrow board mounted
between two wheels, tandem, with an upright steering handle attached to the
front wheel.



   SKATEBOARDS. A wheeled device designed to transport a rider in a
standing position, which device is not otherwise secured to the rider’s
feet or shoes.



(Prior Code, § 8-10-1)



§ 94.46  PROHIBITED AREAS.



   No person shall ride or use a skateboard, roller skates/blades, or
scooter:



   (A)   On any public sidewalk, street, or any public parking lot
situated in the Central Business District in any careless, reckless, or
negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger the safety of any
person or property of any other person;



   (B)   On any other public or private property of another without the
express permission to do so by the owner or occupant of the property; or



   (C)   On any state highway in the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-10-2)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.47  OBSERVATION OF RULES OF THE ROAD.



   (A)   The operator of a skateboard, roller skates/blades, or scooter
emerging from any alley, driveway, or building upon approaching a sidewalk or
the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, shall yield the right-of-way
to all pedestrians approaching the sidewalk or sidewalk area and upon
entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching
on the roadway.



   (B)   No person operating a skateboard, roller skates/blades, or
scooter shall attach the same or the person of the operator to any vehicle
upon a roadway.



   (C)   Every person operating a skateboard, roller skates/blades, or
scooter upon a roadway shall ride as close as possible to the right-hand curb
or edge of the roadway.



   (D)   No person shall use a skateboard, roller skates/blades, or
scooter upon a public street, sidewalk, or other roadway after sunset and
before sunrise.



(Prior Code, § 8-10-3)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 94.45 through
94.47 shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
punished not more than the maximum penalty as prescribed by state law. In
addition, any peace officer who observes any person violate any provisions of
§§ 94.45 through 94.47 is authorized to seize the offender’s roller
skates/blades, skateboard, or scooter and to hold same at the County
Sheriff’s Department or city’s Police Department. In the event of such
seizure, the offender, if an adult, may secure the return of the article
seized after 24 hours have elapsed since the seizure. In the case of a minor,
the article seized shall be returned only to the parent or guardian of the
minor offender after 24 hours have elapsed since the seizure.



(Prior Code, § 8-10-4)  (Ord. 263, passed 11-28-1994; Ord. 358, passed
1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 95:  FIRE PREVENTION



Section




Fire Code




   95.01   Fire Code



   95.02   Enforcement



   95.03   Definitions




Fire Lanes




   95.15   Establishment



   95.16   Prohibited acts




Open Burning




   95.30   Definitions



   95.31   Burning restricted



   95.32   Open burning permit applications



   95.33   Permit denial and/or revocation



   95.34   Liability



   95.35   Conflicting laws



   95.36   Recreational fires



 



   95.99   Penalty




FIRE CODE




§ 95.01  FIRE CODE.



   The Minnesota State Fire Code (MSFC), current adopted version, and all
amendments thereto, one copy of which has been marked as the official copy
and which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted as
the Fire Code for the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
Every provision contained in this Code, except as modified or amended by this
subchapter, is hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter as if fully
set forth herein.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-1)  (Ord. 391, passed 6-9-2003)



§ 95.02  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department serving the city or the
representative authorized by the Chief shall enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail the members of the
Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The
Chief of the Fire Department may recommend the employment of technical
inspectors who, when the authorization is made, shall be selected through an
examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination
shall be open to members and nonmembers of the Fire Department, and
appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with
removal only for cause.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-2)  (Ord. 391, passed 6-9-2003)



§ 95.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CORPORATION COUNSEL. The attorney for the city.



   JURISDICTION. The City of Monticello.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-3)



FIRE LANES



§ 95.15  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   Orders establishing fire lanes. The Public Safety Department
is hereby authorized to order the establishment of fire lanes on public or
private property as may be necessary in order that the travel of fire
equipment may not be interfered with and that access to fire hydrants or
buildings may not be obstructed.



   (B)   Signs and markings of fire lanes. When a fire lane has been
ordered to be established pursuant to this section, it shall be marked by a
sign bearing the words “No Parking - Fire Lane - By Order of the Fire
Department”. When the fire lane is on public property or a public
right-of-way, the sign or signs shall be erected by the city; and when on
private property, they shall be erected by owner at his or her own expense
within 30 days after he or she has been notified of the order.



   (C)   Parking or otherwise obstructing prohibited. After a sign or
signs have been erected in accordance with division (B) above, no person
shall park a vehicle or otherwise occupy or obstruct the fire lane.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-1)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.16  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   Interference with fire service duties. No unauthorized persons
shall ride upon, race with, trail, or follow within 500 feet of any apparatus
belonging to the Fire Department when the apparatus is responding to an
emergency call.



   (B)   Protection of fire hoses. No person shall drive any vehicle
over a fire hose except upon specific orders from a member of the Fire
Department of this municipality, and then only with due caution.



   (C)   Parking near fire equipment. No person shall park any vehicle
or place any material or other obstruction within ten feet of any fire
hydrant or fire reservoir, nor shall any person enter any block or park any
vehicle within 300 feet of a place where a fire is in progress which requires
equipment from the Fire Department to be present.



   (D)   False fire alarm. No person shall sound a false fire alarm
knowing the alarm to be false.



   (E)   Authorized use of fire equipment. No person shall use any fire
apparatus or equipment for any reason except as may be prescribed by the Fire
Chief or his or her delegated representatives.



(Prior Code, § 5-2-2)  Penalty, see § 95.99



OPEN BURNING



§ 95.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NATURAL/VEGETATIVE MATTER. Grass clippings, leaves, twigs, sticks, and
branches, but not the main trunk nor primary limbs of trees, and the
non-harvested parts of garden plants.



   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter whereby the resultant
combustion products are emitted directly to the atmosphere without passing
through an adequate stack, duct, or chimney.



   SCOPE. As used herein, the following words shall have the meanings
defined herein.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-1)



§ 95.31  BURNING RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person shall cause, allow, or permit any burning in the
city except as may hereinafter be allowed.



   (B)   Open burning may be conducted if an open burning permit is
obtained pursuant to the requirements of this subchapter and other
regulations of local, state, and federal agencies.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-2)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.32  OPEN BURNING PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Application. Application for open burning permits may be made
in cases where fires are proposed to be set for the following purposes:



      (1)   Bona fide instruction and training of fire fighting
personnel and for the testing of fire extinguishing equipment;



      (2)   Elimination of fire of health hazards which cannot be
abated by any other practicable means;



      (3)   Activities in accordance with accepted forest or game
management;



      (4)   Ground thawing for utility repair and construction;
and/or



      (5)   The required maintenance and management of designated
prairie grass areas.



   (B)   Restrictions. A burning permit shall be issued on a prescribed
form to the applicant if the burning is for one of the purposes set forth in
division (A) above and the applicant agrees that all burning shall be
conducted under the following circumstances.



      (1)   The prevailing wind at the time of the burning shall be
away for nearby residences.



      (2)   The burning shall be conducted as far away as practical
from any highway or public road and controlled so that a traffic hazard is
not created.



      (3)   The burning may not be conducted during the duration of
an air pollution alert, warning, or emergency.



      (4)   The recipient of the permit or his or her authorized
representative shall be present for the duration of any fire authorized by
the permit.



      (5)   Prior notice shall be given to the local Department of
Natural Resources Forest Officer, local Fire Marshal, or local Fire Chief of
the time and location of any fire authorized by the permit.



      (6)   Open burning for ground thawing shall be conducted in
accordance with the following additional restrictions.



         (a)   Fuels and starting materials shall be of a kind
which do not generate appreciable smoke.



         (b)   Propane gas thawing torches or other devices
causing minimal pollution shall be used when practicable.



      (7)   Open burning of materials permitted in division (A)(5)
above shall be conducted in accordance with the following additional
restrictions.



         (a)   The location of the burning shall not be within
600 feet of an occupied residence other than those located on the property on
which the burning is conducted. The distance can be reduced when the burn is
performed by or with the assistance of the Fire Department.



         (b)   Oils, rubber, and other similar smoke producing
materials shall not be burned or used as starting materials.



         (c)   The burning shall not be conducted within one mile
of any airport or landing strip unless approved by the Fire Chief.



      (8)   The following persons are authorized to accept
application and issue open burning permits:



         (a)   Zoning Administrator;



         (b)   Building Official; and



         (c)   Fire Chief.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-3)  (Ord. 373, passed 4-22-2002)



§ 95.33  PERMIT DENIAL AND/OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Any permit application submitted shall be denied if:



      (1)   A reasonable, practical alternative method of disposal
of the material is available; or



      (2)   A nuisance condition would result from the burning.



   (B)   Any permit is subject to revocation at the discretion of a
Department of Natural Resources Forest Officer, the local Fire Marshal, or
Fire Chief, or the permit issuer if:



      (1)   A reasonable practical method of disposal of the
material is found;



      (2)   A fire hazard exists or develops during the course of
the burning; or



      (3)   Any of the conditions of the permit are violated.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-4)



§ 95.34  LIABILITY.



   The granting of an open burning permit under any provisions of this
subchapter does not excuse a person from the consequences, damages, or
inquires which may result therefrom.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-5)



§ 95.35  CONFLICTING LAWS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to allow open burning in
those areas in which open burning is prohibited by other laws, regulations,
or ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-6)



§ 95.36  RECREATIONAL FIRES.



   Fires set for recreational, ceremonial, food preparation, or social
purposes are permitted provided the following conditions are adhered to:



   (A)   Only dry raw wood, or wood products such as sticks. No painted
or treated wood or other lightweight vegetation such as leaves shall be
burned in a recreational fire;



   (B)   Fire must be contained within a three feet diameter fire pit
area;



   (C)   Fire must not be left unattended; and



   (D)   Fire pits must be located in rear yard only, at least 25 feet
from any structure or property line. Portable fire pits with covers are
allowed for use in front yards on driveways only and may not be within 25
feet of any structure in the front yard. All fires must be completely
extinguished with water before leaving them unattended. Portable fire pits
with covers shall not be stored on the driveway or front yard when not in
use. The wind should also be considered before lighting any fire.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-7)  (Ord. 252, passed 6-13-1994; Ord. 373, passed
4-22-2002)



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of
§§ 95.01 through 95.03 hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who
shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall
build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to
comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by a
court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally
for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. The imposition of
penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue; and all persons shall be required to correct or remedy the
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise
specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall
constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held
to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Prior Code, § 5-1-9)



   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 95.30 through 95.36
is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more
than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 5-4-8)



(Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 96:  PUBLIC GATHERINGS



Section




Neighborhood Block Parties




   96.01   Purpose



   96.02   Definition



   96.03   Permit required



   96.04   Permit application



   96.05   Fees



   96.06   General provisions



   96.07   Application review



   96.08   Permit issuance



   96.09   Revocation of permit




Special Event Permits




   96.20   Purpose



   96.21   Permit requirements



   96.22   Exemptions



   96.23   Standards



   96.24   Conditions



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Chapter 91




NEIGHBORHOOD BLOCK PARTIES




§ 96.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that reasonable regulations of, and allowances
for, temporary gatherings held in a section of street contained within a
neighborhood are necessary because of the impact such activities may have on
a specific area.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-1)



§ 96.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK PARTY. A temporary gathering held on a barricaded public street
contained within a residential neighborhood.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-2)



§ 96.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage or participate in, aid, form, or hold any block
party unless a permit has been properly obtained from the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   A person seeking the issuance of a block party permit shall
file an application with the city on an application form prescribed by the
City Clerk. An application shall be filed with the city not less than 14 days
nor more than 60 days before the proposed date of the event.



   (B)   With the printed application form, the applicant shall provide
a site plan depicting the location of all proposed facilities and equipment
and the proposed street segments to be closed.



   (C)   Within seven days of receipt of permit, the applicant shall be
provided a list of persons to be notified of the proposed event. All parties
on the list shall be notified within seven days of the event in writing by
the applicant. The applicant shall notify the city upon completion of the
notification.



   (D)   No permits shall be issued to applicants that cannot
demonstrate compliance with all provisions of this subchapter or who have had
block parties previously terminated by police action.



   (E)   The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the
city, its agents, and employees from any and all claims, demands, actions, or
cause of action of whatsoever nature or character arising out of or by reason
of, the conduct of the block party in any respect, including, but not limited
to, costs, attorney’s fees, expenses, and the like, incurred in connection
with the defense or settlement of any claims for injuries or damage resulting
from or connected with the block party.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-4)



§ 96.05  FEES.



   Fees are as adopted in the fee schedule, Chapter 36, and set annually
by the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-5)



§ 96.06  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   To promote public safety and to ensure adequate access, no
more than one block or section of road shall be barricaded for the duration
of the event.



   (B)   Barricades shall be placed at either end of the temporarily
closed street section as directed by city staff. Barricades shall be placed
in a manner to allow for access by emergency vehicles. A ten-foot wide lane
shall be free from barricades, equipment, and devices throughout the
barricaded street section.



   (C)   Only local roads may be closed or barricaded for a block party.



   (D)   A block party shall be limited to residents in the immediate
affected area and their invited guests and not the general public.



   (E)   Parties shall be limited to a maximum of eight hours in
duration and shall be conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



   (F)   Noise and music levels shall not be audible beyond the area
designated for the block party. The block party shall be in compliance with
the city’s noise ordinance (§ 130.09).



   (G)   The applicant shall be responsible for cleaning up after the
event. The right-of-way shall be completely free of all materials, objects,
or obstructions within one hour of the scheduled end of the event. The
applicant shall remove the barricades from the street at the conclusion of
the event and place in an area designated by city staff with the permit
approval.



   (H)   Alcohol sales are prohibited.



   (I)   The consumption of alcohol in the right-of-way is prohibited.



   (J)   The applicant is responsible for any damages to the
right-of-way and street surface.



   (K)   The city’s authorized public safety agents are authorized to
terminate any block party not in full compliance with all provisions of this
subchapter, not in full compliance of all conditions of operation required at
the time of approval, or being maintained as a public nuisance.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-6)



§ 96.07  APPLICATION REVIEW.



   The City Clerk shall review the application and consider approval based
on the following factors.



   (A)   The applicant has provided a complete submittal.



   (B)   The Wright County Sheriff’s office has no objections to the
content of the submission.



   (C)   The Fire Department has no objections to the content of the
submission.



   (D)   The Public Works Director has no objections to the content of
the submission and has the capabilities to handle the Department’s
obligations to administer the permit.



   (E)   The submission is in full compliance with all requirements of
all city ordinances.



   (F)   There is adequate city staff available to ensure all aspects
of this subchapter may be enforced and acted upon.



   (G)   There are no other extenuating circumstances that may endanger
the health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its citizens.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-7)



§ 96.08  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   Upon issuing the permit, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant and
provide a list of all conditions of approval and requirements for the permit.
Copies of the approval shall be provided to all affected agencies and
departments.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-8)



§ 96.09  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The city may revoke the permit at any time due to any violation of §§
96.01 through 96.09, conditions of approval, or any emergency condition.



(Prior Code, § 3-17-9)  (Ord. 505, passed 10-26-2009)




SPECIAL EVENT PERMITS




§ 96.20  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this permit is to apply procedures and standards to all
special events that are planned for or which reasonably may be expected to
attract more than 100 persons at any one time (including, but not limited to,
cultural events, musical events, celebrations, festivals, fairs, and
carnivals) held on private property within the city, unless expressly
exempted.



(Prior Code, § 3-19-1)  (Ord. 646, passed 5-23-2016)



§ 96.21  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All special events subject to this subchapter shall have a
permit for a special event reviewed and approved or approved with conditions
by the City Clerk before conducting the special event.



   (B)   A temporary use permit for a special event authorized in
accordance with this subchapter shall be limited to a maximum duration of 14
days per site per calendar year, unless otherwise specifically authorized by
the City Clerk.



   (C)   Permits requiring use of city property shall require the
review and approval of the City Council.



   (D)   Special events shall not operate before 7:00 a.m. or after
10:00 p.m. unless a special event permit (or other) for the activity has been
approved by the City Council. The permit supersedes the provisions of §
130.09(B).



(Prior Code, § 3-19-2)  (Ord. 646, passed 5-23-2016)



§ 96.22  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   On grounds of private residence. Special events or activities
occurring within, or on the grounds of, a private residence or on the common
areas of a single-family attached, townhouse, two- to four-family, or
multi-family residential development.



   (B)   Event sponsored by city or state. Any event sponsored in whole
or in part by the city or state.



   (C)   Event or activity at site intended for such event or activity.
Any organized activities conducted at sites or facilities typically intended
and used for such activities. Examples of the exempt activities include, but
are not limited to, sporting events such as golf, soccer, softball, and
baseball tournaments conducted on courses or fields intended and used for
such activities; fairs and carnivals at fairgrounds; wedding services
conducted at reception halls, or similar facilities; funeral services
conducted at funeral homes or cemeteries; religious services, wedding
services, and funeral services conducted at religious institutions.



   (D)   Event approved as part of another permit. Temporary special
events that are expressly approved as part of another permit shall not
require separate review under this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-19-3)  (Ord. 646, passed 5-23-2016)



§ 96.23  STANDARDS.



   In addition to the general temporary use criteria to be reviewed with
the permit application, the following standards shall also apply.



   (A)   False or material misleading information. The application
shall be certified by the applicant as not containing intentionally false or
materially misleading information.



   (B)   Unreasonable risk. There is a finding that the special event
would not create an unreasonable risk of significant:



      (1)   Damage to public or private property, beyond normal wear
and tear;



      (2)   Injury to persons;



      (3)   Public or private disturbance or nuisances;



      (4)   Unsafe impediments or distractions to, or congestion of,
vehicular or pedestrian travel;



      (5)   Additional and impracticable or unduly burdensome
police, fire, trash removal, maintenance, or other public services demands;
and/or



      (6)   Other adverse effects upon the public health, safety, or
welfare.



   (C)   Location cannot be accommodated. The special event shall not
be of such a nature, size, or duration that the particular location requested
cannot reasonably accommodate the event.



   (D)   Time permitted or reserved for other activities. The special
event shall not conflict with another permitted special event at the same
location in a manner that will negatively impact the public health, welfare,
or safety.



(Prior Code, § 3-19-4)  (Ord. 646, passed 5-23-2016)



§ 96.24  CONDITIONS.



   (A)   In approving the permit for the special event, the City Clerk
is authorized to impose conditions upon the issuance of the permit as may be
necessary to reduce or minimize any potential adverse impacts upon other
property in the area, as long as the condition relates to a situation created
or aggravated by the proposed special event.



   (B)   The City Clerk is authorized, where appropriate, to require:



      (1)   Provision of temporary parking facilities, including
vehicular access and egress;



      (2)   Control of nuisance factors, such as, but not limited
to, the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties,
noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, and heat;



      (3)   Regulation of temporary buildings, structures, and
facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and
open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;



      (4)   Provision of sanitary and medical facilities;



      (5)   Provision of solid waste collection and disposal;



      (6)   Provision of security and safety measures;



      (7)   Use of an alternative location or date for the proposed
special event;



      (8)   Modification or elimination of certain proposed
activities;



      (9)   Regulation of operating hours and days, including
limitation of the duration of the special event to a shorter time period than
that requested or specified in this section; or



      (10)   Submission of a performance guarantee to ensure that
any temporary facilities or structures used for the proposed special event
will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event
and that the property will be restored to its former condition.



(Prior Code, § 3-19-5)  (Ord. 646, passed 5-23-2016)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   ALCOHOL



      111.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



      112.   BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS



      113.   AMUSEMENTS



      114.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS



      115.   CABLE SERVICE



      116.   SIDEWALK CAFÉS



CHAPTER 110:  ALCOHOL



Section




Beer




   110.001   Provisions of state law adopted



   110.002   License required



   110.003   Applications for license



   110.004   License fees



   110.005   Granting of license



   110.006   Persons ineligible for license



   110.007   Places ineligible for license



   110.008   Conditions of license



   110.009   Days and hours of sales



   110.010   Clubs



   110.011   Restrictions on purchase and consumption



   110.012   Revocation



   110.013   Brew pub, brewer taprooms, or microdistillery license




Liquor




   110.025   Provisions of state law adopted



   110.026   License required



   110.027   Application for license



   110.028   License fees



   110.029   Granting of licenses



   110.030   Persons ineligible for license



   110.031   Places ineligible for license



   110.032   Conditions of license



   110.033   Days and hours of sales



   110.034   Restrictions on purchase and consumption



   110.035   Revocation




Municipal Liquor Stores




   110.050   Dispensary established; places to drink



   110.051   Location and operation



   110.052   Hours of operation



   110.053   Regulations



   110.054   Enforcement




Liquor by the Drink




   110.070   License required



   110.071   Application for license



   110.072   License fees



   110.073   Conditions of license



   110.074   Days and hours of sale



   110.075   Special provisions: sports, conventions, or cultural
facilities; community festivals




“On-Sale” Wine License




   110.090   Provisions of state law adopted



   110.091   Wine licenses



   110.092   License required for on-sale of wine



   110.093   Application for license



   110.094   License fees



   110.095   Granting of licenses



   110.096   Persons ineligible for license



   110.097   Places ineligible for license



   110.098   Conditions of license



   110.099   Days and hours of sale



   110.100   Combination wine/3.2% malt liquor on-sale option



   110.101   Suspension and revocation



 



   110.999   Penalty




BEER




§ 110.001  PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, applications for license,
granting of license, conditions of license, restrictions on consumption,
provisions on sales pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and
consumption of non-intoxicating liquor are hereby adopted and made a part of
this subchapter as if fully set out herein except as modified herein.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-1)



§ 110.002  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person, except wholesalers and manufacturers to the extent
authorized by law, shall deal in or dispose of by gift, sale, or otherwise,
or keep or offer for sale any beer within the city without first having
received a license as hereinafter provided. Licenses shall be of two kinds:



      (1)   Retail “on-sale”; and



      (2)   Retail “off-sale”.



   (B)   “On-sale” license shall be granted only to bona fide
clubs, beer stores, restaurants, theaters, and hotels where food is prepared
and served for consumption on the premises. “On-sale” licenses shall
permit the sale of beer for consumption on the premises only.



   (C)   “Off-sale” licenses shall permit the sale of beer at
retail in the original package for consumption off the premises only.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-2)



§ 110.003  APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form. Every application for a license to sell beer shall be
made on a form supplied by the city and shall state the name of the
applicant, his or her age, representations as to his or her character with
such references as may be required, his or her citizenship, whether the
application is for “on-sale” or “off-sale”, the business in
connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location,
whether applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long he or she
has been in that business at that place, and other information as the City
Council may require from time to time. It shall be unlawful to make any false
statement in an application. Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Financial responsibility. The liability insurance policy filed
as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S.
§ 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business
which is required to be licensed by this chapter, without having on file with
the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility, is a cause
for revocation of the license.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-3)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.004  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the city for payment in full of the required fee for the
license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund of the city. Upon
rejection of any application for a license, the city shall refund the amount
paid. All licenses shall expire on the last day of June in each year. Each
license shall be issued for a period of one year, except that if a portion of
the license year has elapsed when the application is made, a license may be
issued for the remainder of the year for a pro-rata fee.



   (B)   The annual fee for an “on-sale” license shall be in the
fee schedule ordinance adopted by the City Council. The annual fee for an
“on-sale” extended hours license shall be set forth by the state. The
annual fee for an “off-sale” license shall be on a fee schedule adopted
by the Council.



   (C)   No part of the fee paid for any license issued under this
subchapter shall be refunded where a license is revoked, but there shall be
refunded a pro-rata portion of the fee for the unexpired period of the
license upon cancellation.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-4)  (Ord. 107, passed 11-23-1981; Ord. 394, passed
7-14-2003)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see Chapter 36



§ 110.005  GRANTING OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the
application. After the investigation, the Council shall grant or refuse the
application in its discretion.



   (B)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant only and shall
not be transferable to another holder.



   (C)   Each license shall be issued only for the premises described
in the application. No license may be transferred to another place without
the approval of the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-5)  (Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003)



§ 110.006  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license shall be granted to any person:



   (A)   Under 21 years of age, or as stipulated in state statutes;



   (B)   Who has been convicted of a felony or any law of the state or
local ordinance relating to the manufacture or transportation of intoxicating
liquors;



   (C)   Who is a manufacturer of beer or who is interested in the
control of any place where beer is manufactured;



   (D)   Who is not of good moral character;



   (E)   Who is or during the period of this license becomes the holder
of a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp for the sale of
intoxicating liquor at any place unless there has also been issued to him or
her a local license to sell intoxicating liquor at such place;



   (F)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which the
license is issued; or



   (G)   Who is not resident of the state.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-6)  (Ord. 575, passed 3-11-2013)



§ 110.007  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   No license shall be granted for sale on any premises where a
licensee has been convicted of the violation of this subchapter, or of the
state beer or liquor law, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for
cause until one year has elapsed after the conviction of revocation.



   (B)   No “on-sale” license shall be granted for any place within
1,000 feet of any public school or within 1,000 feet of any church.



   (C)   No “off-sale” license for non-intoxicating liquors shall
be granted for any premises except those that operate primarily in the sale
of food, beer, cigars, cigarettes, beverage, and soft drinks.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-7)  (Ord. 17, passed 9-9-1976)



§ 110.008  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   Every license is subject to the conditions in the following divisions
and all other provisions of this subchapter, and of other applicable
ordinance, state law, or regulation.



   (A)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in
the following divisions and all other provisions of this subchapter and of
any other applicable provisions in this code.



   (B)   All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place at all times.



   (C)   No beer shall be sold or served to any intoxicated person or
to any person under 21 years of age, or as stipulated in state statutes.



   (D)   No minor under 18 shall be permitted to sell or serve beer in
an “on-sale” establishment.



   (E)   No gambling or any gambling device shall be permitted on any
licensed premises.



   (F)   No manufacturer for wholesaler of beer shall have any
ownership of or interest in an establishment licensed to sell at retail
contrary to the provisions of M.S. § 340A.403, subd. 3, as it may be amended
from time to time. No retail license and manufacturer or wholesaler of beer
shall be parties to any exclusive purchase contract. No retail licensee shall
receive any benefits contrary to law from a manufacturer or wholesaler of
beer, and no manufacturer or wholesaler shall confer any benefits contrary to
law upon a retail licensee.



   (G)   No licensee shall sell beer while holding or exhibiting in the
licensed premises a federal retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp unless
he or she is licensed under the laws of the state to sell intoxicating
liquors.



   (H)   No licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating
liquor shall sell or permit the consumption or display of intoxicating
liquors on the licensed premises or service any liquids for the purpose of
mixing with intoxicating liquor. The presence of intoxicating liquors on the
premises of a licensee shall be prima facie evidence of possession of
intoxicating liquors for the purpose of sale; and the serving of any liquor
for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquors shall be prima facie
evidence that intoxicating liquor is being permitted to be consumed or
displayed contrary to this subchapter.



   (I)   Any peace officer shall have the unqualified right to enter,
inspect, and search the premises of a licensee during business hours without
a search and seizure warrant and may seize all intoxicating liquors found on
the licensed premises.



   (J)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of the
place of business and shall maintain conditions of sobriety and order.



   (K)   Every licensee shall be prohibited from conducting business on
the premises from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday inclusive.
Presence of customers on the premises is not permitted between the hours of
2:30 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday inclusive.



   (L)   All license holders may be subject to alcohol compliance
checks. Civil penalties for failing a compliance check and providing alcohol
to minors are assessed as follows:



      (1)   First violation: amount as stated in the current fee
schedule;



      (2)   Second violation within two years: amount as stated in
the current fee schedule; and



      (3)   Third violation within two years: amount as stated in
the current fee schedule (with no mandatory revocation of license).



(Prior Code, § 3-1-8)  (Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003; Ord. 512, passed
4-12-2010; Ord. 575, passed 3-11-2013; Ord. 584, passed 5-28-2013)  Penalty,
see § 110.999



§ 110.009  DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES.



   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. §
340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City
Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive hours.
No sale of 3.2% malt liquor may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
the days of Monday through Saturday inclusive, nor between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Sundays. An establishment serving 3.2% malt liquor on Sundays must
obtain a Sunday license from the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-9)  (Ord. 143, passed 10-22-1984; Ord. 394, passed
7-14-2003; Ord. 512, passed 4-12-2010; Ord. 625, passed 9-28-2015)



§ 110.010  CLUBS.



   No club shall sell beer except to members and to guests in the company
of members.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-10)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.011  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
obtaining beer.



   (B)   No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure beer.



   (C)   No minor shall have beer in his or her possession with the
intent to consume it at a place other than the household of his or her parent
or guardian.



   (D)   No person shall consume or display any intoxicating liquor on
the premises of a licensee who is not also licensed to sell intoxicating
liquors.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-11)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.012  REVOCATION.



   A license granted under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
suspended or revoked by the City Council for the following reasons.



   (A)   In the event the licensee is convicted of a violation of this
subchapter or any state law relating to the sale or consumption of 3.2% malt
liquor, his or her license shall be suspended for a period of five days upon
the first conviction.



   (B)   In the event the license holder is convicted a second time,
his or her license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days.



   (C)   In the event the license holder shall be convicted for a third
time, his or her license shall be revoked.



   (D)   The violation of any provision or condition of this subchapter
by a beer licensee or his or her agent shall be grounds for revocation or
suspension of the license. The license of any person who holds a federal
retail liquor dealer’s special tax stamp without a license to sell
intoxicating liquors at such place shall be revoked without notice and
without hearing. In all other cases, a license granted under this subchapter
may be revoked or suspended by the City Council after written notice to the
licensee and a public hearing. The notice shall give at least eight days’
notice of the time and place of the hearing and shall state the nature of the
charges against the licensee. The Council may suspend any license pending a
hearing on revocation or suspension.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-12)



§ 110.013  BREW PUB, BREWER TAPROOMS, OR MICRODISTILLERY LICENSE.



   A brew pub, brewer taproom, or microdistillery as defined and made
eligible under state law may be issued “on-sale” and “off-sale”
license subject to the terms and conditions established by state law and this
code, and to any limitations imposed by the City Council. The license issued
by the city must specify whether off-sale is permitted, the hours of
operation, whether Sunday sales are permitted, and other conditions. The fees
established by ordinance may reflect various license options authorized by
law.



(Prior Code, § 3-1-13)  (Ord. 625, passed 9-28-2015)




LIQUOR




§ 110.025  PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as they may be amended from time to
time, with reference to the definition of terms, applications for license,
granting of license, conditions of license, restrictions on consumption,
provisions on sales, conditions of bonds of licenses, hours of sale, and all
other matters pertaining to the retail sale, distribution, and consumption of
intoxicating liquor are hereby adopted and made a part of this subchapter as
if fully set out herein, except as modified herein.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-1)



§ 110.026  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person except wholesalers or manufacturers to the extent
authorized under state license shall directly or indirectly deal in, sell, or
keep for sale any intoxicating liquor without first having received a license
to do so as provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   Licenses shall be of three kinds:



      (1)   “On-sale” license;



      (2)   “Off-sale” license; and



      (3)   Club licenses.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-2)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.027  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form. Every application for a license to sell liquor shall be
verified and filed with the City Clerk. It shall have stated the name of the
applicant, age with references as may be required, citizenship, whether the
application is for an “on-sale” or “off-sale”, the business in
connection with which the proposed license shall operate and its location,
whether applicant is owner and operator of the business, how long that
business has been at that place, and other information as the City Council
may require. In addition to containing such information, each application for
a license shall be in the form prescribed by the Department of Public Safety
and the city. Each application for a license hereunder shall be accompanied
by a cashier’s check in the amount adopted by the Council which shall not
be subject to refund and shall be paid for the purpose of defraying the
expense of investigation of the applicant.



   (B)   Financial responsibility. The liability insurance policy filed
as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S.
§ 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business
which is required to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with
the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause
for revocation of the license.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-3)  (Ord. 107, passed 11-23-1981; Ord. 162, passed
6-27-1988; Ord. 191, passed 5-1-1990)



§ 110.028  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the city for payment in full of the required fee for the
license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund of the city. Upon
rejection of any application for license, the city shall refund the amount
paid.



   (B)   Licenses herein provided for shall expire June 30 following
the issuance thereof and if issued for less than one year shall be pro-rated
on a quarterly basis.



   (C)   The annual fee for an “on-sale” license shall be adopted
by the City Council except as stated in division (D) below. The annual fee
for a special club license shall be a fee schedule adopted by the Council.
The annual fee for an extended hours license shall be set forth by the state.



   (D)   Licenses in effect before annexation in the annexed area will
be brought up to present fee at increase of $250 per year.



   (E)   No refund of any fee shall be permitted except as authorized
under M.S. § 340A.408, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-4)  (Ord. 107, passed 11-23-1981; Ord. 394, passed
7-14-2003)



§ 110.029  GRANTING OF LICENSES.



   The City Council shall investigate all facts set out in the
application. After the investigation, the Council shall grant or refuse the
application in its discretion. Each license shall be issued to the applicant
only. Each license shall be issued only for the premises described in the
application. No license may be transferred to another person or to another
place without the approval of the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-5)  (Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003)



§ 110.030  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No license shall be granted to or held by any person made ineligible
for a license by state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-6)



§ 110.031  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   No “on-sale” license shall be granted to any person who
does not have invested or does not propose to invest in the fixtures and
structure of the proposed on-sale establishment, exclusive of land, an amount
of at least $200,000. The City Council may provide for an independent
appraisal at applicant’s expense as an aid in determining the value of the
premises. In the event this requirement as to investment is not complied with
within one year from the date of issuance of the license, the license may be
revoked.



   (B)   No “on-sale” license shall be granted to a restaurant that
does not meet the following minimum standards as determined by the City
Council.



      (1)   The restaurant shall have seating capacity for at least
50 guests in its formal dining area.



      (2)   The restaurant shall have a full-service menu available
with meals prepared on site within a state’s Department of Health licensed
commercial kitchen each day the establishment is open for business.



      (3)   All meals shall be regularly served at tables to the
general public and shall employ an adequate staff to provide the usual and
suitable services to its guests.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-7)  (Ord. 94, passed 3-9-1981; Ord. 319, passed
10-26-1998; Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003; Ord. 453, passed 1-22-2007)



§ 110.032  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions in the
following divisions and all other provisions of this subchapter, and of any
other applicable provisions of this code or state law.



   (A)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of his or
her place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order in it.



   (B)   Any peace officer, health officer, or any properly designated
officer or employee of the city shall have the unqualified right to enter,
inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours
without a warrant.



   (C)   Every licensee shall be prohibited from conducting business on
the premises from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday inclusive.
Presence of customers on the premises is not permitted between the hours of
2:30 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday inclusive.



   (D)   All real estate taxes assessed against the licensed premises
and all personal property taxes assessed against any personal property
located in, on, or upon the licensed premises shall be paid or caused to be
paid when due by the licensee, provided, however, that in the event the
licensee and/or the owner of the licensed premises shall duly contest the
validity and/or amount of any real estate or personal property tax according
to law, the tax need not be paid until 30 days after the final judicial
determination of the validity and/or amount of the tax.



   (E)   No license shall be issued for premises located in an area
wherein the use of the premises is prohibited by the zoning code, nor within
an area where the sales are forbidden by state law or any other ordinance of
the city.



   (F)   One-half of all additional “on-sale” liquor licenses
available for issuance by the city shall be reserved for issuance to
qualifying hotels, motels, or restaurants within the Central Community
District (CCD) as defined by the official zoning map.



   (G)   All license holders may be subject to alcohol compliance
checks conducted under a resolution adopted by City Council in 2005. This
agreement sets civil penalties for failing a compliance check and providing
alcohol to minors. Liquor administrative fines are assessed as follows:



      (1)   First violation: amount as stated in the current fee
schedule;



      (2)   Second violation within two years: amount as stated in
the current fee schedule; and



      (3)   Third violation within two years: amount as stated in
the current fee schedule (without mandatory revocation of license).



(Prior Code, § 3-2-8)  (Ord. 275, passed 8-14-1995; Ord. 319, passed
10-26-1998; Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003; Ord. 513, passed 4-12-2010; Ord. 575,
passed 3-11-2013; Ord. 584, passed 5-28-2013)



§ 110.033  DAYS AND HOURS OF SALES.



   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by
M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the
City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive
hours.



   (B)   No sale of intoxicating liquor for consumption on the licensed
premises may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday inclusive, or between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sundays. Sales
after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday are unlawful unless the establishment has obtained
a Sunday liquor license in accordance with state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-9)  (Ord. 513, passed 4-12-2010; Ord. 625, passed
9-28-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.034  RESTRICTIONS ON PURCHASE AND CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
obtaining intoxicating liquor.



   (B)   No person shall induce a minor to purchase or procure liquor.



   (C)   No liquor shall be sold or consumed on a public highway or in
an automobile.



   (D)   No person shall consume any intoxicating liquor on any public
land in the city except by special permit granted by the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-10)  (Ord. 513, passed 4-12-2010)  Penalty, see §
110.999



§ 110.035  REVOCATION.



   The City Council may suspend or revoke any liquor license for violation
of any provision or condition of the provisions hereof or any state law
regulating the sale of intoxicating liquor or any false statement in the
application.



(Prior Code, § 3-2-11)




MUNICIPAL LIQUOR STORES




§ 110.050  DISPENSARY ESTABLISHED: PLACES TO DRINK.



   There is hereby established a municipal liquor dispensary for the
off-sale of intoxicating liquor. No liquor may be sold off-sale at retail
elsewhere in the city, unless otherwise authorized in this subchapter. No
person shall consume liquor in a public park or on a public street.



§ 110.051  LOCATION AND OPERATION.



   (A)   Location and employees. A municipal liquor dispensary shall be
at such place at the City Council shall determine and may be either leased or
owned by the city. It shall be in the charge of a person known as the
manager, who shall have such assistants as may be necessary. All employees,
including the manager, shall hold their positions at the pleasure of the
Council. No person under the age of 18 shall be employed in the store.



   (B)   Dispensary Fund. A Liquor Dispensary Fund is hereby created
into which all revenues received from the operation of the dispensary shall
be paid and from which all operating expenses shall be paid. Any surplus
accumulating in this Fund may, from time to time, be transferred to the
General Fund by resolution of the City Council and expended for any municipal
purpose.



§ 110.052  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by M.S. Ch.
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the City Council
may, by ordinance or resolution, provide for more restrictive hours. The
dispensary shall not be open for business of any kind during the hours when
sales of intoxicating liquor are prohibited.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-5)  (Ord. 143, passed 10-22-1984; Ord. 177, passed
6-26-1989; Ord. 668, passed 6-12-2017)



§ 110.053  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No business other than the sale of liquor shall be carried on
in the dispensary except the retail sale of cigars, cigarettes, all forms of
tobacco, beer, and soft drinks, both on-sale and off-sale.



   (B)   No pool or billiard table shall be kept in any part of the
dispensary.



   (C)   No person shall gamble on the premises and no gambling of any
character shall be permitted thereon.



   (D)   No minor shall be permitted to remain on the dispensary
premises.



   (E)   No liquor or beer shall be sold or served to a minor directly
or indirectly.



   (F)   No minor shall misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of
obtaining liquor or beer.



   (G)   No liquor or beer shall be served or sold to an intoxicated
person.



   (H)   No person of known immoral character and no disorderly person
shall be permitted on the dispensary premises.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-6)  (Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003)  Penalty, see §
110.999



§ 110.054  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of all police officers of the city to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter and to search the premises and seize evidence
of law violation and preserve the same as evidence against any person alleged
to be in violation of this subchapter and to prepare the necessary processes
and papers therefor.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-7)




LIQUOR BY THE DRINK




§ 110.070  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any private club or public place, directly or
indirectly, or upon any pretense, or by any device, to allow the consumption
or display of intoxicating liquor or the serving of any liquor for the
purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor without first having obtained a
permit therefor from the Department of Public Safety as provided in M.S. Ch.
340A, as it may be amended from time to time, and a license therefor from the
city.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-1)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.071  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form. Every application for a license under this subchapter
shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall state the name of the
applicant, his or her age, representations as to his or her character, with
such reference as may be required, his or her citizenship, the business in
connection with which the proposed license will operate and its location,
whether applicant is owner or operator of the business, how long he or she
has been in that business at that place, and other information that the City
Council may require from time to time. It shall be unlawful to make any false
statement in an application. Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   (B)   Financial responsibility. The liability insurance policy filed
as proof of financial responsibility under this section shall conform to M.S.
340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time. Operation of a business
which is required to be licensed by this chapter without having on file with
the city at all times effective proof of financial responsibility is a cause
for revocation of the license.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-2)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.072  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   An application for a license shall be accompanied by a receipt
from the City Clerk for payment in full of the required fee for the license.
Upon rejection of any application for license, the Clerk shall refund the
amount paid less $25, which shall be retained as a handling charge for the
application.



   (B)   All licenses shall expire on the last day of June in each
year. Each license shall be issued for a period of one year, except if a
portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is made, a
license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro-rata fee. In
computing the fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one
month.



   (C)   The annual fee for the license shall be a fee schedule adopted
by the City Council. The annual fee for an extended hours license shall be as
set forth by the state.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the City Council
may, upon proper application as stipulated in § 110.071, issue a permit for
the display and consumption of intoxicating liquor and the serving of any
liquid for the purpose of mixing with intoxicating liquor for a period of one
day. No more than five permits may be issued in a single year. No more than
two permits shall be issued to the same organization or an affiliate in a
single year. The fee for the permit shall be set from time to time by the
Council but shall not exceed $25. All permits issued under this provision
shall be approved by the state’s Department of Public Safety. The permit
issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the day indicated on
it.



   (E)   Applicants receiving authorization under § 110.073 to be a
liquor provider at the community center shall pay a fee to the city as set by
City Council resolution.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-3)  (Ord. 107, passed 11-23-1981; Ord. 116, passed
6-28-1982; Ord. 332, passed 9-13-1999; Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003)



§ 110.073  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   Every licensee shall not conduct business on the premises between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday inclusive. Presence
of customers on the event premises is not permitted between the hours of 2:30
a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday inclusive.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-4)  (Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003; Ord. 575, passed
3-11-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.074  DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   The hours of operation and days of sale shall be those set by
M.S. § 340A.504, as it may be amended from time to time, except that the
City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, provide for more restrictive
hours.



   (B)   No sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink for consumption on
the licensed premises may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday
through Saturday inclusive. No sale of intoxicating liquor by the drink for
consumption on the licensed premises may be made between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m. on Sundays. Sales after 2:00 a.m. on Sunday are unlawful unless the
liquor license holder has obtained a Sunday liquor license in accordance with
state law.



   (C)   No establishment licensed under M.S. § 340A.414, as it may be
amended from time to time, or § 110.072(D) may permit a person to consume or
display intoxicating liquor, and no person may consume or display
intoxicating liquor between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday inclusive, and between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-5)  (Ord. 575, passed 3-11-2013; Ord. 625, passed
9-28-2015)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.075  SPECIAL PROVISIONS: SPORTS, CONVENTIONS, OR CULTURAL FACILITIES;
COMMUNITY FESTIVALS.



   (A)   Distributing liquor at public gatherings. The city may
authorize the holder of a retail “on-sale” intoxicating liquor license
issued by the city or by an adjacent municipality to dispense intoxicating
liquor at any convention, banquet, conference, meeting, or social affair
conducted in the community center. The licensee (liquor provider) must be
engaged to dispense intoxicating liquor at the event held by a person or
organization permitted to use the premises and may dispense intoxicating
liquor only to any person attending the event. The licensee may not dispense
intoxicating liquor to any person attending or participating in an amateur
athletic event held on the premises.



   (B)   Community center liquor provider authorization. Authority to
be a liquor provider will be granted by the City Council on an annual basis,
term to run January 1 to December 31. The Community Center Director will
accept applications, screen, and make the formal request for authorization to
the Council. Applications for authorization to become a liquor provider will
be accepted throughout the year, but will require a six to eight week waiting
period for approval. If approved, the term will expire at the end of the
calendar year, December 31.



   (C)   Termination of liquor provider authorization. The City
Administrator may suspend or terminate the license of a liquor provider for
conducting illegal operations, for maintaining insufficient insurance
coverage, for loss or suspension of its retail liquor license, and for
violating the policies set forth in the city’s Community Center Policy
Manual. The liquor provider may appeal any suspension or termination to the
City Council within ten days after receipt of notice of suspension
termination. The appeal shall be served on the City Administrator and the
Council shall commence a hearing within 21 days after receipt of the notice
of appeal.



(Prior Code, § 3-4-6)  (Ord. 332, passed 9-13-1999)




“ON-SALE” WINE LICENSE




§ 110.090  PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW ADOPTED.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to
time, adopted and made a part of this subchapter as if set out in full.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-1)



§ 110.091  WINE LICENSES.



   An “on-sale” wine license authorizes the sale of wine not exceeding
14% alcohol by volume for consumption on the licensed premises only in
conjunction with the sale of food. An “on-sale” wine license may be
issued only to a restaurant having facilities for seating not fewer than 25
guests at one time. For purposes of this subchapter, a RESTAURANT means an
establishment under the control of a single proprietor or manager having
appropriate facilities for serving meals and where, in consideration of
payment therefor, meals are regularly served at tables to the general public,
and which employs an adequate staff to provide the usual and suitable service
to its guests.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-2)



§ 110.092  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR ON-SALE OF WINE.



   No person shall sell any wine not exceeding 14% alcohol by volume by
the glass without an “on-sale” wine license as provided herein or an
“on-sale” intoxicating liquor license as provided in §§ 110.025 through
110.035.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-3)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.093  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Form. Every application for “on-sale” wine license shall
state the name of the applicant, age, representations as to character with
such references as the City Council may require, citizenship, the restaurant
in connection with which the proposed licensee will operate and its location,
whether the applicant is owner and operator of the restaurant, how long the
restaurant business has been at that place, and other information as the
Council may require from time to time. In addition to containing the
information, the application shall be in a form prescribed by the Liquor
Control Director and shall be verified and filed with the City Clerk. No
person shall make a false statement in an application.



   (B)   Liability insurance. Prior to the issuance of a wine license,
the applicant shall file with the City Clerk a liability insurance policy in
the amount of $50,000 coverage for bodily injury for one person in any one
occurrence; $100,000 coverage for bodily injury for two or more persons in
any one occurrence; $10,000 because of injury to or destruction of others in
any one occurrence; $50,000 for loss of means of support of any one person in
any one occurrence; and $100,000 for loss of means of support of two or more
persons in any one occurrence; and shall comply with the provisions of M.S.
§ 340A.409, as it may be amended from time to time, relating to liability
insurance policies.



   (C)   Approval of security. The security offered under division (B)
above shall be approved by the City Council and the State Liquor Control
Director. Surety bonds and liability insurance policies shall be approved as
to form by the City Attorney. Operation of a licensed business without having
on file with the city at all times effective security as required in division
(B) above is a cause for revocation of the license.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-4)  (Ord. 369, passed 1-28-2002)



§ 110.094  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Amount. The annual fee for a wine license shall be in the
amount duly established by the Council from time to time. The annual fee for
an extended license shall be as set forth by the state.



   (B)   Payment. Each application for a wine license shall be
accompanied by a receipt from the City Clerk for payment in full of the
license fee. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund. If an application
for a license is rejected, the Clerk shall refund the amount due.



   (C)   Term. Each license shall be issued for a period of one year.
Every license shall expire on June 30.



   (D)   Refunds. No refund of any fee shall be made except as
authorized by statute.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-5)  (Ord. 394, passed 7-28-2003)



§ 110.095  GRANTING OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Investigation and issuance. The City Council shall investigate
all facts set out in the application. After the investigation, the Council
shall, in its discretion, grant or refuse the application. No wine license
shall become effective until it, together with the security furnished by the
applicant, has been approved by the State Liquor Control Director.



   (B)   Persons and premises licensed; transfer. Each license shall be
issued only to the applicant and for the premises described in the
application. No license may be transferred to another person or place without
City Council approval. Any transfer of stock of a corporate licensee is
deemed a transfer of the license, and a transfer of stock without prior
Council approval is a ground for revocation of the license.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-6)  (Ord. 394, passed 7-14-2003)



§ 110.096  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   No wine license shall be granted to any person made ineligible for a
license by state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-7)



§ 110.097  PLACES INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   General prohibition. No wine license shall be issued for any
restaurant ineligible for a license under state law.



   (B)   Delinquent taxes and charges. No license shall be granted for
operation on any premises on which taxes, assessments, or other financial
claims of the city are delinquent and unpaid.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-8)  (Ord. 369, passed 1-28-2002)



§ 110.098  CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.



   (A)   In general. Every license is subject to the conditions in the
following divisions and all other provisions of this subchapter, and of other
applicable ordinance, state law, or regulation.



   (B)   Licensee’s responsibility. Every licensee is responsible for
the conduct of the place of business and the conditions of sobriety and order
in it. The act of any employee on the licensed premises authorized to sell
intoxicating liquor there is deemed the act of the licensee as well, and the
licensee shall be liable to all penalties provided by this subchapter and the
law equally with the employee.



   (C)   Inspections. Every licensee shall allow any peace officer,
health officer, or properly designated officer or employee of the city to
enter, inspect, and search the premises of the licensee during business hours
without a warrant.



   (D)   Display during prohibited hours. No licensee shall display
wine to the public during hours when the sale of wine is prohibited.



   (E)   Federal stamps. No licensee shall possess a federal wholesale
liquor dealer’s special tax stamp or a federal gambling stamp.



   (F)   Compliance checks. All license holders may be subject to
alcohol compliance checks. This agreement sets civil penalties for failing a
compliance check and providing alcohol to minors. Liquor administrative fines
are assessed as follows:



      (1)   First violation: amount as stated in the current fee
schedule;



      (2)   Second violation within two years: amount as stated in
the current fee schedule; and



      (3)   Third violation within two years: amount as stated in
the current fee schedule (without mandatory revocation of license).



(Prior Code, § 3-11-9)  (Ord. 584, passed 5-28-2013)  Penalty, see §
110.999



§ 110.099  DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE.



   (A)   No sale of wine under this license shall be made on the
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., Monday through
Saturday inclusive, or on any Sunday between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m.



   (B)   The presence of customers is not allowed on the premises
between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Sunday inclusive.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-10)  (Ord. 369, passed 1-28-2002; Ord. 394, passed
7-14-2003; Ord. 575, passed 3-11-2013; Ord. 625, passed 9-28-2015)  Penalty,
see § 110.999



§ 110.100  COMBINATION WINE/3.2% MALT LIQUOR ON-SALE OPTION.



   (A)   Provided that an applicant meets or exceeds the requirements
of this subchapter and the requirements of §§ 110.001 through 110.013,
which pertain to 3.2% malt liquor on-sale, the applicant may apply for a
single license authorizing the sale and consumption of wine not to exceed 14%
alcohol by volume and beer not to exceed 3.2% alcohol by volume.
(Intoxicating malt liquor may be sold on premises holding both a 3.2% malt
liquor “on-sale” license and a wine license.)



   (B)   Fees for the combination license shall be according to a fee
schedule adopted by the City Council. The annual fee for an extended hours
combination license shall be in an amount established by the state.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-11)  (Ord. 369, passed 1-28-2002; Ord. 394, passed
7-14-2003)



Cross-reference:



   Fee schedule, see Chapter 36



§ 110.101  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   The City Council may either suspend for not to exceed 60 days or revoke
any “on-sale” wine license upon a finding that the licensee has failed to
comply with any applicable statute, regulation, or ordinance relating to
intoxicating liquor, or any of the provisions of this subchapter. No
suspension or revocation shall take effect until the licensee has been
afforded an opportunity for a hearing pursuant to M.S. §§ 14.57 through
14.62 and 14.69, as they may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-12)



§ 110.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any employee of the dispensary willfully violating any
provision hereof or any provision of the state laws relating to gambling or
the sale of intoxicating liquor or beer shall be discharged.



(Prior Code, § 3-3-7)



   (C) Any person violating any provision of §§ 110.090 through 110.101
is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more
than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-11-13)



(Ord. 128, passed 11-4-1983; Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 111:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Section




Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants




   111.01   Purpose



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   License or registration required



   111.04   Application for license



   111.05   Registration required for solicitors



   111.06   Conditions of licensing; separate licenses and registration



   111.07   Licensing and registration exemptions



   111.08   License fees



   111.09   Ineligibility for license



   111.10   Prohibited activities



   111.11   Identification required



   111.12   Suspension or revocation of license or registration



   111.13   Misdemeanor violation; administrative enforcement



   111.14   Severability




Pawn Shops




   111.25   Purpose



   111.26   Definitions



   111.27   License required



   111.28   Application required



   111.29   Application execution



   111.30   Persons ineligible for a license



   111.31   License fees



   111.32   Bond required



   111.33   Records required



   111.34   Daily reports to police



   111.35   Receipt required



   111.36   Redemption period



   111.37   Holding period



   111.38   Police order to hold property



   111.39   Inspection of items



   111.40   Label required



   111.41   Prohibited acts



   111.42   Denial, suspension, or revocation



   111.43   Business at only one place



 



   111.99   Penalty



PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



§ 111.01  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is not intended to interfere with legitimate business
activities of peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants as the same are
herein defined, whether same be local or interstate. These provisions are
intended only to, as nearly as possible, ferret out the illegitimate or
confidence operators and to regulate and control all those who would use
their unique presence on property within the city, for purposes of
harassment, nuisance, theft, or other unlawful activities.



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER. Any person who goes door to door, street to street, or place
to place, to offer or display for sale, and delivering immediately upon sale,
goods, wares, merchandise, or services transported with that person.



   SOLICITOR. Any person who, for solely commercial sales purposes, goes
door to door, street to street, or place to place, to obtain or attempt to
obtain orders for goods, wares, merchandise, or services as shown or
described by sample, catalog, or some other form, for which delivery or
performance will occur at a later time.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, who engages in, or transacts any
temporary and transient business in the city, selling goods, wares, or
merchandise; and, who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires,
leases, occupies, or uses a building, structure, vacant or occupied lot, or
railroad car for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares, and
merchandise. The term TRANSIENT MERCHANT does not include a seller or
exhibitor in a firearms collector show involving two or more sellers or
exhibitors.



§ 111.03  LICENSE OR REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler or
transient merchant the city without first obtaining a license therefor from
the city. A license must be applied for at least ten days prior to the date
when the activity to be carried on is to commence. The applicant shall
completely fill out an application for a license as prepared by the city and
pay the applicable license fee per the fee schedule ordinance. For peddler
permit application, a background investigation will be required with fee
prescribed per the fee schedule ordinance.



Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Application. Application for a license shall be made on a form
provided by the city. All applications shall be signed by the applicant. Any
fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement on the application shall
constitute a violation of this subchapter. All applications shall include the
following information:



      (1)   Name and driver’s license number or other acceptable
identification of the person registering, including recent passport style
photograph of applicant;



      (2)   Full address of the applicant’s permanent residence;



      (3)   Telephone number of the applicant’s permanent
residence;



      (4)   Full legal name of any and all business operation(s)
owned, managed, or operated by the applicant, or for which the applicant is
an employee or agent;



      (5)   Full address of the applicant’s regular place of
business (if any);



      (6)   Any and all business related telephone number(s) of the
applicant;



      (7)   The type of business for which the applicant is applying
for a license;



      (8)   The dates during which the applicant intends to conduct
business and the number of days he or she will be conducting business in the
city;



      (9)   Any and all address(es) and telephone number(s) where
the applicant can be reached while conducting business within the city,
including the location where a transient merchant intends to set up business;



      (10)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any felony, gross misdemeanor, or misdemeanor, for violation of
any state or federal statute or any local ordinance, other than traffic
offenses;



      (11)   A list of the three most recent locations where the
applicant has conducted business as a peddler or transient merchant;



      (12)   Written permission of the property owner or the
property owner’s agent for any property to be used by a transient merchant;



      (13)   A general description of the items to be sold or
services to be provided;



      (14)   All additional information deemed necessary by the City
Council;



      (15)   A list of all individuals to be covered by a group
license;



      (16)   Source of items sold and the item’s location at the
time of licensing and time of sale;



      (17)   License plate and registration information for any
vehicle to be used in conjunction with the licensed business and a
description of the vehicle;



      (18)   Proof of any required state or county license for
transient merchant activities (not applicable to door to door solicitations);
and



      (19)   Written consent authorizing the city to request a
criminal history background investigation for peddler permits in accordance
with this code.



   (B)   Procedure.



      (1)   An application shall be determined to be complete only
if all required information is provided. If the city determines that an
application is incomplete, it shall inform the applicant of the information
required to be provided prior to issuance of a license.



      (2)   The city shall review the application and order any
investigation, including background investigations, necessary to verify the
information provided with the application.



      (3)   The city shall either approve or deny the license within
ten business days after receipt of a complete application.



      (4)   If the application is denied, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the decision, the reason for the denial, and the
applicant’s right to appeal the denial by requesting, within seven days of
the date of the denial, to be heard by the City Administrator, other
designated staff or a Hearing Officer appointed by the City Council within 30
days of the date of the request.



      (5)   A license granted under this subchapter shall be valid
until the date noted on the application.



§ 111.05  REGISTRATION REQUIRED FOR SOLICITORS.



   (A)   All solicitors shall be required to register with the city
prior to engaging in activities. Registration shall be made on the same form
required for a license application but no fee shall be required. Upon
completion of the registration form, the city shall issue to the registrant a
certificate of registration as proof of the registration. Certificates of
registration shall be non-transferrable.



   (B)   All solicitors must carry proof of registration and photo
identification in such a manner that the information is readily,
continuously, and clearly visible.



   (C)   Individual and exempt organizations engaging in non-commercial
door-to-door advocacy shall not be required to register or obtain a
certificate of registration.



§ 111.06  CONDITIONS OF LICENSING; SEPARATE LICENSES AND REGISTRATION.



   Each individual engaged as a peddler or person accompanying a licensee
at work must secure a separate license. Each individual engaged as a
solicitor or person accompanying a solicitor at work must separately register
with the city. Licenses and registration are non-transferable. Proof of
license or registration shall be displayed at all times.



§ 111.07  LICENSING AND REGISTRATION EXEMPTIONS.



   The licensing and registration requirements of this subchapter shall
not apply to:



   (A)   Any person selling or attempting to sell, or to take or
attempt to take orders for, any product grown, produced, cultivated, or
raised on any farm or garden within the city. Such person must comply with
the city’s zoning ordinance and other applicable ordinances;



   (B)   Persons exercising that person’s state or federal
constitutional rights, except if that person’s exercise of constitutional
rights is merely incidental to a commercial activity;



   (C)   Daily newspaper sales;



   (D)   Persons selling personal property at wholesale to retailers;
and/or



   (E)   Merchants or their employees or agents delivering goods in the
regular course of business.



§ 111.08  LICENSE FEES.



   License fees for peddler permits and transient merchant license shall
be determined by the City Council and listed in the fee schedule ordinance.



§ 111.09  INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.



   The following shall be grounds for denying a license or registration
under this subchapter:



   (A)   The failure of the applicant to obtain and show proof of
having obtained any required license;



   (B)   The failure of the applicant to truthfully provide any of the
information requested by the city as a part of the application, or the
failure to sign the application, or the failure to pay the required fee at
the time of application;



   (C)   The conviction of the applicant for any violation of any
federal or state statute or regulation, or of any local ordinance, which
adversely reflects on the person’s ability to conduct the business for
which the license is being sought in an honest and legal manner that will not
adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
city. Such violations shall include, but not be limited to, burglary, theft,
larceny, swindling, fraud, unlawful business practices, and any form of
actual or threatened physical harm against another person; or



   (D)   The revocation within the past five years of any license
issued to the applicant for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant.



§ 111.10  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.



   No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in
any of the following manners:



   (A)   Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way;



   (B)   Conducting business in such a way as to create a threat to the
health, safety, or welfare of any individual or the general public;



   (C)   Failing to provide proof of license or registration and
identification when requested or using the license or registration of another
person;



   (D)   Failing to display the certificate of registration or
licensure provided by the city;



   (E)   Making any false or misleading statements about the product or
service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the
city solely based on the city having issued a license or certificate of
registration to that person;



   (F)   Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave,
or to otherwise conduct business in a manner a reasonable person would find
obscene, threatening, intimidating, or abusive;



   (G)   Entering upon any premises or attempting to enter in or upon
any premises wherein a sign or placard bearing the notice “peddlers or
solicitors prohibited” or language similar thereto, is located;



   (H)   Selling or soliciting sales by transient merchants from public
property or right-of-way or from private property unless he or she owns the
property or has written permission from the owner; and



   (I)   Entering upon any residential premises for the purpose of
carrying on the licensee’s or registrant’s trade or business between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 12:00 p.m. of the following day, unless such person
has been invited to do so by the owner or occupant thereof.



§ 111.11  IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED.



   All solicitors, peddlers, and transient merchants must carry their city
issued license or registration certificate when conducting the business or
activity required to be licensed or registered under this subchapter and
photo identification.



§ 111.12  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Grounds. Any license or registration issued under this
subchapter may be suspended or revoked at the discretion of the city for
violation of any of the following:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements on the
application form;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made
during the course of the license activity;



      (3)   Conviction of any offense for which granting of a
license could have been denied under this subchapter;



      (4)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter; or



      (5)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such
a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.



   (B)   Notice required. Prior to revoking or suspending any license
or registration issued under this subchapter, the city shall provide the
license holder or registrant with written notice of the alleged violation(s)
and inform the licensee of the licensee’s right to a hearing on the alleged
violation. Notice shall be delivered in person or by mail to the permanent
residential address listed on the license application or registration, or if
no residential address is listed, the business address provided on the
license application or registration.



   (C)   Hearing. Upon receiving the notice provided in division (B)
above, the licensee or registrant shall have the right to request a hearing.
If no request for a hearing is received by the city within ten regular
business days following the service of the notice, the city may proceed with
the suspension or revocation. For the purpose of mailed notices, service
shall be considered complete as of the date the notice is placed in the mail.
If a public hearing is requested within the stated time frame, a hearing
shall be scheduled within 20 days from the date of the request. Within three
regular business days of the hearing, the city shall notify the licensee of
its decision.



   (D)   Emergency suspension. If, in the discretion of the city,
imminent harm to the health or safety of the public may occur because of the
actions of a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant licensed or registered
under this subchapter, the city may immediately suspend the person’s
license or registration and provide notice of the right to hold a subsequent
hearing as prescribed in division (B) above.



   (E)   Right to appeal. Any person whose license or registration is
suspended or revoked under this section shall have the right to appeal that
decision in court.



§ 111.13  MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION; ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or a
code violation subject to administrative enforcement.



(Prior Code § 7-10-12)



§ 111.14  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this subchapter is found to be invalid for any
reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the remaining
provisions shall not be affected.




PAWN SHOPS




§ 111.25  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Council finds that use of services provided by
pawnbrokers provides an opportunity for the commission of crimes and their
concealment because pawn businesses have the ability to receive and transfer
property stolen by others easily and quickly. The City Council also finds
that consumer protection regulation is warranted in transactions involving
pawnbrokers. The City Council further finds that the pawn industry has
outgrown the city’s current ability to effectively or efficiently identify
criminal activity related to pawn shops. The purpose of this subchapter is to
prevent pawn businesses from being used as facilities for the commission of
crimes, and to assure that the businesses comply with basic consumer
protection standards, thereby protecting the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city.



   (B)   To help local law enforcement better regulate current and
future pawn businesses, decrease and stabilize costs associated with the
regulation of the pawn industry, and increase identification of criminal
activities in the pawn industry through the timely collection and sharing of
pawn transaction information, this subchapter also implements and establishes
the required use of the automated pawn system (APS).



(Prior Code, § 3-15-1)



§ 111.26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLABLE TRANSACTION. Every reportable transaction conducted by a
pawnbroker except renewals, redemptions, or extensions of existing pawns on
items previously reported and continuously in the licensee’s possession is
a billable transaction.



   PAWNBROKER. A person, partnership, or corporation who lends money on
the security of pledged goods (items that are “left in pawn”), and/or
purchases goods on the condition that they may be redeemed or repurchased by
the seller for a fixed price, within a fixed period of time. To the extent
that a PAWNBROKER’S business includes buying personal property previously
used, rented or leased, or selling it on consignment, the provisions of this
subchapter shall be applicable.



   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION. Every transaction conducted by a pawnbroker in
which merchandise is received through a pawn, purchase, consignment, or
trade; or in which a pawn is renewed, extended, or redeemed; or for which a
unique transaction number or identifier is generated by their point-of-sale
software, is reportable except:



      (1)   The bulk purchase or consignment of new or used
merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an
established permanent place of business, and the retail sale of the
merchandise, provided the pawnbroker must maintain a record of the purchase
or consignment which describes each item, and must mark each item in a manner
which relates it to that transaction record; and



      (2)   Retail and wholesale sales of merchandise originally
received by pawn or purchase, and for which all applicable hold and/or
redemption periods have expired.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-2)  (Ord. 542, passed 1-9-2012)



§ 111.27  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker at any location
without a pawnbroker license for that location. No pawnbroker license may be
transferred to a different location or a different person. Issuance of a
license under this subchapter shall not relieve the licensee from obtaining
any other licenses required to conduct business at the same or any other
location.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-3)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.28  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   An application form provided by the City Clerk must be
completed by every applicant for a new license or for renewal of an existing
license.



   (B)   Every new applicant must provide all the following information:



      (1)   If the applicant is a sole proprietor:



         (a)   The name, place and date of birth, street resident
address, and phone number of applicant;



         (b)   Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United
States or resident alien;



         (c)   Whether the applicant has ever used or has been
known by a name other than the applicant’s name, and if so, the name or
names used and information concerning dates and places used;



         (d)   The name of the business if it is to be conducted
under a designation, name, or style other than the name of the applicant and
a certified copy of the certificate as required by M.S. § 333.01, as it may
be amended from time to time;



         (e)   The street address at which the applicant has
lived during the preceding five years;



         (f)   The type, name, and location of every business or
occupation in which the applicant has been engaged during the preceding five
years and the name(s) and address(es) of the applicant’s employer(s) and
partner(s), if any, for the preceding five years;



         (g)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony, crime, or violation of any ordinance other than a traffic ordinance.
If so, the applicant must furnish information as to the time, place, and
offense of all such convictions; and



         (h)   If the applicant does not manage the business, the
name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in charge of the business and all
information concerning each of them required in divisions (B)(1)(a) through
(B)(1)(g) above.



      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership:



         (a)   The name(s) and address(es) of all general and
limited partners and all information concerning each general partner required
in division (B)(1) above;



         (b)   The name(s) of the managing partner(s) and the
interest of each partner in the licensed business; and



         (c)   A true copy of the partnership agreement shall be
submitted with the application. If the partnership is required to file a
certificate as to a trade name pursuant to M.S. § 333.01, as it may be
amended from time to time, a certified copy of the certificate must be
attached to the application.



      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation or other organization:



         (a)   The name of the corporation or business form, and
if incorporated, the state of incorporation;



         (b)   A true copy of the certificate of incorporation,
articles of incorporation or association agreement, and by-laws shall be
attached to the application. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a
certificate of authority as required by M.S. § 303.06, as it may be amended
from time to time, must be attached; and



         (c)   The name of the manager(s) or other person(s) in
charge of the business and all information concerning each manager,
proprietor, or agent required in divisions (B)(1)(a) through (B)(1)(g) above.



      (4)   For all applicants:



         (a)   Whether the applicant holds a current pawnbroker,
precious metal dealer, or secondhand goods dealer license from any other
governmental unit;



         (b)   Whether the applicant has previously been denied,
or had revoked or suspended, a pawnbroker, precious metal dealer, or
secondhand dealer license from any other governmental unit;



         (c)   The location of the business premises; and



         (d)   Other information as the City Council or issuing
authority may require.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-4)



§ 111.29  APPLICATION EXECUTION.



   (A)   All applications for a license under this subchapter must be
signed and sworn to under oath or affirmation by the applicant.



   (B)   If the application is that of a sole proprietor, it must be
signed and sworn to by the person; if that of a corporation, by an officer
thereof; if that of a partnership, by one of the general partners; and if
that of an unincorporated association, by the manager or managing officer
thereof.



   (C)   Any falsification on a license application shall result in the
denial of a license.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-5)



§ 111.30  PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR A LICENSE.



   No license under this subchapter will be issued to an applicant who is
a sole proprietor, a partnership if the applicant has any general partner or
managing partner, a corporation or other organization if the applicant has
any manager, proprietor, or agent in charge of the business to be licensed,
if the applicant:



   (A)   Is a minor at the time that the application is filed;



   (B)   Has been convicted of any crime directly related to the
occupation licensed as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 2, as it may be
amended from time to time, and has not shown competent evidence of sufficient
rehabilitation and present fitness to perform the duties of a licensee under
this subchapter as prescribed by M.S. § 364.03, subd. 3, as it may be
amended from time to time; or



   (C)   Is not of good moral character or repute.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-6)



§ 111.31  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   The annual license fees for licenses issued under this
subchapter shall be as adopted by the City Council.



   (B)   The billable transaction license fee shall reflect the cost of
processing transactions and other related regulatory expenses as determined
by the City Council, and shall be reviewed and adjusted periodically.
Licensees shall be notified in writing 30 days before any adjustment is
implemented.



   (C)   Billable transaction fees shall be billed monthly and are due
and payable within 30 days. Failure to do so is a violation of this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-7)  (Ord. 357, passed 11-27-2000; Ord. 542, passed
1-9-2012)



§ 111.32  BOND REQUIRED.



   Before a license will be issued, every applicant must submit a $5,000
bond on the forms provided by the licensing authority. All bonds must be
conditioned that the principal will observe all laws in relation to
pawnbrokers, and will conduct business in conformity thereto, and that the
principal will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled any
goods which have come into the principal’s hand through the principal’s
business as a pawnbroker, or in lieu thereof, will pay the reasonable value
in money to the person. The bond shall contain a provision that no bond may
be canceled except upon 30 days’ written notice to the city, which shall be
served upon the licensing authority.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-8)



§ 111.33  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals,
extensions, or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English
the following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or
in a computerized record approved by local law enforcement:



   (A)   A complete and accurate description of each item including,
but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number,
model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;



   (B)   The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged
therefor;



   (C)   The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due,
including monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges;



   (D)   Date, time, and place the item of property was received by the
licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that
distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee’s records;



   (E)   Full name, current residence address, current residence
telephone number, date of birth, and accurate description of the person from
whom the item of property was received, including: sex, height, weight, race,
color of eyes, and color of hair;



   (F)   The identification number and state of issue from any of the
following forms of identification of the seller:



      (1)   Current valid Minnesota driver’s license;



      (2)   Current valid Minnesota identification card; or



      (3)   Current valid photo identification card issued by
another state or province of Canada.



   (G)   The signature of the person identified in the transaction;



   (H)   (1)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by
local law enforcement of acceptable video standards, the licensee must also
take a color photograph or color video recording of:



         (a)   Each customer involved in a billable transaction;
and



         (b)   Every item pawned or sold that does not have an
unique serial or identification number permanently engraved or affixed.



      (2)   If a photograph is taken, it must be at least two inches
in length by two inches in width and must be maintained in a manner that the
photograph can be readily matched and correlated with all other records of
the transaction to which they relate. The photographs must be available to
the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee, upon request. The major
portion of the photograph must include an identifiable front facial close-up
of the person who pawned or sold the item. Items photographed must be
accurately depicted. The licensee must inform the person that he or she is
being photographed by displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous
place in the premises. If a video photograph is taken, the video camera must
zoom in on the person pawning or selling the item so as to include an
identifiable close-up of that person’s face. Items photographed by video
must be accurately depicted. Video photographs must be electronically
referenced by time and date so they can be readily matched and correlated
with all other records of the transaction to which they relate. The licensee
must inform the person orally that he or she is being videotaped and by
displaying a sign of sufficient size in a conspicuous place on the premises.
The licensee must keep the exposed videotape for three months.



      (3)   Effective 60 days from the date of notification by local
law enforcement, licensees must fulfill the color photograph requirements in
division (H) above by submitting them as digital images, in a format
specified by the issuing authority, electronically cross-referenced to the
reportable transaction they are associated with. Notwithstanding the digital
images may be captured from required video recordings, this provision does
not alter or amend the requirements in division (H) above.



   (I)   For renewals, extensions, and redemptions, the licensee shall
provide the original transaction identifier, the date of the current
transaction and the type of transaction; and



   (J)   The records must at all reasonable times be open to inspection
by local law enforcement or state regulatory agencies. Data entries shall be
retained for at least three years from the date of transaction. Entries of
required digital images shall be retained a minimum of 90 days.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-9)



§ 111.34  DAILY REPORTS TO POLICE.



   (A)   Reporting transactions.



      (1)   Effective no later than 60 days after local law
enforcement provides licensees with computerized record standards, licensees
must submit every reportable transaction to local law enforcement daily in
the following manner.



      (2)   Licensees must provide to local law enforcement all
information required in § 111.33(A) through (F) and other required
information by transferring it from their computer to the automated pawn
system via modem. All required records must be transmitted completely and
accurately after the close of business each day in accordance with standards
and procedures established by the issuing authority. The licensee must
display a sign of sufficient size, in a conspicuous place in the premises,
which informs all patrons that all transactions are reported to local law
enforcement daily.



   (B)   Billable transactions fees. Licensees will be charged for each
billable transaction reported to local law enforcement.



      (1)   If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the
required reports by modem, the licensee must provide local law enforcement
printed copies of all reportable transactions along with the video tape(s)
for that date by 12:00 the next business day.



         (a)   If the problem is determined to be in the
licensee’s system and is not corrected by the close of the first business
day following the failure, the licensee must provide the required reports as
detailed in division (B)(1) above, and must be charged a $50 reporting
failure penalty, daily, until the error is corrected; or



         (b)   If the problem is determined to be outside the
licensee’s system, the licensee must provide the required reports in
division (B)(1) above and resubmit all such transactions via modem when the
error is corrected.



      (2)   If a licensee is unable to capture, digitize, or
transmit the photographs required in § 111.33(H), the licensee must
immediately take all required photographs with a still camera,
cross-reference the photographs to the correct transaction, and make the
pictures available to local law enforcement upon request.



   (C)   Technical problems. Regardless of the cause or origin of the
technical problems that prevented the licensee from uploading his or her
reportable transactions, upon correction of the problem, the licensee shall
upload every reportable transaction from every business day the problem had
existed.



   (D)   Delay of implementation. Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) above
notwithstanding, local law enforcement may, upon presentation of extenuating
circumstances, delay the implementation of the daily reporting penalty.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-10)



§ 111.35  RECEIPT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every licensee must provide a receipt to the party identified
in every reportable transaction and must maintain a duplicate of that receipt
for three years.



   (B)   The receipt must include at least the following information:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the licensed
business;



      (2)   The date and time the item was received by the licensee;



      (3)   Whether the item was pawned or sold or the nature of the
transaction;



      (4)   An accurate description of each item received including,
but not limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number,
model number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;



      (5)   The signature or unique identifier of the licensee or
employee that conducted the transaction;



      (6)   The amount advanced or paid;



      (7)   The monthly and annual interest rates, including all
pawn fees and charges;



      (8)   The last regular day of business by which the item must
be redeemed by the pledger without risk that the item will be sold, and the
amount necessary to redeem the pawned item on that date;



      (9)   The full name, current residence address, current
residence telephone number, and date of birth of the pledger or seller;



      (10)   The identification number and state of issue from any
of the following forms of identification of the seller:



         (a)   Current valid Minnesota driver’s license;



         (b)   Current valid Minnesota identification card; or



         (c)   Current valid photo driver’s license or
identification card issued by another state or province of Canada.



      (11)   Description of the pledger or seller including sex,
approximate height, weight, race, color of eyes, and color of hair;



      (12)   The signature of the pledger or seller; and



      (13)   All printed statements as required by M.S. § 325J.04
subd. 2, as it may be amended from time to time, or any other applicable
statutes.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-11)



§ 111.36  REDEMPTION PERIOD.



   (A)   Any person pledging, pawning, or depositing an item for
security must have a minimum of 60 days from the date of that transaction to
redeem the item before it may be forfeited and sold. During the holding
period, items may not be removed from the licensed location except as
provided in § 111.43. Licensees are prohibited from redeeming any item to
anyone other than the person to whom the receipt was issued or, to any person
identified in a written and notarized authorization to redeem the property
identified in the receipt, or to a person identified in writing by the
pledger at the time of the initial transaction and signed by the pledger, or
with approval of the police license inspector. Written authorization for
release of property to persons other than original pledger must be maintained
along with original transaction record in accordance with § 111.33(I).



   (B)   Pawnbroker must return goods, or provide compensation for lost
or damaged goods, upon payment of the full amount due, unless:



      (1)   The 60-day redemption period has expired; or



      (2)   The goods have been taken into custody by a court or by
a law enforcement officer or agency.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-12)  (Ord. 542, passed 1-9-2012)



§ 111.37  HOLDING PERIOD.



   Any item purchased or accepted in trade by a licensee, but not involved
in a pawn transaction, must not be sold or otherwise transferred for 31 days
from the date of the transaction. An individual may redeem an item at any
time during the holding period.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-13)  (Ord. 542, passed 1-9-2012)



§ 111.38  POLICE ORDER TO HOLD PROPERTY.



   Whenever a law enforcement official from any agency notifies a licensee
not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or removed from the premises.
This initial or investigative hold shall be confirmed in writing within 72
hours and remains in effect for 15 days from the date of initial
notification. Local law enforcement may, in writing, extend an investigative
hold or independently order an item held for up to 90 days, or order the
confiscation of an item identified as stolen or evidence in a criminal case.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-14)  (Ord. 542, passed 1-9-2012)



§ 111.39  INSPECTION OF ITEMS.



   At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow
law enforcement officials to enter the premises, in accordance with § 10.20,
where the licensed business is located, including all off-site storage
facilities as authorized in § 111.43, during normal business hours, except
in an emergency for the purpose of inspecting the premises and inspecting the
items, wares and merchandise and records therein to verify compliance with
this subchapter and other applicable laws.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-15)



§ 111.40  LABEL REQUIRED.



   Licensee must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned,
purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable transaction.
Permanently recorded on this label must be the number or name that identifies
the transaction in the shop’s records, the transaction date, the name of
the item and the description or the model and serial number of the item as
reported to local law enforcement, whichever is applicable, and the date the
item is out of pawn or can be sold, if applicable. Labels shall not be
re-used.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-16)



§ 111.41  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may pawn or sell or
attempt to pawn or sell goods with any licensee, nor may any licensee receive
any goods from a person under the age of 18 years.



   (B)   No licensee may receive any goods from a person of unsound
mind or an intoxicated person.



   (C)   No licensee may receive any goods, unless the seller presents
identification in the form of a valid driver’s license, a valid state
identification card, or current valid photo driver’s license or
identification card issued by the state of residency of the person from whom
the item was received.



   (D)   No licensee may receive any item of property that possesses an
altered or obliterated serial number or operation identification number or
any item of property that has had its serial number removed.



   (E)   No person may pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or deposit
any article of property not their own; nor shall any person pawn, pledge,
sell, consign, leave, or deposit the property of another, whether with
permission or without; nor shall any person pawn, pledge, sell, consign,
leave, or deposit any article of property in which another person has a
security interest; with any licensee.



   (F)   No person seeking to pawn, pledge, sell, consign, leave, or
deposit any article of property with any licensee shall give a false or
fictitious name, nor give a false date of birth; nor give a false or out of
date address of residence or telephone number; nor present a false or altered
identification, or the identification of another, to any licensee.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-17)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.42  DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.



   Any license under this subchapter may be denied, suspended, or revoked
for one or more of the following reasons:



   (A)   The proposed use does not comply with any applicable zoning
code;



   (B)   The proposed use does not comply with any health, building,
building maintenance, or other provisions of this code of ordinances or state
law;



   (C)   The applicant or licensee has failed to comply with one or
more provisions of this subchapter;



   (D)   The applicant is not a citizen of the United States or a
resident alien, or upon whom it is impractical or impossible to conduct a
background or financial investigation due to the unavailability of
information;



   (E)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or bribery in securing or renewing a
license;



   (F)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements made in the
application and investigation for, or in the course of, the applicant’s
business;



   (G)   Violation within the preceding five years of any law relating
to theft, damage, or trespass to property, sale of a controlled substance, or
operation of a business; or



   (H)   The owner of the premises licensed or to be licensed would not
qualify for a license under the terms of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-18)



§ 111.43  BUSINESS AT ONLY ONE PLACE.



   A license under this subchapter authorizes the licensee to carry on its
business only at the permanent place of business designated in the license.
However, upon written request, the police inspector may approve an off-site
locked and secured storage facility. The licensee shall permit inspection of
the facility in accordance with § 111.39. All provisions of this subchapter
regarding record keeping and reporting apply to the facility and its
contents. Property shall be stored in compliance with all provisions of the
city code. The licensee must either own the building in which the business is
conducted, and any approved off-site storage facility, or have a lease on the
business premises that extends for more than six months.



(Prior Code, § 3-15-19)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.



CHAPTER 112:  BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS



Section




Rental Housing Licensing




   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Applicability; scope



   112.03   Definitions



   112.04   Enforcement Officer



   112.05   Responsibility of owner (landlord)



   112.06   General licensing provisions



   112.07   Inspections



   112.08   Conduct on licensed premises



   112.09   Condition of licensed premises



   112.10   Hearing procedure



   112.11   Misdemeanor




Mobile Food Units




   112.25   Purpose



   112.26   Definition



   112.27   License applications



   112.28   Conditions of licensing



   112.29   Suspension or revocation of a license




Licensing of Adult Use Businesses




   112.40   License requirements




Eating and Drinking Establishments




   112.55   Ordinance adopted



 



   112.99   Penalty




RENTAL HOUSING LICENSING




§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the community at large and the residents of rental
dwellings in the city and to ensure that rental housing in the city is
decent, safe, and sanitary and is so operated and maintained as not to become
a nuisance to the neighborhood or to become an influence that fosters blight
and deterioration or creates a disincentive to reinvestment in the community.
The operation of rental residential properties is a business enterprise that
entails certain responsibilities. Owners and operators are responsible to
take such reasonable steps as are necessary to ensure that the citizens of
the city who occupy such units may pursue the quiet enjoyment of the normal
activities of life in surroundings that are: safe, secure, and sanitary; free
from noise, nuisances, or annoyances; and free from unreasonable fears about
safety of persons and security of property.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-1)



§ 112.02  APPLICABILITY; SCOPE.



   (A)   This subchapter applies to all existing and new rental
dwellings in the city, including any accessory structures on the premises
upon which the rental dwelling is located, such as garages and storage
buildings and appurtenances, such as sidewalks and retaining walls.



   (B)   This subchapter does not apply to the state’s Department of
Health licensed rest homes; convalescent care facilities; nursing homes;
hotels; motels; or owner-occupied units.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-2)



§ 112.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Chief Building Official or designated
agent.



   CITY. The City of Monticello.



   CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator or the City
Administrator’s designated agent.



   INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. The International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 edition, as published by the International Code
Council.



   MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A rental dwelling containing three or more
units.



   OCCUPANT. Any person living or sleeping in a rental dwelling unit, or
having possession of a space within a rental dwelling unit.



   OWNER. With respect to all matters involving the making of applications
and the giving of notices, the individuals or entities holding legal and
equitable title to the premises.



   PREMISES. A lot, plot, or parcel of land, including the building or
structures thereon.



   RENTAL DWELLING. A building or premises, or portion thereof, containing
one or more units used or intended to be used for residential rental purposes.



   UNIT. A single unit within a rental dwelling providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-3)



§ 112.04  ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   The city’s Chief Building Official is authorized and directed to
enforce all provisions of this subchapter. The Chief Building Official may
designate other city employees to enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-4)



§ 112.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER (LANDLORD).



   (A)   Owner responsibility. Every owner of a rental dwelling is
responsible for violations of duties and obligations imposed by this
subchapter, applicable provisions of the city code, and the International
Property Maintenance Code.



   (B)   Cleanliness. Every owner of a rental dwelling is responsible
for keeping the rental dwelling in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition in
conformance with this subchapter, applicable provisions of the city code and
the International Property Maintenance Code.



   (C)   Disposal of rubbish. Every owner of a rental dwelling shall
have all rubbish, garbage, and waste stored and disposed of in a clean,
sanitary, and safe manner.



   (D)   Obtain license. The owner must obtain a license and pay all
license fees as required by this subchapter before the rental dwelling may be
rented.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-5)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.06  GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   License required. It is unlawful to own or operate a rental
dwelling in the city without first having obtained a license from the city.
An owner must obtain a license for each rental dwelling. If the rental
dwelling contains two or more units, and has a common owner and a common
property identification number, the owner shall obtain a single license for
the rental dwelling.



   (B)   License application. The owner of a rental dwelling must
submit an application for a license on forms and in the format provided by
the city. The owner must give notice, in writing, to the city within five
business days of any changes to the information contained in the license
application. The application must include:



      (1)   The owner’s name, address, and telephone number,
owning partners if a partnership, corporate officers if a corporation;



      (2)   Legal address of the rental dwelling;



      (3)   The type and number of units within the rental dwelling;



      (4)   The type of structure to be licensed (i.e.,
single-family, duplex, multi-family); and



      (5)   Pursuant to M.S. § 270C.72, subd. 4, as it may be
amended from time to time, the owner’s Social Security number and/or state
business identification number.



   (C)   License fees. The owner must pay an annual license fee, the
amount of which will be determined by the City Council. The owner must submit
the required fee along with the application for a new or renewal license.
Applications for a renewal license submitted after December 31 are subject to
an additional late fee, which shall be determined from time to time by the
Council.



   (D)   License period. The license period is for one year and all
licenses shall expire on March 14 in each year.



   (E)   License issuance.



      (1)   Preliminary inspection and investigation. Prior to
issuing an initial license, the Chief Building Official will seek consent
from the owner for an inspection of the rental dwelling and conduct an
inspection to determine compliance with this subchapter, the city code, and
the International Property Maintenance Code. The Chief Building Official will
review the application for completeness. All real estate taxes and municipal
utilities must be paid and current.



      (2)   Compliance order. As to any rental dwelling existing as
of the effective date of this subchapter, if the rental dwelling is not in
full compliance with division (E)(1) above, the city may issue the initial
license and provide the owner with a compliance order pursuant to § 112.09.



   (F)   Posting of license. The owner shall post a copy of the license
in the rental dwelling in a conspicuous place approved by the Building
Official. In multiple-dwelling units requiring a single license, the license
shall be posted in a common area of the building such as a corridor, hallway,
or lobby. The posted license shall be framed and covered with clear glass or
plastic.



   (G)   Transfer of license. Licenses are transferable. Any changes in
the ownership of the rental dwelling require submittal of application and
payment of license transfer fee.



   (H)   Register of occupancy. The owner shall keep a current register
of occupancy for each rental dwelling. This register of occupancy may be
reviewed by the city at any time. The register of occupancy shall contain, at
a minimum, the following information:



      (1)   Address(es) of the rental dwelling;



      (2)   Number of bedrooms of each unit;



      (3)   Number of units in each building; and



      (4)   Number of adults and children (under 18) currently
occupying each unit.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-6)  (Ord. 611, passed 2-9-2015)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.07  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Routine license inspections. No operating license may be
issued or renewed unless the city determines, following an inspection
conducted pursuant to this section, that the dwelling unit complies with this
code. The owner of a dwelling unit shall contact the Chief Building Official
or his or her agents to arrange an inspection at a reasonable time. The Chief
Building Official and his or her agents are authorized to conduct an
inspection, provided the owner or tenant consented to the inspection. A
rental dwelling unit, including any common space areas, must be inspected a
minimum of one time every two years. Nothing shall prohibit the city from
requesting additional inspections if deemed necessary or if requested by a
tenant of a rental dwelling unit. The owner shall notify the tenant or
tenants of the time when the city inspection will be conducted and provide
access to the units.



   (B)   Response to complaints. The Chief Building Official shall
respond to complaints of violations of this subchapter. A complaint may be
cause for a complete inspection of a unit or building. If an inspection is to
be made, the Chief Building Official shall notify the owner or tenant of the
inspection and request permission to inspect from the owner or tenant. If the
owner or tenant does not consent, the city may pursue an administrative
search warrant to conduct the inspection, unless a lawful exception to
conduct an inspection without a warrant exists. If there are violations, the
Chief Building Official shall notify the owner or tenant pursuant to §
112.09 to correct the problem which prompted the complaint. The cost of the
inspection shall be paid by the owner if the city’s inspection reveals
actual deficiencies as described by the occupant, and the payment of the cost
shall be a condition of license renewal.



   (C)   Right to refuse entry. The owner, occupant, tenant, or person
in charge of any property or rental unit possesses the right to deny entry to
any unit or property by the Chief Building Official for purposes of
compliance with this subchapter. However, nothing in this subchapter shall
prohibit the Chief Building Official from asking permission from an owner,
occupant, tenant, or person in charge of property for permission to inspect
the property or rental unit for compliance with this subchapter and all other
applicable laws, regulations, and codes. Nothing in this subchapter shall
prohibit the city from seeking a search warrant or from entering a property
or rental unit if a lawful exception to the warrant requirement exists.



   (D)   Scope of inspection.



      (1)   Neither the city nor any employee thereof assumes
liability for the accuracy or quality of any property inspected pursuant to
this subchapter at the request of the owner. The issuance of a rental license
shall not be construed to represent a warranty or guarantee by or on behalf
of the city nor shall the issuance of any certificate, license, or approval
be construed to imply or warrant that a unit or property is: safe or free of
any dangers or hazards to the occupants or general public; free and clear of
any violations of this subchapter or any other laws, regulations, or codes;
and free and clear of any defects.



      (2)   The issuance of any rental license shall not be
construed to represent any warranties or guarantees by or on behalf of the
city, nor shall the issuance of any certificates or approvals be construed to
imply that the property is:



         (a)   Completely safe or free of any dangers or hazards
to the occupants or general public;



         (b)   Completely free and clear of any violations of
this subchapter or any other codes; or



         (c)   Completely free and clear of any defects related
to any structural, fire protection, fire prevention, building utilities, or
any other features of the property.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-7)  (Ord. 611, passed 2-9-2015)



§ 112.08  CONDUCT ON LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   Owner responsible. It shall be the responsibility of the owner
to see that persons occupying the rental dwelling conduct themselves in a
manner as not to cause the premises to be disorderly. For purposes of this
section, a rental dwelling is disorderly at which any of the following
activities occur:



      (1)   Violation of M.S. §§ 609.755 through 609.76, as they
may be amended from time to time, as may be amended from time to time,
relating to gambling;



      (2)   Violation of laws relating to prostitution or acts
relating to prostitution as defined in M.S. § 609.321, as it may be amended
from time to time;



      (3)   Violation of M.S. §§ 152.01 through 152.027, as may be
amended from time to time, relating to the unlawful sale or possession of
controlled substances;



      (4)   Violation of M.S. §§ 340A.401 and 340A.503, as may be
amended from time to time, relating to the unlawful commercial sale and
underage consumption of alcoholic beverages;



      (5)   Violation of M.S. § 609.33, as may be amended from time
to time, which prohibits owning, leasing, operating, managing, maintaining,
or conducting a disorderly house, or inviting or attempting to invite others
to visit or remain in a disorderly house;



      (6)   Violation of M.S. §§ 97B.021, 97B.045, 609.66 through
609.67, 624.712 through 624.716, 624.719, or 624.731 through 624.732, as may
be amended from time to time, relating to the unlawful possession,
transportation, sale, or use of weapons;



      (7)   Violation of city code or violation of M.S. § 609.72,
as may be amended from time to time, relating to disorderly conduct;



      (8)   Violation of §§ 91.01 through 91.06 relating to
nuisances.



      (9)   Violation of §§ 95.30 through 95.36 relating to
recreational fires.



      (10)   Violation of §§ 90.001 through 90.025 and §§ 90.040
through 90.049 relating to animal control.



   (B)   First violation. Upon determination by the Chief Building
Official that a licensed premises was used in a disorderly manner, as
described in division (A) above, the Chief Building Official must give notice
to the licensee of the violation and direct the licensee to take steps to
prevent further violations.



   (C)   Second violation. If another instance of disorderly use of the
licensed premises occurs within 12 months of an incident for which a notice
in division (B) above was given, the Chief Building Official must notify the
licensee of the violation and must also require the licensee to submit a
written report of the actions taken, and proposed to be taken, by the
licensee to prevent further disorderly use of the premises. This written
report must be submitted to the Chief Building Official within five days of
receipt of the notice of disorderly use of the premises and must detail all
actions taken by the licensee in response to all notices of disorderly use of
the premises within the preceding three months.



   (D)   Third violation.



      (1)   If another instance of disorderly use of the licensed
premises occurs within 12 months after any two previous instances of
disorderly use for which notices were given to the licensee pursuant to this
section, the rental dwelling license for the premises may be denied, revoked,
suspended, or not renewed. An action to deny, revoke, suspend, or not renew a
license under this section must be initiated by the Chief Building Official
who must give to the licensee written notice of a hearing before the City
Council to consider such denial, revocation, suspension, or non-renewal. The
written notice must specify all violations of this section, and must state
the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. The hearing must be held
no less than ten days and no more than 30 days after giving the notice.



      (2)   Following the hearing, the City Council may deny,
revoke, suspend, or decline to renew the license for all or any part or parts
of the licensed premises or may grant a license upon such terms and
conditions as it deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.



   (E)   No adverse action pending eviction. No adverse license action
shall be imposed where the instance of disorderly use of the licensed
premises occurred during the pendency of eviction proceedings (unlawful
detainer) or within 30 days of notice given by the licensee to a tenant to
vacate the premises where the disorderly use was related to conduct by that
tenant or by other occupants or guests of the tenant’s unit. Eviction
proceedings are not a bar to adverse license action, however, unless they are
diligently pursued by the licensee. Further, an action to deny, revoke,
suspend, or not renew a license based upon violations of this section may be
postponed or discontinued at any time if it appears that the licensee has
taken appropriate measures which will prevent further instances of disorderly
use.



   (F)   Finding of disorderly conduct. A determination that the
licensed premises have been used in a disorderly manner as described in
division (A) above shall be made upon a fair preponderance of the evidence to
support such a determination. It is not necessary that criminal charges be
brought in order to support a determination of disorderly use, nor does the
fact of dismissal or acquittal of a criminal charge operate as a bar to
adverse license action under this section.



   (G)   Service of notices. All notices given by the city under this
section, at the city’s option, may be either personally served on the
licensee, sent by regular mail to the licensee at the address listed on the
application, or by posting on a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.



   (H)   Enforcement actions. Enforcement actions provided in this
section are not exclusive, and the City Council may take any action with
respect to a licensee, a tenant, or the licensed premises as is authorized by
the city code, state law, or federal law.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-8)



§ 112.09  CONDITION OF LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   Compliance order. Whenever the Chief Building Official
determines that the condition of any rental dwelling or the premises
surrounding it fails to meet the provisions of this subchapter, other
applicable city code provisions, or the International Property Maintenance
Code, he or she may issue a compliance order setting forth the specific
violations and ordering the owner to correct the violations.



   (B)   License action. If the violations listed in the compliance
order are not remedied by the owner within the specified time given in the
order, the license for the rental dwelling may be denied, suspended, revoked,
or not renewed by the city. An administrative fine in an amount set forth
from time to time by the City Council by resolution may also be imposed. If
the city decides that it will be denying, suspending, revoking, or not
renewing a license or imposing an administrative fine pursuant to this
section, the city shall send a notice of the proposed action to the owner of
the rental dwelling. The proposed action by the city shall be heard by the
Council pursuant to the procedure set forth in § 112.10.



   (C)   Appeal.



      (1)   When it is alleged by the owner that the compliance
order is based upon the erroneous interpretation of this subchapter, other
applicable city code provisions, or the International Property Maintenance
Code, the owner may appeal the compliance order to the City Council.



      (2)   The appeal shall be in writing, must specify the grounds
for the appeal, must be accompanied by a filing fee, as set forth by
resolution of the City Council, from time to time, and must be filed with the
city within five business days after service of the compliance order. The
appeal shall be heard by the Council pursuant to the procedure set forth in
§ 112.10.



      (3)   The filing of the appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless a stay would cause imminent
peril to life, health, or property.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-9)



§ 112.10  HEARING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Scheduling of hearing. If the city makes a determination that
it will be denying, suspending, revoking, or not renewing a license pursuant
to §§ 112.08 or 112.09, or if the owner is appealing the compliance order
pursuant to § 112.09, the City Council shall conduct a hearing on the
matter. The hearing shall be scheduled at the next regular Council meeting
following the date of the notice or receipt of the owner’s notice of appeal
of a compliance order.



   (B)   Hearing. At the hearing, the City Council shall hear all
relevant evidence and arguments and shall review all testimony, documents,
and other evidence submitted. The owner shall have the opportunity to address
the Council at the hearing.



   (C)   Findings. After the hearing is concluded, the City Council
shall make its decision on whether to uphold the compliance order or to
revoke, suspend, deny, or not renew the license or impose an administrative
fine.



   (D)   No occupancy. If a license is revoked, suspended, denied, or
not renewed by the City Council, it shall be unlawful for the owner to
thereafter permit the occupancy of the rental dwelling or the unit. A notice
of the action shall be posted by the Building Official on the rental dwelling
or the unit in order to prevent any further occupancy. No person shall reside
in, occupy, or cause to be occupied that rental dwelling or unit until a
license is obtained or reinstated by the owner.



   (E)   Appeal. An owner may appeal the decision of the City Council
as allowed under state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-10)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.11  MISDEMEANOR.



   Failure by an owner to comply with a compliance order after the right
of appeal has expired or violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate punishable offense.



(Prior Code, § 3-16-11)  (Ord. 464, passed 7-23-2007)




MOBILE FOOD UNITS




§ 112.25  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is designed to permit the reasonable use of mobile food
units while preventing any adverse consequences to residents, businesses, and
public property.



(Prior Code, § 3-20-1)  (Ord. 665, passed 5-8-2017)



§ 112.26  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE FOOD UNIT. A self-contained food service operation, located in a
readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle that is readily movable
without disassembling and that is used to store, prepare, display, or serve
food intended for individual portion service; or a MOBILE FOOD UNIT as
defined in M.S. § 157.15, subd. 9, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 3-20-2)  (Ord. 665, passed 5-8-2017)



§ 112.27  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Type of license. Each applicant must indicate whether it is
applying for a temporary license or annual license for any number of days in
the calendar year. A temporary license allows mobile food unit operations in
the city for up to seven days total. An annual license allows mobile food
unit operations in the city for eight days or more during any year. A
licensee will only be issued one temporary license per calendar year,
however, nothing shall prohibit a temporary licensee from applying for an
annual license within the same year.



   (B)   License fees. Fees for both temporary and annual licenses are
determined in the city’s fee schedule.



   (C)   Mobile food unit. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
mobile food unit in the city without first obtaining a license from the city.
An application for a license shall be filed, along with the required fee,
with the City Clerk. The applicant must be the owner of the mobile food unit.
The application shall be made on a form supplied by the city and shall
contain information requested by the city, including the following:



      (1)   Name of the owner and operator, if different than owner,
of the mobile food unit and permanent and temporary home and business address;



      (2)   The applicant’s full legal name, date of birth, and
driver’s license number;



      (3)   A description of the nature of the business and the
goods to be sold and the license plate number and description for any vehicle
to be used in conjunction with the activity;



      (4)   The permanent and any temporary home and business
address, phone numbers, and email address of the applicant, with a
designation of a preferred mailing address for notices related to the license;



      (5)   The name, address, and contact information for the
commissary with which the mobile food unit is affiliated, if applicable;



      (6)   A certificate of insurance by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state, evidencing the following forms of
insurance:



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, with a
limit of not less than $1,000,000 each occurrence. If the insurance contains
an annual aggregate limit, the annual aggregate limit shall be not less than
$2,000,000.



         (b)   Automobile liability insurance with a limit of not
less than $2,000,000 combined single limit. The insurance shall cover
liability arising out of any auto, including owned, hired, and non-owned
vehicles;



         (c)   Food products liability insurance, with a limit of
not less than $1,000,000 each occurrence;



         (d)   Public liability insurance, with a limit of not
less than $1,000,000 each occurrence;



         (e)   Property damage insurance, with a limit of not
less than $1,000,000 each occurrence;



         (f)   Worker’s compensation insurance (statutory
limits) or evidence of exemption from state law; and



         (g)   The city shall be endorsed as an additional
insured on the certificate of insurance and the umbrella/excess insurance if
the applicant intends to operate its mobile food unit on public property,
including public right-of-way.



      (7)   The certificate of insurance must contain a provision
requiring notification be sent to the city should the policy be cancelled
before its state expiration date;



      (8)   Written consent of each private property owner from
which mobile food unit sales will be conducted;



      (9)   If the mobile food unit will be located on city property
or public right-of-way, a signed statement that the licensee shall hold
harmless the city and its officers and employees, and shall indemnify the
city and its officers and employees for any claims for damage to property or
injury to persons which may be occasioned by any activity carried on under
the terms of the license;



      (10)   If applying only for a temporary license, the applicant
must provide the dates and locations for its up to ten days of mobile food
unit operations;



      (11)   A copy of each related license or permit issued by the
county and the state required to operate a mobile food unit; and



      (12)   A copy of the applicant’s state sales tax ID number.



(Prior Code, § 3-20-3)  (Ord. 665, passed 5-8-2017)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.28  CONDITIONS OF LICENSING.



   A mobile food unit may only operate as set forth in the following.



   (A)   Locations. A mobile food unit may only operate in the
locations set forth in this division (A). A mobile food unit may operate in a
private commercial or industrial parking lot and on private residential
property, with the written consent of the private property owner. When
operations occur on private residential property, mobile food unit sales may
only be for catering purposes (such as a private graduation party or wedding)
and not open for sales to the general public. A mobile food unit may only
operate along a public or private street when the street is closed to all
nonemergency vehicles. A mobile food unit may only operate in a city park or
on city property with the prior written approval by the city; additional
permits may be required for such operations.



   (B)   Performance standards. A mobile food unit licensee is subject
to the following performance standards:



      (1)   A mobile food unit with an annual license may not
operate on the same property more than 21 days during any calendar year;



      (2)   Applicable license fee shall be paid;



      (3)   Shall operate in strict compliance with the laws, rules,
and regulations of the United States, the state, the county, and the city;



      (4)   A mobile food unit must dispose of its gray water daily.
Gray water may not be drained into city stormwater drains;



      (5)   Shall provide and maintain at least one clearly
designated waste container for customer use per each mobile food cart or
mobile food vehicle;



      (6)   Operator is responsible for daily removal of trash,
litter, recycling and refuse. Public trash cans shall not be used to dispose
of water generated by the operation. The operator shall provide a garbage
receptacle with a tight-fitting lid. The receptacle shall be easily
accessible for customer use, and located within five feet of the unit;



      (7)   A mobile food unit must provide an independent power
supply that is screened from public view and that complies with city’s
noise regulations;



      (8)   Trucks can operate between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and
must not create any unnecessary noise disturbances or disrupt public traffic
or safety in any way. An exemption to hours may be authorized by City Council
on a per event basis;



      (9)   A mobile food unit may have a maximum bumper to bumper
length of no more than 40 feet;



      (10)   Operators must clean around their unit at the end of
each day and units must be kept in good repair and have a neat appearance;



      (11)   Proof of Department of Health licensing must be
provided and posted on unit;



      (12)   A mobile food unit must comply with the Fire Department
food truck requirement (attached as exhibit);



      (13)   An out of service mobile food unit stored within the
city must comply with all applicable zoning ordinance requirements;



      (14)   Mobile food units may operate on private property in
any residential zoned districts for a “one-time” event for catering
purposes only;



      (15)   Mobile food units cannot locate within 300 feet from
the perimeter of any pre-approved festival, sporting event, or civic event
unless a license is issued to be part of the festival or event;



      (16)   Mobile food units may not operate within 100 feet from
the public entrance to any restaurant and/or any portion of a restaurant’s
outdoor dining area during that restaurant’s hours of operation unless the
licensee obtains permission from restaurant owner/manager; and



      (17)   Mobile food units may not operate in city-owned parking
lots, except those parking lots adjacent to or inside a city park with the
approval of a special event permit, expect for events hosted by the city’s
community center.



   (C)   License. A mobile food unit license is non-transferable. Proof
of license shall be displayed at all times in the mobile food unit. Mobile
food unit operations may not occur in January, February, March, November, and
December. A mobile food unit license is an annual license.



   (D)   Practices prohibited. It is unlawful for any person engaged in
the business of a mobile food unit operation to do the following:



      (1)   Call attention to that licensee’s business by crying
out, blowing a horn, ringing a bell, loud music, or by any loud or unusual
noise, or by use of any amplifying device;



      (2)   Fail to display proof of license and produce valid
identification when requested;



      (3)   Cannot be left unattended nor remain at an authorized
location outside allowed hours of operation;



      (4)   May not operate or travel in or on public sidewalks or
trails;



      (5)   Remain on the property of another when asked to leave;



      (6)   Obstruct the ingress or egress from commercial buildings
during the building hours of operation;



      (7)   Claim endorsements by the city based on license; or



      (8)   Conduct business in any manner as to create a threat to
the health, safety, and welfare of a specific individual or the general
public.



(Prior Code, § 3-20-4)  (Ord. 665, passed 5-8-2017; Ord. 713, passed - -) 
Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.29  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.



   A license issued pursuant to this section may be suspended by a city
official if the licensee has violated § 112.28, or is otherwise conducting
business in a manner as to constitute a breach of peace, fraudulent conduct,
or any other conduct that is prohibited by local, state, or federal laws or
regulations. Falsification of information required for a license is also
grounds for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license. The license shall
be automatically revoked if the licensee does not file an appeal pursuant to
this section. When taking action on any license issued under this section,
the city official shall provide the licensee with verbal or written notice of
the violation. The notice shall inform the licensee of its right to be heard
before the City Council. The notice shall also inform the licensee that the
license shall be automatically revoked if no appeal is filed within 21 days
of the date of the notice by the city official. Verbal notice shall be
confirmed within five days by a mailed written notice to the licensee. The
Council shall not conduct a hearing on a suspension or revocation unless a
request is made by the next available Council meeting. No Council resolution
or other notice calling for a hearing shall be required.



(Prior Code, § 3-20-5)  (Ord. 665, passed 5-8-2017)




LICENSING OF ADULT USE BUSINESSES




§ 112.40  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General requirement. No person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall operate an adult use, either principal or accessory,
without having first secured a license as hereinafter provided. Licenses
shall be one of two types:



      (1)   Adult use/accessory; and



      (2)   Adult use/principal.



   (B)   Application. In addition to such information the City Council
may require, the application shall also include:



      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the name, residence,
phone number, and birth date of the applicant. If the applicant is a
partnership, the name, residence, phone number, and birth date of each
general and limited partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the names,
residences, phone numbers, and birth dates of all those persons holding more
than 5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation;



      (2)   The name, address, phone number, and birth date of the
manager of the operation, if different from the owners;



      (3)   The premises where the adult use is to be located within
the entire building;



      (4)   A statement detailing any felony convictions by the
applicant and whether or not the applicant has ever applied for or held a
license to operate a similar type of business in other communities. In the
case of a corporation, a statement detailing any felony convictions by the
owners of more than 5% of the issued and outstanding stock of the
corporation, and whether or not those owners have ever applied for or held a
license to operate a similar type of business in other communities;



      (5)   The activities and types of business to be conducted;



      (6)   The hours of operation;



      (7)   The provisions made to restrict access by minors; and



      (8)   A building plan of the premises detailing all internal
operations and activities.



   (C)   License fees.



      (1)   Each application for a license shall be submitted to the
City Administrator and payment made to the city. Each application for a
license shall be accompanied by payment in full of the required fee for the
license. All fees shall be paid into the General Fund. Upon rejection of any
application for a license, the city shall refund the amount paid except for
that cost to investigate the applicant.



      (2)   All licenses shall expire on the last day of December in
each year. Each license shall be issued for a period of one year, except that
if a portion of the license year has elapsed when the application is made, a
license may be issued for the remainder of the year for a pro-rated fee. In
computing the fee, any unexpired fraction of a month shall be counted as one
month.



      (3)   The annual fee for an adult use/accessory shall be $250.
The annual fee for an adult use/principal license shall be $1,000.



      (4)   No part of the fee paid by any license issued under this
subchapter shall be refunded except in the following instances upon
application to the City Administrator within 30 days from the happening of
the event. There shall be refunded a pro-rata portion of the fee for the
unexpired period of the license, computed on a monthly basis, when operation
of the licensed business ceases no less than one month before expiration of
the license because of:



         (a)   Destruction or damage of the licensed premises by
fire or other catastrophe;



         (b)   If the licensee is an individual, the licensee’s
disabling illness. If the licensee is a partnership, the disabling illness of
any general partner. If the licensee is a corporation, the disabling illness
of any shareholder or shareholders who in the aggregate hold 50% or more of
the issued and outstanding shares of the corporation;



         (c)   If the licensee is an individual, the licensee’s
death. If the licensee is a partnership, the death of any general partner. If
the licensee is a corporation, the death of any shareholder or shareholders
who in the aggregate hold 50% or more of the issued and outstanding shares of
the corporation; or



         (d)   A change in the legal status making it unlawful
for the licensed business to continue.



   (D)   Granting of license.



      (1)   (a)   The City Council shall investigate all facts
set out in the application and hold a public hearing within 45 days after the
City Administrator receives the application. Opportunity shall be given to
any person to be heard for or against the granting of the license.



         (b)   After the investigation and administrative
hearing, the City Council shall grant or refuse the application. The city
shall grant or refuse the application within 45 days after the public hearing
has closed.



      (2)   (a)   Each license shall be issued to the applicant
only and shall not be transferable to another holder. Each license shall be
issued only for the premises described in the application.



         (b)   No license may be transferred to another premises
without the approval of the City Council. If the licensee is a partnership or
a corporation, a change in the identity of any of the principals of the
partnership or corporation shall be deemed a transfer of the license.



         (c)   All adult uses existing at the time of the
adoption of this subchapter shall be required to obtain an annual license.



   (E)   Persons ineligible for license. No license shall be granted to
or held by any person:



      (1)   Under 21 years of age;



      (2)   (a)   Who has been convicted of any of the following
felonies, or a shareholder, director, officer, or partner of which has been
convicted of any of the following felonies:



            1.   Homicide;



            2.   Assault;



            3.   Any felony relating to controlled substances;



            4.   Kidnapping;



            5.   Robbery;



            6.   Any felony relating to prostitution;



            7.   Criminal sexual conduct;



            8.   Incest;



            9.   Malicious punishment of a child;



            10.   Receiving stolen property;



            11.   Any felony relating to gambling;



            12.   Any felony relating to dangerous weapons
and/or firearms;



            13.   Any felony in which a dangerous weapon or
firearm was used; or



            14.   Any other felony involving moral turpitude.



         (b)   The City Council may waive the provisions of
division (E)(2)(a) above with respect to an adult use/accessory license and
grant an adult use/accessory license to a person, partnership, or corporation
a principal or principals of which have been convicted of a felony or
felonies. In deciding whether to make a waiver, the Council shall consider:



            1.   The number of felony convictions;



            2.   The nature of the felony or felonies;



            3.   The length of time that has passed since the
conviction or convictions; and



            4.   Whether the license is for a use that existed
prior to the effective date of this subchapter.



      (3)   Who is not the proprietor of the establishment for which
the license is issued.



   (F)   Places ineligible for license.



      (1)   No license shall be granted for adult uses on any
premises where a licensee has been convicted of a violation of this
subchapter, or where any license hereunder has been revoked for cause, until
one year has elapsed after the conviction or revocation.



      (2)   Except for uses lawfully existing at the time of this
subchapter adoption, no license shall be granted for any adult use which is
not in compliance with the city’s zoning regulations.



   (G)   Conditions of license.



      (1)   Every license shall be granted subject to the conditions
in the following divisions and all other provisions of this subchapter, and
of any applicable sections of the code of the city or state law.



      (2)   All licensed premises shall have the license posted in a
conspicuous place at all times.



      (3)   In the case of an adult use/principal, no minor shall be
permitted on the licensed premises unless accompanied by his or her parent or
legal guardian.



      (4)   Any designated inspection officer of the city shall have
the unqualified right to enter, inspect, and search the premises of a
licensee during business hours.



      (5)   Every licensee shall be responsible for the conduct of
his or her place of business and shall maintain conditions of order.



      (6)   No adult goods and/or services shall be offered, sold,
transferred, conveyed, given, displayed, or bartered to any minor.



   (H)   Right of appeal. Any applicant whose application for an adult
use license is denied, or any licensee whose license is revoked or suspended,
may appeal the denial, revocation, or suspension to the County District Court
within 30 days after the denial, revocation, or suspension of the license.



(Prior Code, § 3-13-1)  (Ord. 219, passed 1-27-1992)  Penalty, see §
112.99




EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS




§ 112.55  ORDINANCE ADOPTED.



   An ordinance entitled “The National Sanitation Foundation Standards
of Commercial Powered Food Preparation Equipment, Food Service Refrigerator
and Food Service Storage Freezers, Automatic Ice-Making Equipment, Soda
Fountain/Luncheonette Equipment and Appurtenances, Dispensing Freezers, Food
Vending Machines, Food Service Equipment and Appurtenances, and Commercial
Spray-Type Dishwashing Machines” is hereby adopted for all public eating,
drinking, and food service establishments in the city.



(Prior Code, § 7-4-1)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of § 112.40 is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than
the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed state law.



      (2)   (a)   Any violation of § 112.40 shall be a basis for
the suspension or revocation of any license granted hereunder. In the event
that the City Council proposes to revoke or suspend the license, the licensee
shall be notified in writing of the basis for such proposed revocation or
suspension. The Council shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of
determining whether to revoke or suspend the license, which public hearing
shall be within 45 days of the date of the notice.



         (b)   The City Council shall determine whether to
suspend or revoke the license within 45 days after the close of the hearing
and shall notify the licensee of its decision within that 45-day period.



(Prior Code, § 3-13-1)  (Ord. 219, passed 1-27-1992)



CHAPTER 113:  AMUSEMENTS



Section




Traveling Shows




   113.01   Purpose



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   License required



   113.04   License application



   113.05   License fees



   113.06   Provisions of license



   113.07   Surety bond



   113.08   Insurance



   113.09   Approval of license



   113.10   Revocation




TRAVELING SHOWS




§ 113.01  PURPOSE.



   The City Council finds that reasonable regulation of carnivals,
circuses, and other similar events is necessary because of the impact such
activities may have on the safety and well being of the citizens.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-1)  (Ord. 461, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CARNIVAL. A traveling enterprise consisting of any combination of
amusement rides, games, sideshows, or exhibits.



   CIRCUS. An arena often covered by a tent and used for variety shows,
usually including tests of physical skill and daring, wild animal acts, and
performances by jugglers, clowns, and the like.



   MENAGERIE. Display of animals for exhibition.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-2)  (Ord. 461, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 113.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No individual or firm shall operate a carnival, circus, or menagerie in
the city without having first obtained a license as provided by this
subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   Every person or firm desiring a license shall fill out a form as
prescribed by the City Clerk and receive approval for the application by the
City Council. An application shall be made at least ten days in advance of
the Council meeting at which it is to be considered. The applicant shall
provide evidence of written permission by the property owner of the site
specified in the application allowing the operation of the carnival, circus,
or menagerie on the site.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-4)  (Ord. 461, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 113.05  LICENSE FEES.



   Fee for a license shall be a fee schedule adopted by the City Council.
The fee payment shall accompany application. This license fee may be waived
or modified for non-profit organizations by the Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-5)  (Ord. 107, passed 11-23-1981)



§ 113.06  PROVISIONS OF LICENSE.



   License shall be as provided in the license application unless modified
by the City Council and shall not be for a period longer than eight days
including set up and take down time.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-6)  (Ord. 461, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 113.07  SURETY BOND.



   A surety bond in the amount of $5,000 shall be provided to the city to
insure that all applicable federal, state, and city regulations are adhered
to, including provisions of this subchapter. This bond shall accompany the
application.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-7)



§ 113.08  INSURANCE.



   (A)   The licensee shall provide proof of liability insurance
coverage to protect the city and licensee against any claims or liability for
personal injury or property damage sustained by any person as a result of the
operation of carnival, circus, or menagerie. The liability coverage shall
name the city as an additional insured. The insurance coverage shall have
minimum limits of liability coverage of $1,000,000.



   (B)   The licensee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
city from any claims and liability which may be brought against the
municipality as a result of the operation of the circus, carnival, or
menagerie.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-8)  (Ord. 461, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 113.09  APPROVAL OF LICENSE.



   City Council shall review application and consider approval based on
the following factors:



   (A)   Adherence to ordinance provisions of this section;



   (B)   Previous violations of city ordinances, other cities’
ordinances, and state and federal regulations;



   (C)   Location and capability of location to handle anticipated
traffic, and the like;



   (D)   Noise levels and proximity to residences, nursing homes, and
hospitals;



   (E)   Other extenuating circumstances that may endanger the health,
safety, and general welfare of the city and its citizens; and



   (F)   Hours of operation are limited from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
unless modified by City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-9)  (Ord. 461, passed 6-25-2007)



§ 113.10  REVOCATION.



   City Council may revoke the license at any time for violations of this
subchapter or becoming aware of misrepresentation of facts in the application.



(Prior Code, § 3-9-10)



CHAPTER 114:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



Section



   114.01   Findings and purpose



   114.02   Creation



   114.03   Management



   114.04   Reservation of power



§ 114.01  FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.



   M.S. § 237.19, as it may be amended from time to time, authorizes the
city to own and operate a telephone exchange and to provide municipal
telecommunications services following a referendum within the city. The city
conducted the required referendum and more than the statutorily prescribed
65% of those voting thereon voted in favor of proceeding. The City Council
hereby finds that the establishment of FiberNet Monticello is in the best
interests of the city.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-1)



§ 114.02  CREATION.



   A municipal telecommunications services enterprise to be known as
FiberNet Monticello is hereby created and established.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-2)



§ 114.03  MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   The City Council shall appoint management for FiberNet
Monticello, and hire or assign such staff or consultants or contractors as it
deems necessary for the efficient operations of FiberNet Monticello and the
city.



   (B)   Management shall be responsible for the administration and
management of FiberNet Monticello.



   (C)   Management shall have the authority to govern FiberNet
Monticello within the boundaries established in the annual budget as approved
by the City Council. Management shall make an annual budget recommendation to
the Council. Management shall ensure FiberNet meets city requirements and
state statutory requirements for financial management and reporting.



   (D)   Management shall provide reports to the City Council
accurately describing the activities and financial condition of FiberNet
Monticello.



   (E)   Management shall maintain contact with the City Administrator
as necessary to coordinate activities.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-3)



§ 114.04  RESERVATION OF POWER.



   Except as delegated by this subchapter or the City Council, the Council
reserves its rights and powers regarding FiberNet Monticello, including, but
not limited to, the power to:



   (A)   Adopt the annual budget;



   (B)   Approve capital improvements; and



   (C)   Approve potential expansions of the service area of FiberNet
Monticello.



(Prior Code, § 2-9-4)  (Ord. 480, passed 4-14-2008; Ord. 654, passed
8-22-2016)



CHAPTER 115:  CABLE SERVICE



Section



   115.01   Findings and intent



   115.02   Short title



   115.03   Definitions



   115.04   Franchises



   115.05   Construction standards



   115.06   System design and extension provisions



   115.07   Consumer protection and customer service standards



   115.08   Community services



   115.09   Administration provisions



   115.10   Indemnification and insurance



   115.11   Franchise transfer or abandonment



   115.12   Protection of individual rights



   115.13   Unauthorized connections and modifications; prohibited



   115.14   Enforcement



 



   115.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Right-of-way regulations, see §§ 94.01 through 94.30



§ 115.01  FINDINGS AND INTENT.



   The city finds that the delivery of cable service and related
communications services may contribute significantly to the communication
needs and desires of residents of the city, benefit local economic
development, and improve public and municipal services. The city’s intent
in adopting this cable chapter is to encourage further development of cable
service and related communications services in the city, and to ensure that
all cable service providers are subject to comparable obligations and burdens.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.02  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter will be known and cited as the “Cable Ordinance”.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Unless
otherwise provided herein, terms, phrases, and words contained in this cable
chapter shall have the meaning ascribed in the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521
et seq., or if not defined herein or in the Cable Act will have their normal
and customary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
singular number include the plural number. The words “must” and
“will” are always mandatory and not merely directory. The word “may”
is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. The meaning ascribed in Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §
522(3).



   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, or SYSTEM. The meaning
ascribed in Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).



   CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE. The meaning ascribed in Cable Act, 47 U.S.C.
§ 543(l)(2).



   CABLE SERVICE. The meaning ascribed in Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is
used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel.



   CITY. The City of Monticello, Minnesota, a municipal corporation, in
the State of Minnesota.



   COMMISSION. The Sherburne/Wright Counties Cable Communications
Commission, a municipal joint powers entity consisting of the following
municipalities: Big Lake; Buffalo; Cokato; Dassel; Delano; Elk River; Maple
Lake; Monticello; Rockford; and Watertown.



   CONVERTER. A customer premises device required to receive cable service.



   DROP. The cable that connects the ground block at the subscriber’s
location to the nearest distribution point of the system.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or its lawful successor.



   FRANCHISE, CABLE FRANCHISE, or FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. An agreement
between the city and any provider of cable service pursuant to this cable
chapter granting authorization to construct, operate, and maintain a system
and provide cable service in the city.



   FRANCHISE FEE. The meaning ascribed in Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g).



   GRANTEE. Any recipient of a franchise, and its agents and employees,
lawful successors, transferees, or assignees.



   GROSS REVENUES. All revenues, as determined in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), received by a grantee
or its affiliates from the operation of a cable system to provide cable
service in the city. By way of example and not limitation, GROSS REVENUES
shall include any advertising revenues received by a grantee or its
affiliates in connection with the provision of cable service. GROSS REVENUES
shall not include revenues received by a grantee or its affiliates from the
provision of telecommunications services or other non-cable services in the
city, bad debt, credits, refunds and deposits paid to subscribers, or any
taxes, fees, or assessments of general applicability collected by a grantee
which are imposed directly on a subscriber and which are collected by a
grantee for such governmental unit including any PEG capital fees. A
franchise fee is not such a tax, fee, or assessment.



   INSTALLATION. The connection of a system from a distribution cable to
the point of connection, including standard installations and custom
installations.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. The meaning ascribed in the FCC’s rules, 47
C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(4).



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. The meaning ascribed in the FCC’s rules,
47 C.F.R. § 76.309(c)(4).



   PEG ACCESS FACILITIES. Public, educational, and governmental
programming channels, or any equipment or facilities for use of such channels
as required by a franchise.



   PERSON. The meaning ascribed in Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 522(15).



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, cartway, bicycle lane, and public sidewalk in which
the local government unit has an interest, including other dedicated
rights-of-way for travel purposes and utility easements of local government
units.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY ORDINANCE. An ordinance of general applicability adopted
and uniformly applied as to similarly situated ROW occupants by the city
establishing requirements regarding regulation, management, and use of
rights-of-way, including registration and permitting requirements.



   STANDARD INSTALLATION. Any residential installation that can be
completed using a drop of 125 feet or less.



   SUBSCRIBER. Any person who lawfully receives cable service via a system.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. The meaning ascribed in 47 U.S.C. §
153(46).



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.04  FRANCHISES.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   No person may construct, operate, or maintain a cable
system or provide cable service in the city unless and until such person is
granted a franchise. All franchises must be granted pursuant to the
provisions of this cable chapter. Notwithstanding any provision to the
contrary, any franchises and this cable chapter shall at all times be subject
to, and without waiving, applicable law.



      (2)   Any franchise granted hereunder will authorize a grantee
to deliver cable service and construct, operate, and maintain a cable system
in the rights-of-way in the city.



      (3)   All franchises shall be nonexclusive and city may grant
additional franchises at any time. The city will not grant an additional
franchise on terms and conditions more favorable or less burdensome than
those in an existing franchise. The city may impose additional terms and
conditions in any additional franchise.



      (4)   The city shall comply with § 115.14(D) in the event an
additional provider is legally authorized to provide cable service.



      (5)   This cable chapter and franchises granted pursuant
hereto are intended to comply with M.S. Ch. 238, as it may be amended from
time to time. Any applicable requirement established by M.S. § 238.084, as
it may be amended from time to time, not expressly incorporated in this cable
chapter or a franchise shall be deemed incorporated by reference in the
franchise as though fully set forth therein.



   (B)   Use of rights-of-way.



      (1)   Use of rights-of-way to operate a cable system and
provide cable service must not be inconsistent with the terms and conditions
by which such rights-of-way were created or dedicated. Use of rights-of-way
is subject to all generally applicable legal requirements including any
right-of-way ordinance enacted by the city and division (E) below.



      (2)   Upon written request, the city shall have the right to
review, subject to the confidentiality protections provided in § 115.09(C),
the grantee’s system location maps at a mutually agreed upon location.



   (C)   Tree trimming. Subject to applicable law, a grantee is
authorized to trim any trees upon and overhanging the rights-of-way, alleys,
sidewalks, or public easements of city so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with wires and cables of a system.



   (D)   Franchise term. Franchises will be granted for a term
established in the franchise agreement. No franchise may be granted for a
period exceeding 15 years from the date of acceptance by the grantee.



   (E)   Regulation of cable service. Any franchise agreement adopted
pursuant to this cable chapter will define the contractual rights and
obligations of the city and grantee; provided however that a grantee remains
subject to the lawful exercise of the city’s police power, ordinance-making
authority, and power of eminent domain.



   (F)   Initial franchise applications.



      (1)   Upon request or its own initiative, the city may
initiate the cable franchise application process required by M.S. § 238.081,
as it may be amended from time to time. Any person desiring an initial
franchise must file an application with the city.



      (2)   The city will establish an application fee in an amount
to offset the costs of processing applications and awarding an initial
franchise. Such application fees will not constitute a franchise fee.



      (3)   Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise,
city staff will prepare a report and recommendations to the City Council
regarding the application(s).



      (4)   A public hearing concerning applications will be held
prior to rejection or acceptance of applications, and award of any initial
franchises.



   (G)   Franchise renewal. Franchise renewals will be conducted in
accordance with applicable laws.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



Cross-reference:



   Right-of-way regulations, see §§ 94.01 through 94.30



§ 115.05  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Registration, permits, and construction codes. Within 90 days
of acceptance of an initial franchise, a grantee shall apply for any
necessary governmental permits, licenses, certificates, and authorizations to
construct, repair, replace, relocate, operate, maintain, or reconstruct a
system. A grantee must strictly adhere to all state and local laws and
building and zoning codes currently or hereafter applicable to location,
construction, installation, operation, or maintenance of the facilities used
to provide cable service in the city.



   (B)   Repair of rights-of-way and property.



      (1)   Consistent with any generally applicable rights-of-way
ordinance adopted by the city or applicable law if a city has not adopted a
rights-of-way ordinance, any rights-of-way or other property disturbed or
damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation,
maintenance, or reconstruction of a cable system shall be promptly and fully
restored by the grantee performing such work, at its expense, to a condition
as good as that prevailing prior to such work.



      (2)   If a grantee fails to promptly perform the restoration
required herein, the city shall have the right, following reasonable written
notice to the grantee, to restore rights-of-way and other public property to
a condition as good as that prevailing prior to the grantee’s work. The
city shall be fully reimbursed by the grantee for its actual costs relating
to such restoration.



   (C)   Undergrounding of facilities.



      (1)   In all areas of the city where utility facilities are
required to be placed underground, or where all other utility lines are
underground, a grantee must construct and install system facilities
underground.



      (2)   A grantee must bury new underground drops within a
reasonable time period, subject to weather conditions. In the event the
ground is frozen, a grantee will be permitted to delay burial until the
ground is suitable for burial which in no event must be later than June 30.



   (D)   Safety requirements.



      (1)   A grantee shall at all times keep and maintain the
system in good condition, order, and repair so as to avoid endangering the
life or property of any person; employ ordinary and reasonable care and
common industry practices to avoid causing damage, injuries, or nuisances to
the public; and keep and maintain the system in accordance with all federal,
state, and local laws and regulations including the National Electric Safety
Code.



      (2)   A grantee must install and maintain equipment and
facilities in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws and
regulations, any right-of-way ordinance, and the requirements of the National
Electric Safety Code.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.06  SYSTEM DESIGN AND EXTENSION PROVISIONS.



   (A)   System capacity and channels. At a minimum, any franchise
granted hereunder shall describe the grantee’s network in terms of the
total system capacity such as the total number of analog and digital video
channels that can be provided.



   (B)   Cable service availability.



      (1)   Each franchise will identify a required service area in
which a grantee will be required to offer cable service to all dwellings,
homes, and businesses, subject to a reasonable density threshold. Any
additional franchise will include a service area that is no more favorable or
less burdensome than the service area in an existing franchise.



      (2)   Any franchise granted hereunder may establish
requirements for the extension of the system and provision of cable service
to areas that may be annexed by the city beyond the initially required
service area.



      (3)   Cable service shall not be denied to any group of
potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the
residents of the area in which such group resides.



   (C)   Non-standard installations. A grantee must provide cable
service to any person requesting other than a standard installation except
that a grantee may charge for the incremental increase in material and labor
costs incurred above the cost of making a standard installation.



   (D)   Technical standards. Any system offering cable service in the
city must comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the
FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §§ 76.601 to 76.617, as
may be amended or modified from time to time.



   (E)   System testing.



      (1)   A grantee shall perform all system testing required
pursuant to the FCC’s technical standards and requirements.



      (2)   Demand for special tests may be made on the basis of
complaints received or other evidence indicating an unresolved controversy or
noncompliance. Such tests shall be limited to the particular matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints. The city shall arrange its request for
such special testing so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to the
grantee or to the subscribers caused by such testing. Before ordering such
tests, the grantee shall be afforded 30 days to correct problems or
complaints upon which tests were ordered. The city shall meet with the
grantee prior to requiring special tests to discuss the need for such and, if
possible, visually inspect those locations which are the focus of concern.
If, after such meetings and inspections, the city wishes to commence special
tests and the 30 days have elapsed without correction of the matter in
controversy or unresolved complaints, the tests shall be conducted by a
qualified engineer mutually selected by the city and the grantee based on a
mutually agreed upon scope of work and cost. The parties shall bear their
respective costs for the testing, with the city bearing the cost of special
testing unless such testing reveal that the source of the technical
difficulty is within the grantee’s reasonable control, in which case the
cost of the testing must be borne by the grantee.



   (F)   FCC reports. The results of tests required to be filed by the
grantee with the FCC shall also be copied to city.



   (G)   Emergency alert system. A grantee shall comply with 47 U.S.C.
§ 544(g) and all regulations issued pursuant thereto with respect to an
emergency alert system (“EAS”). If a grantee provides an EAS, then the
city shall permit only appropriately trained and authorized persons to
operate the EAS equipment and shall take reasonable precautions to prevent
any use of the grantee’s cable system in any manner that results in
inappropriate use thereof, or any loss or damage to the cable system. The
city shall hold the grantee, its employees, officers and assigns harmless
from any claims or costs arising out of use of the EAS, including, but not
limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.07  CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Regulation of cable service rates. The city may regulate rates
for the provision of cable service to the extent allowed under federal and
state law(s). A grantee must file a list of current subscriber rates and
charges with the city, which lists will be maintained on file with city and
will be available for public inspection. For purposes of this section, the
availability of this information on a grantee’s website shall constitute
compliance. A grantee shall comply with applicable law in providing the city
and subscribers with notice of any change in a cable service rate or charges.



   (B)   Sales procedures. A grantee may not exercise deceptive sales
procedures that violate state laws when marketing any of its cable services
within the city. A grantee may conduct marketing consistent with local
ordinances and other applicable laws and regulations.



   (C)   Telephone inquiries and complaints. A grantee must maintain
local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will be
available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. A grantee
must comply with the FCC’s customer service standards, as amended, a
current copy of which is attached to the ordinance codified herein and made a
part hereof.



   (D)   Complaint and other service records.



      (1)   Upon written request by the city, and subject to a
grantee’s obligation to maintain the privacy of certain information, a
grantee must prepare and maintain written records of all written complaints
received and the resolution of such complaints for a period of three years,
including the date of such resolution.



      (2)   Written complaint records for a period of three years
must be on file at the office of a grantee. Upon written request by the city,
a grantee must provide the city with a written summary of such complaints and
their resolution and in a form mutually agreeable to the city and grantee.



      (3)   (a)   Upon written request by the city, a grantee
must provide detailed compliance reports on a quarterly basis for a period of
three years with respect to the objectively measurable service standards
required in this section.



         (b)   A grantee will not be required to acquire
equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone
answering standards contained in this section unless a historical record of
complaints indicates a failure to comply.



   (E)   Subscriber contracts. A grantee must provide to the city upon
request any standard form residential subscriber contract utilized.



   (F)   Video programming. All franchises will comply with 47 U.S.C.
§ 544(b), regarding the broad categories of video programming provided.
Individual programming decisions may be made in the grantee’s sole
discretion.



   (G)   Billing and subscriber communications.



      (1)   A grantee shall comply with federal law regarding giving
the city and subscribers prior notice of any changes in rates, programming
services, or channel alignments.



      (2)   Bills must be clear, concise, and understandable. Bills
must clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including
optional charges, rebates, and credits. In case of a billing dispute, the
grantee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.



   (H)   Refunds and credits. A grantee shall comply with applicable
law regarding the issuance of refunds or credits.



   (I)   Additional customer service requirements. The city may adopt
additional or modified customer service requirements to address subscriber
concerns or complaints to the extent permitted by law.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.08  COMMUNITY SERVICES.



   (A)   PEG access facilities. Franchises will establish obligations
to provide PEG access facilities to meet the community’s needs and
interests. The city will operate, administer, and manage PEG access
programming and the city may delegate its PEG access authority and
responsibilities to the Commission. All franchises must contain equivalent
PEG access obligations on any franchise provider of cable services.



   (B)   Service to public or educational institutions. Franchises will
establish obligations for the provision of free or reduced cost cable
services to identified public or educational institutions.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.09  ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Administration of franchise. The city will have continuing
regulatory authority over cable systems, cable services, and franchise
compliance. The city may delegate any and all regulatory authority to the
commission. A grantee must fully cooperate with the commission in the
exercise of regulatory authority delegated by the city.



   (B)   Franchise fee.



      (1)   A grantee must pay to the city a franchise fee in the
amount established in the franchise agreement, provided that the city must
impose identical franchise fee obligations (including the percentage and
gross revenue definition) on all cable service providers in the city.



      (2)   Each franchise fee payment must be accompanied by a
report certified by an authorized representative of the grantee, in form
reasonably acceptable to city, detailing the computation of the payment. All
amounts paid must be subject to audit and recomputation by the city for the
statutorily-allowed period applicable to assertion of contract claims, and
acceptance of any payment must not be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is in fact the correct amount.



      (3)   A grantee may designate that portion of a subscriber’s
bill attributable to the franchise fee as a separate line item on the bill.



   (C)   Access to records.



      (1)   The city may, upon reasonable notice and during normal
business hours, and subject to the privacy provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 521
et seq., inspect at a mutually convenient location any records of system
operations maintained by a grantee that relate to a grantee’s compliance
with its franchise, including specifically the grantee’s gross revenue
records. A grantee may identify and label documents as “confidential trade
secret” in accordance with § 115.04(B).



      (2)   A grantee must prepare and furnish to the city such
reports as city may reasonably request with respect to operation of the
system and provision of cable services in the city.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.10  INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   Indemnification of the city.



      (1)   A grantee must indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the
city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials,
employees, and agents from and against any loss or damage to any real or
personal property of any person, or for any injury to or death of any person,
arising out of or in connection with the construction, operation,
maintenance, repair, or removal of a system or other facilities used by a
grantee to deliver cable service.



      (2)   A grantee must indemnify, defend, and hold the city, its
officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and
agents, harmless from and against all lawsuits, claims, actions, liability,
damages, costs, expenses, or penalties incurred as a result of the award or
enforcement of its franchise.



      (3)   A grantee shall not be required to provide
indemnification or defense for any intentional misconduct, willful neglect,
or negligence by an indemnified party, for any enforcement action taken by
the city against a grantee, for any claim based solely on the city’s
operation of PEG access facilities, delivery of PEG access programming, or
EAS messages originated by the city. Subject to the limitations in M.S. Ch.
466, as it may be amended from time to time, the city shall indemnify,
defend, and hold a grantee harmless from any damage resulting from any
intentional misconduct, willful neglect, or negligence by the city, its
officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees, and
agents, in utilizing PEG access facilities or channels, delivering EAS
messages originated by the city, or in connection with work performed on or
adjacent to the system.



      (4)   With respect to each claim for indemnification:



         (a)   The city must notify the grantee in writing of its
duty under this section within ten days of receipt of any suit, claim, or
proceeding which gives rise to such duty;



         (b)   The grantee must afford the city an opportunity to
participate in any compromise, settlement, or other resolution or disposition
of any suit, claim, or proceeding; and



         (c)   The city must cooperate with reasonable requests
of the grantee, at grantee’s expense, in its participation in a suit,
claim, or proceeding.



   (B)   Insurance.



      (1)   A grantee must obtain and maintain in full force and
effect, at its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance
policy, in protection of the grantee, and the city, its officers, elected
officials, boards, commissions, agents, and employees for damages which may
arise as a result of operation of the system or delivery of cable service.



      (2)   The policies of insurance must be in the sum of not less
than $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death of any one person, and $2,000,000
for bodily injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence,
$500,000 for property damage to any one person and $2,000,000 for property
damage resulting from any one act or occurrence.



      (3)   The insurance policy must be maintained by grantee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of
insurance must contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not
cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of
premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of grantee or for other
reasons, except after 30 days advance written notice have been provided to
the city.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.11  FRANCHISE TRANSFER OR ABANDONMENT.



   (A)   Abandonment of service. A grantee may not discontinue the
provision of cable service without having first given three months written
notice to the city.



   (B)   System removal after abandonment, termination, or forfeiture.



      (1)   In the event of termination or forfeiture of the
franchise or abandonment of the system, the city may require the grantee to
remove all or any portion of its system from all rights-of-way and public
property within the city; provided, however, that the grantee will not be
required to remove its system to the extent it lawfully provides non-cable
services over the system.



      (2)   If the grantee has failed to commence removal of its
system, or such part thereof as was designated by the city, within 120 days
after written demand for removal is given, or if the grantee has failed to
complete such removal within 12 months after written demand for removal is
given, the city may apply funds secured by the franchise toward removal.



   (C)   Sale or transfer of franchise.



      (1)   No sale or transfer of ownership of a grantee or
“fundamental corporate change” in a grantee as defined in M.S. §
238.083, as it may be amended from time to time, nor sale of transfer of a
franchise, is permitted without city approval. Any sale or transfer of stock
in a grantee creating a new controlling interest constitutes a sale or
transfer of ownership. A “controlling interest” includes majority stock
ownership or a lesser amount sufficient to confer actual working control in
whatever manner exercised. City approval shall not be required where a
grantee grants a security interest in its franchise or system to secure an
indebtedness.



      (2)   A grantee must file a written request with the city
prior to any transaction described above. The city will approve or deny a
transfer request within 120 days of receipt of a written request. The city
will not unreasonably withhold its approval.



      (3)   In no event will a transaction be approved unless any
proposed new grantee becomes a signatory to, and assumes all rights and
obligations under, the franchise.



      (4)   In the event a grantee has received a bona fide offer
for purchase of its system, the city shall have the right to purchase the
system for the same price and under equivalent conditions which the proposed
assignee or transferee agreed to pay. The city will be deemed to have waived
its right to purchase the system in the following circumstances:



         (a)   The city does not notify the grantee in writing,
within 60 days of notice, that it intends to exercise its right of purchase;
or



         (b)   The city approves the transaction.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.12  PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   Discriminatory practices prohibited. No grantee may deny cable
service or otherwise discriminate against citizens or businesses on the basis
of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, status as to public
assistance, affectional preference, or disability.



   (B)   Subscriber privacy.



      (1)   A grantee must comply with the subscriber
privacy-related requirements of 47 U.S.C. § 551.



      (2)   No signals of a Class IV channel may be transmitted from
a subscriber terminal for purposes of monitoring individual viewing patterns
or practices without the express written authorization of the subscriber.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.13  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS; PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, without the express consent of
the grantee, to make or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing,
any connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically,
inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of a
grantee’s system.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to willfully interfere, tamper,
remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of a
system for any purpose.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.14  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations or other occurrences giving rise to enforcement
action.



      (1)   In order to take enforcement action pursuant to this
cable chapter or a franchise, the city must provide the grantee with written
notice of the violation or other occurrence giving rise to the city’s
action.



      (2)   The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of
the notice to cure the violation or occurrence giving rise to the city’s
action. Alternatively, the grantee may, within 14 days of receipt of notice
from the city, notify the city in writing that there is a dispute as to
whether a violation or failure has in fact occurred. Such written notice by
the grantee to the city shall specify with particularity the matters disputed
by grantee and shall toll the running of the timeframes and the accrual of
penalties hereunder until completion of the process and issuance of a
decision under divisions (A)(3) through (A)(5) below.



      (3)   In the event a grantee does not timely cure to the
city’s satisfaction the violation or other occurrence giving rise to the
city’s action, or timely disputes whether a violation has occurred, the
city will schedule a public hearing affording grantee due process. The city
will endeavor to schedule the hearing for a date within 90 days of the
initial violation notice. Notice of the hearing must be provided to the
grantee.



      (4)   At the completion of the hearing, the city will issue
written findings of fact and its final determination.



      (5)   In the event city determines that no violation has taken
place, the city will rescind the notice of violation in writing.



   (B)   Franchise revocation.



      (1)   In addition to all other rights and remedies that the
city possesses pursuant to law, equity and the terms of the franchise
agreement, the city may revoke or terminate the franchise, and all rights and
privileges pertaining thereto, in accordance with division (A) above if the
city determines that:



         (a)   The grantee has violated any material requirement
or provision of the cable chapter or a franchise and has failed to timely
cure;



         (b)   The grantee has attempted to evade any of the
material provisions of the cable chapter or a franchise;



         (c)   The grantee has practiced fraud or deceit upon the
city or a subscriber; or



         (d)   The grantee has filed for bankruptcy.



      (2)   During any revocation proceeding and any appeal period,
the franchise will remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof
sooner expires.



   (C)   Compliance with federal, state, and local laws. The city and
grantee will conform to federal and state laws and rules regarding cable
service or the system as they become effective.



   (D)   Equal protection.



      (1)   The city acknowledges that under M.S. § 238.08, subd.
1(b), as it may be amended from time to time, it may only grant additional
franchises to provide cable service within the city on terms and conditions
no more favorable or less burdensome than those in any then-current franchise
which pertain to:



         (a)   The area served;



         (b)   Public, educational, or governmental access
requirements; or



         (c)   Franchise fees.



      (2)   Additionally, and beyond the requirements of M.S. §
238.08, as it may be amended from time to time, any additional franchises to
provide cable service within the city shall not be granted on more favorable
or less burdensome conditions than those in any then-current franchise issued
pursuant to this cable chapter with regard to ROW access and
responsibilities, complimentary service to public buildings, penalties, and
security, sale, or transfer of ownership.



         (a)   If any other provider of cable services is
lawfully authorized by the city to provide such services using facilities
located wholly or partly in the rights-of-way of the city (“additional
provider(s)”), the city shall, within 30 days of a written request from a
current franchise holder, use best efforts to modify the current franchise
holder’s franchise on a mutually acceptable basis to ensure that the
obligations imposed by this section have been met.



         (b)   If the city fails to comply with this section or
the parties fail to reach agreement under division (D)(2)(a) above, a current
franchise holder shall have the right to initiate an action in the state or
federal district court for breach of contract or other appropriate claims and
seek any and all appropriate relief, including specific performance.



         (c)   Nothing in this chapter shall impair the right of
the city or a current franchise holder to seek other remedies available under
law.



         (d)   In the event city initiates the franchising
process pursuant to M.S. § 238.081, as it may be amended from time to time,
the city shall notify all current franchise holders in writing of its intent
to initiate the franchising process prior to doing so.



         (e)   A current franchise holder shall have the right to
operate its cable system in accordance with applicable state or federal law,
as may be amended from time to time.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating § 115.13 may be fined
not less than $20 and the costs of the action nor more than $500 and the
costs of the action for each and every subsequent offense.



(Ord. 711, passed 2-11-2019)



CHAPTER 116:  SIDEWALK CAFÉS



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Licenses



   116.03   Fees



   116.04   Conditions of approval



   116.05   License requirements



   116.06   Damage deposit



   116.07   Operation



   116.08   Restrictions



   116.09   Inspection



   116.10   Permit suspension and revocation



   116.11   Expiration of licenses



   116.12   Right to a hearing



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELIGIBLE VENUE.



      (1)   A restaurant currently holding a license from the
Minnesota Department of Health that was issued pursuant to M.S. § 157.16,
subd. 1, as it may be amended from time to time;



      (2)   A premises currently holding an on-sale intoxicating
liquor license that was issued pursuant to Chapter 110 of this code of
ordinances;



      (3)   A premises currently holding a wine license that was
issued pursuant to Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances; or



      (4)   A premises currently holding a brew pub license that was
issued pursuant to Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.



   MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT. A parking lot owned by the city that is
generally available for use by the public for vehicular parking.



   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. A sidewalk owned by the city that is generally
available for use by the public for pedestrian traffic.



   RESTAURANT. The meaning given it by M.S. § 157.15, subd. 12, as it may
be amended from time to time.



   SIDEWALK CAFÉ. Tables, chairs, benches, and appurtenant equipment
located on a public sidewalk or municipal parking lot:



      (1)   For the exclusive or non-exclusive use by patrons of an
abutting, eligible establishment as allowed by the license; and



      (2)   Where the service of food or beverages is offered to
persons using such tables, chairs, and benches.



§ 116.02  LICENSES.



   (A)   License required. A person may use a public sidewalk or
municipal parking lot for a sidewalk café in connection with the operation
of an eligible venue if the person holds a current sidewalk café license
issued pursuant to this chapter. The operation of a sidewalk café under any
other circumstance is prohibited.



   (B)   License period. Each sidewalk café license issued on or
before April 1 shall run from the beginning of the day on April 1 to the end
of the day on October 31 for the year to which the license applies. Each
sidewalk café license issued after April 1 shall run from the beginning of
the day the license was issued to the end of the day on October 31 for the
year to which the license applies.



   (C)   Nature of use. A sidewalk café license only grants the
license holder a temporary license to encroach upon a public sidewalk or
municipal parking lot, subject to the requirements and restrictions contained
in this chapter.



   (D)   License application.



      (1)   A person desiring to use any portion of a public
sidewalk or municipal parking lot for a sidewalk café in connection with the
operation of an eligible venue must apply for a sidewalk café license using
forms supplied by the City Clerk.



      (2)   Each application must include a plan, drawn to scale,
illustrating:



         (a)   The exact location of the proposed sidewalk café;



         (b)   Distances to, and dimensions of, adjoining
buildings;



         (c)   All sidewalks, curbs, and striped parking stalls
within 100 feet of the perimeter of the proposed sidewalk café;



         (d)   The distance to and location of the traveled
portion of the nearest adjacent street; and



         (e)   Distances to all obstructions in the vicinity.



§ 116.03  FEES.



   (A)   Fee amount.



      (1)   An application for a sidewalk café license for a
sidewalk café located on a public sidewalk shall be accompanied by the
appropriate sidewalk café license fee set forth in the city fee schedule.



      (2)   (a)   An application for a sidewalk café license for
a sidewalk café located on a municipal parking lot shall be accompanied by
the appropriate sidewalk café license fee, which shall be calculated by
adding the base fee to the total parking stall fee listed in the city fee
schedule.



         (b)   The parking stall fee shall be calculated by
multiplying the number of parking stalls impacted by the sidewalk café by
the per stall fee listed in the city fee schedule.



         (c)   A parking stall shall be deemed impacted by a
sidewalk café if the sidewalk café shown in the application:



            1.   Touches the parking stall;



            2.   Lies within three feet of the parking stall;
or



            3.   Prevents reasonable access to the parking
stall, as determined by the City Council.



   (B)   Fee calculation.



      (1)   The license fee for any sidewalk café license issued
after April 1 of a year shall be prorated based upon the number of days
between April 1 and the date of issuance as compared to the number of days
between the date of issuance and October 31.



      (2)   If the application is denied, the sidewalk café license
fee, less $100, shall be returned to the applicant.



      (3)   If a sidewalk café license is surrendered by a license
holder or revoked before October 31 of any calendar year, no refund shall be
given.



§ 116.04  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   (A)   Site specific requirements.



      (1)   Sidewalk café area shall be limited to the public
right-of-way abutting the frontage of the business to which it is attached.
The sidewalk café area may be extended to the public frontage of the
abutting property with notice to the adjacent property owner of the license
consideration.



      (2)   Sidewalk cafés must be located at least 20 feet from
any fire hydrant.



      (3)   Sidewalk cafés must not block site lines at
intersections as determined by the City Engineer and/or Public Works Director.



      (4)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
specify the specific dimensional area in which such café may be operated.



      (5)   The city maintains the right to review and make final
determination as to the location of each sidewalk café based on the unique
circumstances related to each business.



   (B)   Design specifications.



      (1)   Dimensioned site plan shall be provided detailing
location of sidewalks, pathways, proposed seating areas, landscaping
features, and any appurtenances.



      (2)   Lighting, if proposed, must be illustrated on the site
plan, be directed downward, and be compatible with the surrounding area.



      (3)   Canopies may be used for weather protection and heaters
are allowed. Specifications for both to be provided and are subject to
approval of Building Official.



      (4)   No commercial signage may be placed on the sidewalk
café areas, including canopies and umbrellas, except for on table tops.
Sandwich board signs may be allowed provided they are removed from the café
each evening.



      (5)   There shall be a minimum clear passage zone for
pedestrians of at least five feet, and shall be maintained at all times.



      (6)   Umbrellas extending into the pedestrian clear passage
zone or pedestrian aisle shall have a minimum head clearance of seven feet.



§ 116.05  LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.



   No license for a sidewalk café shall be issued or renewed until all of
the following conditions are met.



   (A)   The applicant possesses valid licenses from the state and the
city to operate the eligible venue.



   (B)   The area occupied by the sidewalk café abuts to, and will be
operated as part of, the applicant’s eligible venue and no part of the
sidewalk café adjoins any premises other than the applicant’s eligible
venue.



   (C)   A distance of at least 150 feet exists between the nearest
point of the sidewalk café to the nearest point of any property used for
residential purposes, excepting residential property owned by the applicant,
mixed use commercial/residential structures, and properties located within
the Central Community District.



   (D)   The applicant has furnished the City Clerk with acceptable
evidence that the applicant maintains commercial general liability insurance
for any death, personal injury, or property damage arising from the
ownership, maintenance, or operation of the sidewalk café in amounts not
less than:



      (1)   One million dollars for injury to or death of one person;



      (2)   Three million dollars for any one incident; and



      (3)   One hundred thousand dollars for damage to property
arising from any one incident.



   (E)   The applicant shall maintain such insurance in effect at all
times during the term of the sidewalk café license. The city shall be named
as an additional insured in the policy providing such insurance. The
applicant shall produce a certificate to the city when any sidewalk café
license is issued or renewed evidencing the required insurance. Further, such
certificate shall obligate the insurer to endeavor to give the city not less
than 30 days advanced notice of any modification or cancellation of coverage.



   (F)   The applicant has furnished the City Clerk with acceptable
evidence of worker’s compensation coverage as required by M.S. § 176.182,
as it may be amended from time to time.



   (G)   The city has not received notice from the State Department of
Revenue prohibiting issuance or renewal of the sidewalk café license.



   (H)   The applicant has executed and delivered a written agreement
to the City Clerk, using a form of agreement provided by the City Clerk, that:



      (1)   Acknowledges the sidewalk café only exists as a
permitted encumbrance for the applicable license period; and



      (2)   Obligates the applicant to indemnify and hold the city
and the city’s officials and employees harmless from any loss, costs,
damages, and expenses arising out of the use, design, operation, or
maintenance of the sidewalk café.



   (I)   The applicant has delivered the damage deposit required by §
116.06 to the City Clerk.



   (J)   The City Council has found that the sidewalk café will not
unduly restrict the safe usage of the public sidewalk or municipal parking
lot, as applicable, after taking into consideration the location of the
proposed sidewalk café, pedestrian traffic, and vehicular traffic.



§ 116.06  DAMAGE DEPOSIT.



   (A)   Deposit required. No sidewalk café license shall be issued
until the applicant has delivered a sidewalk café damage deposit to the City
Clerk in the amount required by the city fee schedule. Such deposit shall be
paid by the applicant in cash or certified funds. The city shall have the
right to commingle any deposit with the city’s other funds. Further, any
interest associated with any deposit shall belong to the city.



   (B)   Use of deposit. The city may use a damage deposit, or any part
thereof, to repair damage to public property resulting, in whole or in part,
from the operation of the sidewalk café. If any portion of the damage
deposit is used, the person that made the deposit shall, within five days
after written demand therefor, deposit cash or certified funds with the city
in an amount sufficient to restore the damage deposit to its original amount.
Any failure to restore a deposit shall constitute grounds for revocation of
the sidewalk café license to which the deposit applies.



   (C)   Return of deposit. The city shall return any remaining portion
of a sidewalk café damage deposit to the person that made it within 30 days
after the sidewalk café license to which the deposit relates expires or
otherwise terminates. Notice of termination by licensee is required.



§ 116.07  OPERATION.



   Every sidewalk café shall be operated in strict conformance with the
following requirements.



   (A)   The conditions, operation, and restrictions shall be met on a
continuing basis. No expansion of the area occupied by the sidewalk café
from that shown on the license application shall be made.



   (B)   Only food or beverages for immediate consumption shall be
offered for sale.



   (C)   Intoxicating liquors, beer, or wine may be consumed only if
the sidewalk café meets all of the requirements of Chapter 110.



   (D)   The sidewalk café shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. Sidewalks will be required to be swept and washed daily by the
permit holder and trash disposal and electricity will be provided from within
the establishment.



   (E)   The person holding the sidewalk café license shall, at such
person’s expense, promptly repair any damage to public property resulting,
in whole or in part, from the operation of the sidewalk café.



   (F)   Any public sidewalk between the eligible venue and the
sidewalk café shall, at all times, remain open for public traffic, subject
to ingress and egress between the eligible venue and its sidewalk café.



   (G)   No sale or service shall be permitted in any portion of the
street designated for vehicular traffic.



   (H)   Hours of operation of the sidewalk café shall be limited to
between 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. from April 15 through October 15.



   (I)   No electronically amplified outdoor music, intercom, audio
speakers, or other such noise generating devices shall be allowed in the
sidewalk café area.



§ 116.08  RESTRICTIONS.



   Every sidewalk café shall be operated in strict conformance with the
following restrictions.



   (A)   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall specify the
specific dimensional area in which such café may be operated.



   (B)   The permit does not authorize any structure to be permanently
installed or any equipment to be permanently attached to, in, or upon any
public right-of-way.



   (C)   Except as provided herein, the ownership, operation, and
maintenance of a sidewalk café shall be subject to all applicable laws,
ordinances, and regulations.



   (D)   No sidewalk café permit can be transferred to new ownership
without permission of the City Council.



   (E)   The recommendation of these departments, including the
recommended minimum unobstructed sidewalk width necessary for pedestrian
traffic on such application, shall be reported to the City Council for its
action.



   (F)   No person shall consume an alcoholic beverage in a public
park, on any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, or alley, or in any other
public place, except as expressly allowed by:



      (1)   This Chapter 116;



      (2)   M.S. Ch. 340A, as it may be amended from time to time; or



      (3)   A sidewalk café license issued pursuant to this Chapter
116.



§ 116.09  INSPECTION.



   The city may inspect a sidewalk café at any time to confirm compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.



§ 116.10  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The city may revoke any sidewalk café license if any
requirement set forth in § 116.05 is violated or if the State Department of
Revenue sends the city notice requiring revocation. Nothing herein shall be
interpreted as preventing the city from also prosecuting any violation of
this chapter as a criminal violation pursuant to the city code.



   (B)   Any special permit authorized by this chapter may be revoked
at any time by the City Council when it appears that adequate grounds exist.
Any such permit may be suspended by the Council for such period as the
Council shall determine.



§ 116.11  EXPIRATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Date of expiration. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter
expire on October 31 of each calendar year.



   (B)   Surrender. On or before the date a sidewalk café license
expires, the applicant shall surrender the sidewalk café area to the city in
the same order and condition as existed on the date the sidewalk café
license was issued, ordinary wear and tear excepted. Without limiting the
general nature of the preceding sentence, the applicant shall remove all
personal property from the sidewalk café area and repair all damage caused
by such removal, all at the applicant’s expense.



§ 116.12  RIGHT TO A HEARING.



   Except for a denial or revocation required by the State Department of
Revenue, any applicant that has been denied the issuance of a sidewalk café
license or any person whose sidewalk café license has been revoked may, upon
written request to the City Clerk promptly made after the denial or
revocation has occurred, request a hearing before the City Council to present
evidence and to appeal the decision.



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   UNLAWFUL CONDUCT



      131.   GAMBLING AND ENTERTAINMENT



      132.   FIREARMS



CHAPTER 130:  UNLAWFUL CONDUCT



Section



   130.01   Assault



   130.02   Unlawful assembly



   130.03   Presence at unlawful assembly



   130.04   Disorderly conduct



   130.05   Obstructing legal process or arrest



   130.06   Minors; possession



   130.07   Theft



   130.08   Curfew



   130.09   Noise



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  ASSAULT.



   Whoever does any of the following commits an assault, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and may be sentenced as provided in § 10.99:



   (A)   Does any act with intent to cause fear in another of immediate
bodily harm or death; or



   (B)   Intentionally inflicts or attempts to inflict bodily harm upon
another.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-1)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   When three or more persons assemble, then each participant is guilty of
a misdemeanor and may be sentenced as provided in § 10.99 if the assembly is:



   (A)   With intent to commit an unlawful act by force;



   (B)   With intent to carry out any purpose in such a manner as will
disturb or threaten the public peace; or



   (C)   Without unlawful purpose, but the participants so conduct
themselves in a disorderly manner as to disturb or threaten the public peace.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-2)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  PRESENCE AT UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   Whoever, without lawful purpose, is present at the place of an unlawful
assembly and refuses to leave when so directed by a law enforcement officer
is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced as provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-3)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   Whoever does any of the following in a public or private place,
knowing, or having reasonable grounds to know that it will or will tend to
alarm, anger, or disturb others or provoke an assault or breach of peace, is
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced as provided in § 10.99:



   (A)   Engage in brawling or fighting;



   (B)   Disturbs an assembly or meeting not unlawful in its character;
or



   (C)   Looks, peers, or peeps into the window of any structure not in
his or her own property, which structure if occupied or is intended to be
occupied as a residence, or loiters around or within view of any window with
the intent of watching or looking through said window.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-4)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  OBSTRUCTING LEGAL PROCESS OR ARREST.



   Whoever intentionally obstructs, hinders, or prevents the lawful
execution of any legal process, civil or criminal, or apprehension of another
on a charge or conviction or a criminal offense, is guilty of a misdemeanor
and may be punished as provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-5)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  MINORS; POSSESSION.



   It shall be unlawful for a minor to have in his or her possession any
intoxicating liquor or any non-intoxicating malt liquor with intent to
consume the same at a place other than the household of his or her parent or
guardian. Possession of such intoxicating liquor or non-intoxicating malt
liquor at a place other than the household of his or her parent or guardian
shall be prima facie evidence of intent to consume the same at a place other
than the household of his or her parent or guardian. A person violating a
provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced as
provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-7)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.07  THEFT.



   Whoever intentionally and without claim or right takes, uses,
transfers, conceals, or retains possession of the property of another where
the value of the property is $100 or less without his or her consent, and
with intent to deprive the owner permanently of possession of the property,
is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be sentenced as provided in § 10.99.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-8)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  CURFEW.



   (A)   Purpose. The curfew for minors established by this section is
maintained for four primary reasons:



      (1)   To protect the public from illegal acts of minors
committed during the curfew hours;



      (2)   To protect minors from improper influences that prevail
during the curfew hours, including involvement with gangs;



      (3)   To protect minors from criminal activity that occurs
during the curfew hours; and



      (4)   To help parents control their minor children.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      EMERGENCY ERRAND. A task that if not completed promptly threatens
the health, safety, or comfort of the minor or a member of the minor’s
household. The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, seeking
urgent medical treatment, seeking urgent assistance from law enforcement or
Fire Department personnel, and seeking shelter from the elements or urgent
assistance from a utility company due to a natural or human-made calamity.



      OFFICIAL CITY TIME. The time of day as determined by reference to
the master clock used by the Police Department.



      PLACES OF AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT OR REFRESHMENT. Those places
that include, but are not limited to, movie theaters, pinball arcades,
shopping malls, nightclubs catering to minors, restaurants, and pool halls.



      PRIMARY CARE or PRIMARY CUSTODY. The person who is responsible
for providing food, clothing, shelter, and other basic necessities to the
minor. The person providing primary care or custody to the minor shall not be
another minor.



      SCHOOL ACTIVITY. An event which has been placed on a school
calendar by public or parochial school authorities as a school sanctioned
event.



   (C)   Hours.



      (1)   Minors under the age of 16 years. No minor under the age
of 16 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon
any vacant lot, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following
day, official city time.



      (2)   Minors ages 16 years to 18 years. No minor of the ages
of 16 or 17 years shall be in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks,
playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings; nor in
or upon places of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment; nor in or upon
any vacant lot, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. the
following day, official city time.



   (D)   Effect on control by adult responsible for minor. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to give a minor the right to stay out until
the curfew hours designated in this section if otherwise directed by a
parent, guardian, or other adult person having the primary care and custody
of the minor; nor shall this section be construed to diminish or impair the
control of the adult person having the primary care or custody of the minor.



   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in
the following situations:



      (1)   To a minor accompanied by his or her parent or guardian,
or other adult person having the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   To a minor who is upon an emergency errand at the
direction of his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
primary care and custody of the minor;



      (3)   To a minor who is in any of the places described in this
section if in connection with or as required by an employer engaged in a
lawful business, trade, profession, or occupation; or to a minor traveling
directly to or from the location of the business, trade, profession, or
occupation and the minor’s residence. Minors who fall within the scope of
this exception shall carry written proof of employment and proof of the hours
the employer requires the minor’s presence at work;



      (4)   To a minor who is participating in or traveling directly
to or from an event which has been officially designated as a school activity
by public or parochial school authorities; or who is participating in or
traveling directly to or from an official activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization, school, religious institution,
or similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor and with the
permission of the minor’s parent, guardian, or other adult person having
the primary care and custody of the minor;



      (5)   To a minor who is passing through the city in the course
of interstate travel during the hours of curfew;



      (6)   To a minor who is attending or traveling directly to or
from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free
speech, freedom of assembly, or freedom of religion;



      (7)   To minors on the sidewalk abutting their residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor does not
complain to the city’s designated law enforcement provider about the
minor’s presence; or



      (8)   To a minor who is married or has been married, or is
otherwise legally emancipated.



   (F)   Duties of person legally responsible for minor. No parent,
guardian, or other adult having the primary care or custody of any minor
shall permit any violation of the requirements of this section by the minor.



   (G)   Duties of other persons. No person operating or in charge of
any place of amusement, entertainment, or refreshment shall permit any minor
to enter or remain in his or her place of business during the hours
prohibited by this section unless the minor is accompanied by his or her
parent, guardian or other adult person having primary care or custody of the
minor, or unless one of the exceptions to this section applies.



   (H)   Defense. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this
section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified the city’s designated law enforcement provider that a minor was
present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused
to leave. Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  NOISE.



   (A)   Purpose. It is recognized that loud, unpleasant, raucous, or
prolonged noise has a harmful, debilitating, and detrimental effect upon
human beings, adversely affecting their mental and physical health, safety,
and well being. Loud, unpleasant, raucous, or prolonged noise is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance. In an endeavor to provide for the mental
and physical health, safety, and well being and for peaceful repose of the
citizens and neighborhoods of the city, it is hereby declared to be in the
public interest that loud, unpleasant, raucous, and unnecessary or prolonged
noise be abated.



   (B)   Prohibited noise. The following are declared to be nuisances
affecting public health, safety, peace, or welfare:



      (1)   Any distinctly and loudly audible noise that
unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace, safety, or welfare of any person, or precludes his or her
enjoyment of property, or affects his or her property’s value in such a
manner as to be plainly audible at the boundary of the real property,
building, structure, or residence from which the noise originates, or at a
distance of 50 feet from the source of the noise. (This general prohibition
is not limited by any specific restrictions provided in this section).
PLAINLY AUDIBLE is defined as sound that can be detected by a person using
their unaided hearing faculties;



      (2)   All obnoxious noises, motor vehicle or otherwise, in
violation of Minn. Rules. Ch. 7030, as it may be amended from time to time,
are hereby incorporated into this section by reference;



      (3)   The use of any vehicle so out of repair or so loaded as
to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise;



      (4)   The discharging of the exhaust or permitting the
discharge of the exhaust of any stationary internal combustion engine, motor
boat, motor vehicle, motorcycle, all terrain vehicle (ATV), snowmobile, or
any recreational device, except through a muffler or other device that
effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom and complies with all
applicable state laws and regulations;



      (5)   Any loud or excessive noise in the loading, unloading,
or unpacking of any vehicle; and



      (6)   The use or operation, or permitting the use or
operation, of any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument,
music device, paging system, machine, or other device for producing or
reproduction of sound in a distinctly and loudly manner so as to disturb the
peace, quiet, and comfort of any person nearby.



   (C)   Hourly restriction of certain operations.



      (1)   Domestic power equipment. No person shall operate a
power lawn mower, power hedge clipper, chain saw, mulcher, garden tiller,
edger, drill, or other similar domestic power equipment, except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Snow removal equipment is exempt from this
provision.



      (2)   Refuse hauling. No person shall collect or remove
garbage or refuse in any residential district, except between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. on any weekend or holiday.



      (3)   Construction activities. No person shall engage in or
permit construction activities involving the use of any kind of electric,
diesel, or gas-powered machine or other power equipment, except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



      (4)   Radios, music devices, paging systems, and the like. The
operation of any device referred to in division (B)(6) above between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner so as to be plainly audible at
the property line of the structure or building in which it is located, or at
a distance of 50 feet if the source is located outside a structure or
building shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



   (D)   Noise impact statements. The City Council may require any
person applying for a change in zoning classification or a permit or license
for any structure, operation, process, installation, alteration, or project
that may be considered a potential noise source to submit a noise impact
statement on a form prescribed by the Council. The Council shall evaluate
each statement and take its evaluation into account in approving or
disapproving the license or permit applied for or the zoning changes
requested.



   (E)   Enforcement. A peace officer may order all persons present in
any group or gathering from which such noise emanates or other than the
owners or tenants of a dwelling unit to immediately disperse from the party
in lieu of being charged under this section. Refusal to disperse is a
violation of the section.



   (F)   Street noise. No person between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. shall operate a radio, stereo, tape player, or any other mechanical
device other than an automobile engine on the highways, streets, parking
lots, alleys, sidewalks, or other public property within the city which is
audible at a distance of 25 feet.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than
the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



      (2)   Violation of § 130.09 is a petty misdemeanor punishable
by not more than the maximum penalty as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 6-1-10)



(Ord. 22, passed 11-11-1976; Ord. 165, passed 10-11-1988; Ord. 358, passed
1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 131:  GAMBLING AND ENTERTAINMENT



Section




Lawful Gambling Regulations




   131.01   Adoption of state law by reference



   131.02   City may be more restrictive than state law



   131.03   Purpose



   131.04   Definitions



   131.05   Applicability



   131.06   Gambling prohibited



   131.07   Lawful gambling permitted



   131.08   Council approval



   131.09   Application and local approval of premises permits



   131.10   Local permits



   131.11   Revocation and suspension of local permit



   131.12   License and permit display



   131.13   Notification of material changes to application



   131.14   Designated trade area



   131.15   Records and reporting



   131.16   Hours of operation




Bingo Games




   131.30   Purpose



   131.31   Definitions



   131.32   License required



   131.33   License applications



   131.34   Suspension or revocation



   131.35   Conduct of bingo



   131.36   Bingo on leased premises



   131.37   Prizes



   131.38   Records



   131.39   Reports



   131.40   Inspection and investigation



   131.41   Use of bingo receipts



   131.42   Use of bingo profits



   131.43   Exemptions



 



   131.99   Penalty




LAWFUL GAMBLING REGULATIONS




§ 131.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW BY REFERENCE.



   The provisions of M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
with reference to the definition of terms, conditions of operation,
provisions relating to sales, and all other matters pertaining to lawful
gambling are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this
subchapter as if set out in full. It is the intention of the City Council
that all future amendments of M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted by reference or referenced as if they had been in
existence at the time this subchapter was adopted.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-1)



§ 131.02  CITY MAY BE MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN STATE LAW.



   The City Council is authorized by the provisions of M.S. § 349.213, as
it may be amended from time to time, to impose, and has imposed in this
subchapter, additional restrictions on gambling within its limits beyond
those contained in M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-2)



§ 131.03  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate lawful gambling within
the city, to prevent its commercialization, to ensure the integrity of
operations, and to provide for the use of net profits only for lawful
purposes.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-3)



§ 131.04  DEFINITIONS.



   In addition to the definitions contained in M.S. § 349.12, as it may
be amended from time to time, the following terms are defined for purposes of
this subchapter.



   BOARD. The State of Minnesota Gambling Control Board.



   CITY. The City of Monticello.



   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Monticello.



   LICENSED ORGANIZATION. An organization licensed by the Board.



   LOCAL PERMIT. A permit issued by the city.



   TRADE AREA. The corporate limits of the city and the boundaries of all
townships contiguous to the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-4)



§ 131.05  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall be construed to regulate all forms of lawful
gambling within the city except:



   (A)   Bingo conducted within a nursing home or a senior citizen
housing project or by a senior citizen organization if the prizes for a
single bingo game do not exceed $10, total prizes awarded at a single bingo
occasion do not exceed $200, no more than two bingo occasions are held by the
organization or at the facility each week, only members of the organization
or residents of the nursing home or housing project are allowed to play in a
bingo game, no compensation is paid for any persons who conduct the bingo,
and a manager is appointed to supervise the bingo; and



   (B)   Excluded and exempt gambling permits issued on a temporary
basis to qualified non-profit organizations and in accordance with state laws
and rules. Temporary permit applications requiring city signature shall be
presented to City Council for approval within 30 days of receipt of
application and prior to returning a signed permit application to the
requesting organization.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-5)



§ 131.06  GAMBLING PROHIBITED.



   No person or organization shall conduct gambling within the city unless
licensed by the state or city or specifically exempted by state law or this
subchapter from the license requirement.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-6)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.07  LAWFUL GAMBLING PERMITTED.



   Lawful gambling is permitted within the city provided it is conducted
in accordance with M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may
be amended from time to time; M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23, inclusive, as
they may be amended from time to time; and this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-7)



§ 131.08  COUNCIL APPROVAL.



   Lawful gambling authorized by M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.23,
inclusive, as they may be amended from time to time, shall not be conducted
unless approved by the City Council, subject to the provisions of this
subchapter and state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-8)



§ 131.09  APPLICATION AND LOCAL APPROVAL OF PREMISES PERMITS.



   (A)   Any organization seeking to obtain a premises permit from the
Board shall file with the City Clerk an executed, complete duplicate
application, together with all exhibits and documents accompanying the
application as will be filed with the Board.



   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance of a premises
permit, the City Clerk shall have the Gambling Manager complete a background
check form and submit to the city’s designated person for processing.



   (C)   The designated person shall perform the background check and
submit response to the City Clerk as soon as possible following receipt of
the notification to the city.



   (D)   Organizations applying for a state issued premises permit
shall pay the city a $100 investigation fee. This fee shall be refunded if
the application is withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.



   (E)   The applicant shall be notified of the date on which the City
Council will consider the recommendation.



   (F)   The City Council shall, by resolution, approve or disapprove
the application within 60 days of receipt of the application.



   (G)   The City Council may deny an application for issuance of a
premises permit for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   Violation by the gambling organization of any state
statute, state rule, or city ordinance relating to gambling within the last
three years;



      (2)   Violation by the on-sale establishment or organization
leasing its premises for gambling of any state statute, state rule, or city
ordinance relating to the operation of the establishment, including, but not
limited to, laws relating to alcoholic beverages, gambling, controlled
substances, suppression of vice and protection of public safety within the
last three years;



      (3)   Lawful gambling would be conducted at premises other
than those for which an on-sale liquor license has been issued; or



      (4)   Operation of gambling at the site would be detrimental
to health, safety, and welfare of the community.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-9)



§ 131.10  LOCAL PERMITS.



   (A)   No organization shall conduct lawful gambling excluded or
exempted from state licensure requirements by M.S. § 349.166, as it may be
amended from time to time, without a valid local permit. This section shall
not apply to lawful gambling exempted from local regulation by § 131.05.



   (B)   Applications for issuance of a local permit shall be on a form
prescribed by the city.



   (C)   The fee for a local permit shall be $25 or as otherwise set by
the City Council in its annual fee ordinance. The fee shall be submitted with
the application for a local permit. This fee shall be refunded if the
application is withdrawn before the investigation is commenced.



   (D)   Upon receipt of an application for issuance of a local permit,
the City Clerk shall review the application and may direct the conduct of a
background investigation.



   (E)   The City Council may deny an application for issuance of a
local permit for any of the following reasons specified in § 131.09(G).



(Prior Code, § 3-12-10)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.11  REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LOCAL PERMIT.



   (A)   A local permit may be revoked or temporarily suspended for a
violation by the gambling organization of any state statute, state rule, or
city ordinance relating to gambling.



   (B)   A license shall not be revoked or suspended until written
notice and an opportunity for a hearing have first been given to the
permitted person.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-11)



§ 131.12  LICENSE AND PERMIT DISPLAY.



   All permits issued under state law or this subchapter shall be
prominently displayed at the premises where gambling is conducted.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-12)



§ 131.13  NOTIFICATION OF MATERIAL CHANGES TO APPLICATION.



   An organization holding a state issued premises permit shall notify the
city within ten days in writing whenever any material change is made in the
information submitted on the application.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-13)



§ 131.14  DESIGNATED TRADE AREA.



   Each organization licensed to conduct gambling within the city shall
expend 75% or more of its lawful purpose expenditures on lawful purposes
conducted within the city’s trade area. This section applies only to lawful
purpose expenditures of gross profits derived from gambling conducted at a
premise within the city’s jurisdiction.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-14)



§ 131.15  RECORDS AND REPORTING.



   Organizations conducting lawful gambling shall file with the office of
the City Clerk one copy of all records and reports required to be filed with
the Board, pursuant to M.S. Ch. 349, as it may be amended from time to time,
and rules adopted pursuant thereto, as they may be amended from time to time.
The records and reports shall be filed on or before the day they are required
to be filed with the Board. Organizations licensed by the Board shall file a
report with the city proving compliance with the trade area spending
requirements imposed by § 131.14. The report shall be provided in a manner
prescribed by the city and shall be submitted annually.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-15)



§ 131.16  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Lawful gambling shall not be conducted between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on any day of the week and shall be consistent with hours of operation at the
business where gambling is being conducted.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-16)  Penalty, see § 131.99




BINGO GAMES




§ 131.30  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to closely regulate and control the
conduct of the game of bingo and to prohibit commercialization of bingo.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-1)



§ 131.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTIVE MEMBER. A member of the organization requesting a license whose
dues are paid for the current membership period and who has been a member for
at least six months.



   BINGO. A game where each player has a card or board for which a
consideration has been paid containing five horizontal rows of spaces with
each row except the central one containing five figures. The central row has
four figures with the word “free” marked in the center space thereof. A
player wins a game of BINGO by completing any pre-announced combination of
spaces or, in the absence of a pre-announcement of a combination of spaces,
any combination of five spaces in a row, either vertical, horizontal, or
diagonal.



   BINGO OCCASION. A single gathering or session at which a series of one
or more successive bingo games is played.



   ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION. Any fraternal, religious, veteran’s, or other
nonprofit organization which has been in existence for at least three years
and has at least 30 active members.



   PROFIT. The gross receipts collected from one or more bingo occasions
less reasonable sums necessarily and actually expended for bingo supplies and
equipment, prizes, rent, and utilities used during the bingo occasions, bingo
license fees, and compensation to persons lawfully hired to conduct or assist
in conducting a bingo occasion.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-2)



§ 131.32  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No bingo occasion shall be conducted except by an eligible
organization which has secured a license for that purpose as provided in this
subchapter. An organization which is otherwise eligible for a license need
not secure a license when bingo games are conducted fewer than five times in
a year.



   (B)   (1)   A license shall be valid for 12 calendar months from
the date of issuance.



      (2)   The annual license fee shall be adopted by the City
Council.



      (3)   No bingo license issued may be transferred to any other
person or organization. No bingo license shall be transferred to any location
other than the location specified in the license without prior approval by
the City Council.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-3)  (Ord. 19, passed 9-13-1976; Ord. 107, passed
11-23-1981)



§ 131.33  LICENSE APPLICATIONS.



   Every application for a bingo license shall be made to the City Clerk
on a form supplied by the city and containing such information as the Clerk
or the City Council may require. No person shall make a false statement in an
application. Copies of each application shall be referred to the city’s
Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Building Inspector for their recommendations.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-4)



§ 131.34  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   The City Council may suspend for a period not exceeding 60 days or
revoke any bingo license for violation of any provision of M.S. Ch. 349, as
it may be amended from time to time, or this subchapter. The holder of the
license shall be granted a hearing upon at least ten days’ notice before
revocation or suspension is ordered. The notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and the nature of the charges against the licensee.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-5)



§ 131.35  CONDUCT OF BINGO.



   (A)   Each licensed organization shall appoint a bingo manager to
supervise bingo occasions conduct by it. The bingo manager must be a member
of the licensed organization with dues paid for the current membership period
and must have been a member of the organization for at least two years. The
bingo manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of $10,000 in favor of
the organization conditioned on the faithful performance of his or her
duties, except that the City Council may waive the bond requirement upon a
showing by the proposed bingo manager and the licensed organization that bond
is not required to protect the organization and upon a unanimous vote of the
Council. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the Council not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation. Each
bingo occasion shall be conducted under the direct supervision of the bingo
manager, who shall be responsible for the conduct of the bingo occasion in
compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. No person shall act as
bingo manager for more than one organization.



   (B)   One or more checkers shall be engaged for each bingo occasion.
The checkers shall be active members of the licensed organization or spouses
of active members of the licensed organization. The checker or checkers shall
record the number of cards purchased and played in each game prior to the
completion of each game and record the prizes awarded to the recorded cards.
Each checker shall certify all figures which he or she has recorded as
accurate and correct to the best of his or her knowledge on forms prescribed
by the City Clerk.



   (C)   Additional persons may be engaged for other duties in
connection with bingo occasions as needed, but no person shall assist in the
conduct of a bingo occasion who is not an active member of the licensed
organization or the spouse of an active member of the licensed organization.



   (D)   No person shall receive more than $12 as compensation for any
duties in connection with any one bingo occasion.



   (E)   No more than 104 bingo occasions each year or two bingo
occasions each week shall be conducted by any licensed organization.



   (F)   A bingo occasion shall not continue for more than four
consecutive hours.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-6)



§ 131.36  BINGO ON LEASED PREMISES.



   (A)   Any person, corporation, or eligible organization which leases
any premises that it owns to two or more eligible organizations for purposes,
including the conduct of bingo occasions, shall not allow more than four
bingo occasions to be conducted on the premises in any week.



   (B)   Any eligible organization which leases any premises to one or
more other eligible organizations for purposes, including the conduct of
bingo occasions, shall use the proceeds of the rental less reasonable sums
for maintenance, furnishings, and other necessary expenses only for the uses
for which bingo profits may be used as set out in § 131.42. Not less than
once each year the lessor organization shall report to the City Council the
disposition of all receipts which it has received during the reporting period
from the rental of its facilities to other organizations for purposes,
including the conduct of bingo occasions.



   (C)   No eligible organization shall conduct bingo on any leased
premises without a written lease for a term at least equal to the remainder
of the term of the bingo license of the lessee organization. Lease payments
shall be at a fixed monthly rate or rate per bingo occasion not subject to
change during the term of the lease. No lease shall provide that rental
payments be based on a percentage of receipts or profits from bingo occasions.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-7)



§ 131.37  PRIZES.



   (A)   Prizes for a single bingo game shall not exceed $100 except
prizes for a game of the type commonly known as a “cover-all” game.
“Cover-all” prizes may exceed $100 provided that the aggregate value of
the prizes for a bingo occasion shall not exceed $500. The aggregate value of
prizes for a bingo occasion shall not exceed $2,500, except that in the case
of bingo occasion during which a “cover-all” game is played for a maximum
prize of more than $100 but less than $500, the aggregate value of prizes for
the bingo occasion shall not exceed $3,000. Merchandise prizes shall be
valued at fair market retail value.



   (B)   Each bingo winner shall be determined and every prize shall be
awarded and delivered the same day on which the bingo occasion is conducted.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-8)



§ 131.38  RECORDS.



   (A)   Each licensed organization shall keep records of its gross
receipts and profits for each bingo occasion. All deductions from gross
receipts from a bingo occasion shall be documented with receipts of other
records. The distribution of profits shall be itemized as to payee, amount,
and date of payment. Records required by this subchapter shall be preserved
for three years.



   (B)   Gross receipts shall be compared to the checkers’ records
for the bingo occasion by a person who did not sell cards for the bingo
occasion. If a discrepancy exceeding $20 is found between the amount of gross
receipts for a bingo occasion as determined by the checkers’ records and
the amount of gross receipts as determined by totaling the cash receipts, the
discrepancy shall be reported to and investigated by the City Council.



   (C)   Bingo gross receipts shall be segregated from other revenues
of an organization and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall
maintain separate records of its bingo operations. The person who accounts
for bingo gross receipts and profits shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the licensed organization.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-9)



§ 131.39  REPORTS.



   (A)   Each licensed organization shall report monthly to its
membership its gross receipts from bingo, its profits from bingo, and the
distribution of those profits itemized as required by § 131.38.



   (B)   At the time of making its first license application under this
subchapter and on an annual basis thereafter, each licensed organization
shall file with the City Council copies of the following:



      (1)   The most recently filed Department of the Treasury,
Internal Revenue Service, Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax, Form
990, or a comparable form if the organization is required to file the form
with the Department of the Treasury;



      (2)   The most recently filed Department of the Treasury,
Internal Revenue Service, Exempt Organization Business Income Tax, Form
990-T, or a comparable form if the organization is required to file the form
with the Department of the Treasury;



      (3)   The most recently filed annual report required of
charitable organizations by M.S. § 309.53, as it may be amended from time to
time, provided that an organization that is licensed to conduct bingo but is
exempt from submitting this report to the Department of Commerce under M.S.
§ 309.53, subd. Ia, as it may be amended from time to time, shall
nevertheless submit such a report under this subdivision;



      (4)   The most recently filed state’s Department of Commerce
Statement of Bingo Operations. All information contained in the statement
shall be true, correct, and complete to the best of the knowledge of the
persons signing the statement; and



      (5)   Any lease agreements required by this act executed by
the organization in regard to premises leased for the conduct of bingo.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement in any report
required by this section.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-10)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.40  INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION.



   Any city official or employee having a duty to perform with reference
to a bingo license and any police officer may inspect and examine the bingo
records of any licensed organization upon 24 hours’ notice.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-11)



§ 131.41  USE OF BINGO RECEIPTS.



   No expense shall be incurred or amounts paid in connection with the
conduct of bingo except those reasonably expended for bingo supplies and
equipment, prizes, rent, or utilities used during the bingo occasion, bingo
license fees, and compensation to persons lawfully hired to conduct or assist
in conducting a bingo occasion.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-12)



§ 131.42  USE OF BINGO PROFITS.



   (A)   Profits from any bingo occasion shall be expended only as
authorized by a resolution recorded in the official minutes at a regular
meeting of the licensed organization and only for one or more of the
following purposes:



      (1)   Benefitting persons by enhancing their opportunity for
religious or education advancement, by relieving or protecting them from
disease, suffering, or distress, by contributing to their physical well
being, by assisting them in establishing themselves in life as worthy and
useful citizens, or by increasing their comprehension of and devotion to the
principles upon which this nation was founded;



      (2)   Initiating, performing, or fostering worthy public works
or enabling or furthering the erection or maintenance of public structures;



      (3)   Lessening the burdens borne by government or voluntarily
supporting, augmenting, or supplementing services which government would
normally render to the people; or



      (4)   The improving, expanding, maintaining, or repairing of
real property owned or leased by the licensed organization.



   (B)   Profits from bingo occasions shall not be expended for the
erection or acquisition of any real property unless the City Council
specifically authorizes the expenditures after finding that the property will
be used exclusively for one or more of the purposes specified in this section.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-13)



§ 131.43  EXEMPTIONS.



   Bingo may be conducted without complying with the requirements of §§
131.35(E) and (F) and 131.36 if conducted:



   (A)   In connection with the county fair conducted by the county
agricultural society or in connection with a civic celebration recognized by
resolution of the City Council, provided that bingo shall not be conducted
for more than 12 days during any one county fair or recognized civic
celebration; or



   (B)   By an organization that conducts fewer than five bingo
occasions in any calendar year.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-14)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §§ 131.01 through
131.16; M.S. §§ 609.75 through 609.763, inclusive, as they may be amended
from time to time; or M.S. §§ 349.11 through 349.191, as they may be
amended from time to time, or any rules promulgated under those sections, as
they may be amended from time to time, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or both, plus in either case the costs of prosecution. In
addition, violations shall be reported to the Board and recommendation shall
be made for suspension, revocation, or cancellation of an organization’s
license.



(Prior Code, § 3-12-17)



   (C)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 131.30 through
131.43 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not
more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 3-8-15)



(Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 132:  FIREARMS



Section



   132.01   Hunting



   132.02   Discharge, carrying firearms



   132.03   Destruction of diseased, injured, dangerous animals
authorized



   132.04   Licensing of ranges



§ 132.01  HUNTING.



   No person shall hunt, take, capture, shoot, or trap any animals within
the corporate limits of the city unless excepted in § 132.03 of this chapter.



§ 132.02  DISCHARGE, CARRYING FIREARMS.



   No person, except a police officer in the performance of duty, shall,
within the city, discharge any gun, pistol, or firearm of any description or
carry any such weapon, unless it is dismantled or broken apart, or carried in
a case in such a manner that it cannot be discharged. This section does not
prevent the carrying of a hand gun within the city under a permit subject to
the restrictions imposed by law or exception of use at ranges licensed under
§ 132.04 of this chapter.



§ 132.03  DESTRUCTION OF DISEASED, INJURED, DANGEROUS ANIMALS AUTHORIZED.



   The City Council or the Wright County Sheriff may specifically
authorize any person to destroy diseased, injured or dangerous animals.



§ 132.04  LICENSING OF RANGES.



   All owners of rifle, trap, archery and target ranges available to the
public, shall, be required to obtain a permit to operate such ranges with a
fee prescribed in the city fee schedule ordinance. The shooting of firearms
shall be restricted to between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Violation of any of the terms of such regulations shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and can be cause for revocation of the license
granted under the terms of the chapter.



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING CODES



      151.   UTILITY EXCAVATIONS



      152.   SUBDIVISIONS



      153.   ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODES



Section




Building Code




   150.01   Intent and purpose



   150.02   Building Code



   150.03   Application, administration, and enforcement



   150.04   Permits and fees



   150.05   Plumbing permit regulations



   150.06   Waiver of fees for certain disabled veterans



   150.07   Posting of address numbers




International Property Maintenance Code




   150.20   Adoption



   150.21   Application



   150.22   Amendments




Moving Buildings




   150.35   Moving buildings; regulations



   150.36   Variances




Swimming Pool Regulations




   150.50   Adoption of state regulations



   150.51   Fees



   150.52   Enforcement



 



   150.99   Penalty




BUILDING CODE




§ 150.01  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   This is a subchapter adopting the state’s Building Code. This
subchapter provides for the application, administration, and enforcement of
the state’s Building Code by regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings
and/or structures in the city; provides for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees thereof; provides penalties for violation thereof; and
repeals all ordinances and parts of ordinances that conflict therewith.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-1)



§ 150.02  BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   The state’s Building Code, established pursuant to M.S. §§
326B.101 through 326B.194, as they may be amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted as the building code for this jurisdiction.



   (B)   The code, its supplements, amendments, additions, addenda,
alterations, subtractions, and revisions as currently adopted and which may
in the future be adopted and incorporated as part of the code, is hereby
confirmed as the building code of the city and hereby incorporated in this
subchapter as if fully set out herein.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-2)  (Ord. 391, passed 6-9-2003)



§ 150.03  APPLICATION, ADMINISTRATION, AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The application, administration, and enforcement of the code
shall be in accordance with the state’s Building Code. The code shall be
enforced within the incorporated limits of the city, and any
extra-territorial limits permitted by M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended
from time to time, when so established by this subchapter.



   (B)   The code enforcement agency of this municipality is called the
Department of Building Safety. A state certified Building Official must be
appointed by the City Council to administer the code.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-3)  (Ord. 391, passed 6-9-2003)



Statutory reference:



   Appointment of Building Official, see M.S. § 326B.133



§ 150.04  PERMITS AND FEES.



   (A)   The issuance of permits and the collection of fees shall be as
authorized in M.S. § 326B.121, as it may be amended from time to time, and
as provided for in the Minnesota State Building Code and Minn. Rules parts
1305.0106 and 1305.0107.



   (B)   Permit fees assessed for work governed by this code shall be
established by the City Council.



   (C)   A surcharge fee shall be collected on all permits issued for
work governed by this code in accordance with M.S. § 326B.148, as it may be
amended from time to time.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-4)  (Ord. 391, passed 6-9-2003)



§ 150.05  PLUMBING PERMIT REGULATIONS.



   Prior to the installation by any person, corporation, or public agency,
of a system of plumbing that serves any considerable number of persons, or
any plumbing system that shall affect the public health in any manner,
complete plans and specifications, together with any additional information
that the Building Official may require, shall be submitted in duplicate and
approved by the Building Official. The appraisal of the Building Official
shall reflect the degree to which these plans and specifications affect the
public health and conform to the provisions of the state’s Plumbing Code.
No constructions shall proceed except in accordance with the approved plans.
Any alteration or extension of an existing plumbing system shall be subject
to these same requirements.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-8)  (Ord. 293, passed 5-27-1997)



§ 150.06  WAIVER OF FEES FOR CERTAIN DISABLED VETERANS.



   (A)   Findings and intent. The city hereby finds that the men and
women who gave their service in the Unites States Armed Forces are in need of
our honor and respect. These men and women have paid for the country’s
freedom by giving up their families, lives they knew, and their flesh and
their blood to ensure the preservation of democracy. Many of these veterans
have returned to their families, friends, and homes with special needs
directly related to their performed duties. The city honors these individual
sacrifices by waiving the permit fees for remodeling projects and building
modifications needed to an existing structure.



   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PERMANENT OR LONG-TERM DISABILITY. A physical disability that is
medically expected to exist for a period of 12 months or longer.



      QUALIFIED VETERAN. An individual that has received an honorable
discharge from the United States Armed Forces and has served during a
conflict of war, United Nations called action, or homeland security event,
and has received a DD214 or FL-B02 and service-connected disability rating
from the federal government.



      QUALIFYING EVENT. An injury that is directly related to active
duty in the Unites States Armed Forces, including training accidents, combat
injuries, and other duties of service that may cause harm. Off duty injuries
shall not qualify.



      REMODELING PROJECT. A remodeling project to a pre-existing
residential structure that is the primary residence of the individual
requesting the waiver.



      RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof,
designated exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family,
two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels,
and boarding houses either owned or occupied by a qualified veteran.



   (C)   Waiver of permit fees. A qualified veteran that has a
permanent or long-term disability as the result of a qualifying event may
apply for and be granted a waiver of city building permit fees for a
remodeling project to a residential dwelling unit that are necessary to allow
for the general comfort and well being of the individual within his or her
personal residence.



   (D)   Application and documentation.



      (1)   If the property is not owned by the applicant, a
notarized statement from the fee owner(s) authorizing the modification must
be included with the wavier application. The notarized statement shall
include the address, parcel identification number, and legal description of
the parcel.



      (2)   The waiver application shall be submitted within 48
months of discharge from active duty and shall state the purpose statement
regarding the necessity of the remodeling project to a residential dwelling
unit.



      (3)   An applicant must submit a written request 30 days
before expiration of the building permit to extend the building permit fee
waiver. The extension request shall state the reasons for not completing the
building modifications or remodeling project within the required time period.



      (4)   Other documents as may be deemed necessary by the
city’s Building Official with respect to issuance of the building permit.



   (E)   Issuance of the waiver of a building permit fee. The city’s
Building Official shall issue the waiver upon receipt of a complete
application provided that a determination has been made that the waiver
complies with the applicable laws and provisions.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-9)  (Ord. 483, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 150.07  POSTING OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.



   (A)   Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address
numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the
street or road fronting the property. If the building is so constructed that
the numbering is not readily visible from the street, then the street
numbering shall also appear at the street entrance to the building. These
numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic
numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102
mm) high with a minimum stroke width of one-half inch (12.7 mm).



(Prior Code, § 4-5-1)



   (B)   Distance and size requirements. The following shall apply to
commercial, industrial, and institutional signage.

 


Distance Behind Curb

 

Minimum Address Sign Size Required




0 - 49 feet

 

4 in.




50 - 74 feet

 

4 in. + 1 in.




75 - 99 feet

 

4 in. + 2 in.




100 - 199 feet

 

4 in.+ 3 in.




200 - 299 feet

 

4 in. + 4 in.




300 + feet

 

4 in. + 6 in.




 



(Prior Code, § 4-5-2)



(Ord. 475, passed 3-24-2008)




INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE




§ 150.20  ADOPTION.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference in its entirety
except as amended in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-1)



§ 150.21  APPLICATION.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all existing
residential and non-residential structures and all existing premises.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-2)



§ 150.22  AMENDMENTS.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, is adopted
with the following amendments.



   Section 102.1 Title. Amended to read: These regulations shall be known
as the Property Maintenance code of the City of Monticello, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”



   Section 102.1 General. Amended to read: The provisions of this code
shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises,
as set forth in Section 101. Where, in a specific case, different sections of
this code specify different requirements, or if there is a conflict between
the requirements of this code and other ordinances of the city, the most
restrictive shall govern.



   Section 102.3 Application of other codes. Amended to read: Repairs,
additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be
done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Minnesota State
Building Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or
set aside any provision of the City of Monticello Code of Ordinances.



   Section 202.7 Referenced codes and standards. Amended to read: The
codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in
Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the
prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between
provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the most restrictive
shall apply.



   Section 103.2 Appointment. Amended to read: The Chief Building Official
shall serve as the “code official”.



   Section 103.5 Fees. Amended to read: The fees for activities and
services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities
under this code shall be as indicated in the City of Monticello Fee Schedule
Ordinance.



   Section 107.2 Form. Subpart 5. Deleted.



   Section 107.2 Form. Subpart 6. Deleted.



   Section 112.6.3 Limitations of authority. Amended by adding new section
to read: The board of appeals shall have no authority to waive fire and life
safety requirements or to approve a condition that would create a violation
of the Minnesota State Building Code.



   Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Amended to read: Where
terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the Minnesota State
Building Code or elsewhere in the City of Monticello Ordinances, such terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.



   Section 202 General definitions. Amended by adding: Junk Vehicle: A
vehicle without a valid current license, or without a valid current
registration (if applicable), or which is apparently inoperable located
outside an enclosed building in a residential area including, but not limited
to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, snowmobiles, trailers, all-terrain
vehicles and watercraft.



   Inoperative Motor Vehicle. Deleted.



   Section 302.4 Weeds. Amended to read: All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of
eight (8) inches in height. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds
shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than
trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated
flowers and gardens.



   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut
and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be
subject to prosecution in accordance with § 91.04 of the Monticello City
Ordinances.



   Section 302.8 Motor vehicles. Amended to read: except as provided in
other regulations, no junk vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any
premises unless within a totally enclosed structure. No vehicle shall at any
time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled. Spray painting of vehicles is prohibited unless
conducted inside an approved spray booth.



   Exception. Any vehicle is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure
or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
Automotive maintenance and repair shall be limited to the owners/occupants
who reside at that address.



   Section 304.14 Insect screens. Amended to read: During the period from
April 1 to October 31, every door, window and other outside opening in a
commercial establishment required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch and every screen door used
for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition. Screens used for insect control must be maintained in good
condition, securely held in place, and free from holes or tears.



   Exception. Deleted.



   Section 304.15.1 Landings. Amended by adding new section to read:
Exterior doors, other than storm doors, must swing over a floor or landing of
at least the width of the door opening, extending from the threshold for a
distance of at least equal to the door width, and must not be more than eight
inches below the height of the door threshold.



   Section 305.7 Food preparation. Amended by adding new section to read:
All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary
manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary
disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary
storage.



   Section 308.1 Infestation. Amended by adding: Once exterminated, all
carcasses, offal material, fecal matter, etc. must be removed and all
surfaces and materials shall be cleaned and sanitized at the direction of the
code official.



   Section 308.2 Owner. Amended by adding: The owner is also responsible
for maintaining the exterior envelope of the structure by sealing or
repairing all defects, cracks, gaps, holes and other openings in the
foundation and/or other building materials that may allow pests to enter the
structure.



   Section 401.3 Alternative devices. Amended to read: in lieu of the
means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light
or mechanical ventilation complying with the Minnesota State Building Code
shall he permitted.



   Section 404.4.1 Room area. Amended to read: Every bedroom occupied by
one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every
bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square
feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. Every living room shall comply
with Table 404.5.



   Section 404.5 Overcrowding. Amended to read: Dwelling units shall not
be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements
of Table 404.5. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not
create conditions that, in the opinion of the code official, endanger the
life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.




Table 404.5
Minimum Area Requirements




 


Space

 

Minimum Area in Square Feet




1-2 Occupants

 

3-5 Occupants

 

6 or More Occupants





Living room1,2
 

No requirements

 

120

 

150



Dining room1,2
 

No requirements

 

80

 

100



Kitchen2
 

50

 

50

 

60



Bedrooms
 

Shall comply with. Section 404.4.1



Notes:



1.   See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces.




2.   See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes.





 



   Section 404.5.1 Sleeping area. Amended by adding new section to read:
The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a
sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for sleeping
purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with Section 404.4.



   Section 404.5.2 Combined spaces. Amended by adding new section to read:
Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for
separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination
living room/dining room.



   Section 505.1 General. Amended by replacing “International Plumbing
Code” with “Minnesota State Plumbing Code.”



   Section 602.2 Residential occupancies. Amended to read: Dwellings shall
be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a minimum room
temperature of 68° F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms when
the outdoor temperature is -20° F or warmer. Cooking appliances shall not be
used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.



   Exception: Deleted.



   Section 602.3 Heat supply. Amended to read: Every owner and operator of
any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping
units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to May 31 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and toilet rooms.



     Exceptions:



      1.   When the outdoor temperature is below -20° F,
maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided
that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity.



      2.   Deleted.



   Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Deleted.



   Section 603.1.1 Appliance testing. Amended by adding new section to
read: Central heating appliances shall be tested by a licensed mechanical
contractor to verify that the appliance is in a safe working condition when
evidence of malfunction, corrosion, deterioration or excessive interior
carbon monoxide is suspected.



   Section 603.2 Removal of combustion products. Amended to read: All
fuel-burning equipment and appliances intended for heating shall be connected
to an approved chimney or vent to the exterior of the structure.



   Section 604.2 Service. Amended by replacing “ICC Electrical Code”
with “Minnesota State Electrical Code.”



   Section 702.1 General. Amended by replacing “International Fire
Code” with “Minnesota State Fire Code.”



   Section 702.2 Aisles. Amended by replacing “International Fire
Code” with “Minnesota State Fire Code.”



   Section 702.3 Locked doors. Amended by replacing “International
Building Code” with “Minnesota State Building Code.”



   Section 704.1 General. Amended to read: All systems, devices and
equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire
or any combination thereof shall be installed and maintained in an operable
condition at all times in accordance with the Minnesota State Building Code.



   Section 704.2 Smoke alarms. Amended by replacing “International Fire
Code” with “Minnesota State Fire Code.”



   Chapter 8 ICC references. All references to the International Building,
Fire, Fuel Gas, Mechanical, Plumbing, and Electrical Codes shall mean the
applicable chapters of the Minnesota State Building Code. All references to
the International Zoning Code shall mean the applicable chapters of the City
of Monticello Zoning Code.



(Prior Code, § 4-4-3)  (Ord. 464, passed 7-23-2007)




MOVING BUILDINGS




§ 150.35  MOVING BUILDINGS; REGULATIONS.



   No building or structure shall be hereafter moved into or within the
city except under the following conditions.



   (A)   Any persons desiring to move buildings or structures into the
city shall apply for such permit to the Clerk and shall at the time of the
application pay therefor a fee as adopted by the City Council.



   (B)   The structures shall not be of over ten years of age and must
be constructed in compliance with all of the presently operating codes and
ordinances of the city.



   (C)   If the proposed location of the construction or structure is
on a lot in an existing subdivision, he or she must first obtain approval of
the six nearest resident property owners.



   (D)   A building permit or permits as required as to any other
construction in the city shall be required in addition to the permit to move
the structure into the city.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-1)  (Ord. 70, passed 7-9-1979; Ord. 107, passed
11-23-1981)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.36  VARIANCES.



   Any person seeking variance must follow the procedures set forth in the
application for rezoning.



(Prior Code, § 3-6-2)




SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS




§ 150.50  ADOPTION OF STATE REGULATIONS.



   The state’s Health Department regulations on design, construction,
operation, and maintenance of public swimming and wading pools and the
state’s Health Department regulations on design and construction of private
fixed pools ordinance, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City
Administrator, is hereby adopted as the swimming pool ordinance of the city
for the purpose of regulating the installation, alteration, maintenance, and
repair of all swimming pools and for all buildings, providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees thereof, providing penalties for
violation of such ordinance. Every regulation, provision, penalty, condition,
and term contained in this chapter is hereby adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this chapter except as hereinafter modified.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-1)



§ 150.51  FEES.



   For fee schedule, see building permit schedule in Chapter 36 of this
code of ordinances.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-2)



§ 150.52  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Building Official or other qualified and authorized representative
of the City Council shall enforce the provisions of the ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 4-3-3)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99 of this code
of ordinances.



   (B)   Any person violating any provision of §§ 150.01 through
150.07 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not
more than the maximum penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law.



(Prior Code, § 4-1-6)  (Ord. 358, passed 1-8-2001)



CHAPTER 151:  UTILITY EXCAVATIONS



Section



   151.01   Definitions



   151.02   Utility excavation permit



   151.03   Application for permit



   151.04   Permit fee



   151.05   Utility excavation placard



   151.06   Surety bond



   151.07   Exemption from surety bond



   151.08   Public Works Director



   151.09   Emergency action



   151.10   Non-completion or abandonment



   151.11   Insurance



   151.12   Indemnification



   151.13   Exemption from fee payment and insurance provisions



   151.14   Refusal of permits



§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in
the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always
mandatory and not merely discretionary.



   APPLICANT. Any person making written application to the Public Works
Director for an excavation permit hereunder.



   EXCAVATION WORK. The excavation and other work permitted related to
water distribution, wastewater collection, and stormwater collection and
distribution under a utility excavation permit and required to be performed
under this chapter.



   PERMITTEE. Any person or company who has been granted and has in full
force and effect a utility excavation permit issued hereunder.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The Public Works Director of the city or his or
her authorized representative.



   STREET. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, or other public
right-of-way or grounds or public easements in the city.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-1)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)



§ 151.02  UTILITY EXCAVATION PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel,
drill, bore, undermine, or in any manner break up any street or to make or
cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street or to
place, deposit, or leave upon any street any earth or excavated material
obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless
such person shall first have obtained a utility excavation permit therefor
from the Public Works Director as herein provided.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-2)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   No utility excavation permit shall be issued unless a written
application for the issuance of a utility excavation permit on forms provided
for that purpose is submitted to the Public Works Director. The written
application shall state the name, address, and phone number of the applicant,
the nature, location, and purpose of the excavation, and date of commencement
and date of completion of the excavation, and other data as may reasonably be
required by the Public Works Director.



   (B)   If required by the Public Works Director, the application
shall be accompanied by plans showing the extent of the proposed excavation
work, the dimensions and elevations of both the existing ground prior to the
excavation and of the proposed excavated surfaces, the location of the
excavation work, and the other information as may be prescribed by the Public
Works Director.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-3)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)



§ 151.04  PERMIT FEE.



   Upon approval of the application for the utility excavation permit by
the Public Works Director, the applicant shall pay a fee set by the City
Council to the city to cover reasonable costs for the issuance of the utility
excavation permit.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-4)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)



§ 151.05  UTILITY EXCAVATION PLACARD.



   The Public Works Director shall provide each permittee, at the time the
permit is issued, a suitable placard which shall state the permittee’s
name, the permit number, and the date of expiration. It shall be the duty of
any permittee hereunder to keep the placard posted in a conspicuous place at
the site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for any person to
exhibit the placard at or about any excavation not covered by the permit or
to misrepresent the permit number of the date of expiration.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-5)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.06  SURETY BOND.



   Before a utility excavation permit is issued, the applicant shall
deposit with the Clerk a surety bond in the amount of $2,000 in favor of the
city or one-and-a-half times the estimated cost of any excavation(s) and
restoration, whichever is greater:



   (A)   With good and sufficient surety by a surety company authorized
to do business in the state;



   (B)   Satisfactory to the City Attorney in form and substance;



   (C)   Conditioned that the applicant will faithfully comply with all
the terms and conditions of this chapter; all rules, regulations, and
requirements pursuant thereto and as required by the Public Works Director;
and all reasonable requirements of the Public Works Director; and



   (D)   (1)   Conditioned that the applicant will secure and hold
the city and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgements, or
other costs arising from the excavation permit or for which the city, the
City Council, or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any
accident or injury to persons or property through the fault of the permittee.



      (2)   Recovery on the surety bond for any injury or accident
shall not exhaust the bond, but it shall in its entirety cover any or all
future accidents or injuries during the excavation work for which it is given.



      (3)   In the event of any suit or claim against the city by
reason of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city given
written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment
against the city requiring it to pay for such damage shall be conclusive upon
the permittee and his or her surety.



      (4)   An annual bond may be given under this provision which
shall remain in force for one year, conditioned as above, in the amount
specified herein and in other respects as specified herein but applicable as
to all excavation work in streets by the permitted during the term of one
year from the date.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-6)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)



§ 151.07  EXEMPTION FROM SURETY BOND.



   The surety bond provisions shall not apply to any excavation made under
a contract awarded by the city or made by the city, or to any excavation
performed directly by any public utility permitted to operate within the city
limits, franchise or otherwise, for the purpose of supplying natural gas,
electric, or telephone services. This exception only applies to excavation
performed directly by the public utility, and a surety bond is required if
work is performed by a subcontractor of any public utility.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-7)



§ 151.08  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   (A)   All work done pursuant to a utility excavation permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall be performed under the direction
and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director or his or her duly
authorized agent.



   (B)   The Public Works Director shall prepare the regulations with
respect to excavations within any street and shall modify them with respect
to particular work as the Public Works Director shall deem necessary or
advisable to protect the public from injury, to prevent damage to public or
private property, and to minimize interference with the public use of the
streets.



   (C)   Regulations promulgated by the Public Works Director shall be
approved by the City Council after notice of hearing and a copy of the
regulations shall be given to each permittee upon issuance of the street
excavation permit.



   (D)   Regulations promulgated by the Public Works Director may
include:



      (1)   Requirement that all public utilities be notified by the
permittee of permittee’s intent to make a street excavation giving notice
of time, place, and purpose of the excavation;



      (2)   Requirement that the permittee shall have the duty of
determining the location and depth of all existing underground facilities;



      (3)   Manner and method of backfilling street excavation and
procedure to be followed in compacting backfilled material;



      (4)   Specifications as to material to be used in backfilling
street excavation;



      (5)   Manner and method of making street excavation, including
procedures to safeguard and protect adjoining and adjacent property and
existing underground and above ground facilities; and



      (6)   Requirements for restoration of street surfaces.



   (E)   Special provisions shall be made for simplifying procedures
and supervision in respect to excavations by franchised utilities.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-8)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)



§ 151.09  EMERGENCY ACTION.



   (A)   In the event of any emergency in which a main, conduit, or
utility facility in or under any street breaks, bursts, or otherwise is in
such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health, or
safety of any individual, the person owning or controlling the main, conduit,
or utility facility without first applying for and obtaining a utility
excavation permit hereunder shall immediately take proper emergency measures
to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of property,
life, health, and safety of individuals.



   (B)   However, the person owning or controlling the facility shall
apply for a utility excavation permit not later than the end of the next
succeeding day during which the Public Works Director’s office is open for
business and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining
an excavation permit hereunder.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-9)  (Ord. 549, passed 2-27-2012)



§ 151.10  NON-COMPLETION OR ABANDONMENT.



   Work shall progress in an expeditious manner until completion in order
to avoid necessary inconvenience to the general public. In the event that the
work shall not be performed in accordance with the applicable regulations of
the Public Works Director or in accordance with the provisions hereof, or
shall cease or be abandoned without due cause, the city may, after six
hours’ notice in writing to the holder of the permit of intent to do so,
correct the work or fill the excavation and repair the street, and in any
such event the entire cost to the city of the work shall be a liability of
and shall be paid by the person to whom the permit was issued and his or her
surety.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-10)



§ 151.11  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Liability insurance. A permittee, prior to the commencement of
excavation work hereunder, shall furnish the Public Works Director
satisfactory evidence in writing that the permittee has in force and will
maintain in force during the performance of the excavation work and the
period of the utility excavation permit public liability insurance of not
less than $1,000,000 for each occurrence and $1,000,000 for general
aggregate, duly issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the state and on which policy the city is named as co-insured (additional
insured) and $500,000 minimum automobile liability insurance.



   (B)   Worker’s compensation insurance. The contractor shall
provide Worker’s Compensation Insurance for all its employees and, in case
any work is sublet, the contractor shall require the subcontractor to provide
worker’s compensation insurance in accordance with statutory requirements.
Employer’s liability limit shall be a minimum of $100,000.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-11)  (Ord. 278, passed 5-13-1996; Ord. 549, passed
2-27-2012)



§ 151.12  INDEMNIFICATION.



   The permittee shall indemnify, keep, and hold the city free and
harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property
arising or growing out of the permittee’s negligence in making any street
excavation. In the event that suit shall be brought against the city, either
independently or jointly with the permittee on account thereof, the
permittee, upon notice to it by the city, shall defend the city in any suit
at the cost of the permittee; and in the event of a final judgment being
obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with the
permittee, the permittee shall pay the judgment with all costs and hold the
city harmless therefrom.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-12)



§ 151.13  EXEMPTION FROM FEE PAYMENT AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter requiring payment of a permit fee and
evidence of public liability and property damage insurance shall not be
applicable to any excavation work carried on by the city or its employees.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-13)



§ 151.14  REFUSAL OF PERMITS.



   If any person shall fail, refuse, or neglect to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations of the Public Works
Director in reference thereto, the Public Works Director may refuse to issue
further permit to such person until the conditions or orders are complied
with.



(Prior Code, § 8-2-14)  (Ord. 108, passed 11-23-1981)



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISIONS



Section




General Provisions




   152.001   Short title



   152.002   Purpose



   152.003   Scope



   152.004   Conditions for recording



   152.005   Effect of provisions on other permits and agreements



   152.006   Severability



   152.007   Exceptions



   152.008   Interpretation



   152.009   Rules



   152.010   Definitions



   152.011   Amendment



   152.012   Variances




Procedure




   152.025   Pre-application



   152.026   Procedure for preliminary plat



   152.027   Procedure for final plat




Data Required for Preliminary and Final Plats




   152.040   Preliminary plat



   152.041   Final plat




Subdivision Design Standards




   152.055   Conformity with other standards



   152.056   Interpretation of requirements



   152.057   Land requirements



   152.058   Blocks



   152.059   Lots



   152.060   Streets and alleys



   152.061   Easements



   152.062   Erosion and sediment control drainage



   152.063   Drainage



   152.064   Steep slopes



   152.065   Wetland systems



   152.066   Open space and landscaping



   152.067   Protected areas



   152.068   Mail and paper box locations




Parks, Open Space, and Public Use




   152.080   Dedication requirements



   152.081   Cash contribution



   152.082   Combination of land dedication and cash contribution



   152.083   Delayed dedication payment



   152.084   Purchase or condemnation of lands



   152.085   Location and configuration of dedication




Basic Required Improvements




   152.100   General



   152.101   Construction improvements



   152.102   Street improvements



   152.103   Sanitary sewer and water distribution improvements



   152.104   Grading, drainage and stormwater management



   152.105   Utilities



   152.106   Monument and survey requirements



   152.107   Pathways



   152.108   Other improvements




Registered Land Surveys and Conveyance by Metes and Bounds




   152.120   Registered land surveys



   152.121   Conveyance by metes and bounds




Fees




   152.135   Base fee per application



   152.136   Staff and consultant fee



   152.137   Payment




Violations




   152.150   Sale of lots from unrecorded plats



   152.151   Receiving or recording unapproved plats



   152.152   Misrepresentation as to construction, supervision, or
inspection of improvements



 



   152.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Subdivision Ordinance of the City
of Monticello”, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter”.



§ 152.002  PURPOSE.



   (A)   In order to safeguard the best interests of the city and to
assist the subdivider in harmonizing his or her interests with those of the
city at large, the following chapter is adopted in order that adherence to
same will bring results beneficial to both parties.



   (B)   It is the purpose of this chapter to:



      (1)   Encourage well planned, efficient, and attractive
subdivisions by establishing adequate standards for design and construction;



      (2)   Provide for the health and safety and general welfare of
residents by requiring the necessary services such as properly designed
streets and adequate sewage and water service;



      (3)   Place the cost of improvements against those benefitting
from their construction;



      (4)   Secure the rights of the public with respect to public
lands and waters; and



      (5)   Make certain regulations and requirements for the
platting of land within the city pursuant to the authority contained in
Minnesota Statutes Annotated, including M.S. § 462.358 and M.S. Ch. 505, as
they may be amended from time to time, which regulations the City Council
deems necessary for the health, safety, and general welfare of this community.



§ 152.003  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter relate to any division of a tract of
land into two or more parcels by platting, replatting, conveyance, registered
land survey, or other means, and the combination or recombination of parcels
that for which compliance with the zoning ordinance would be affected.



§ 152.004  CONDITIONS FOR RECORDING.



   No plat or any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the County
Register of Deeds office or have any validity until the plat thereof has been
prepared, approved, and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this chapter.



§ 152.005  EFFECT OF PROVISIONS ON OTHER PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Generally. No building permits will be considered for issuance
by the city for the construction of any building, structure, or improvement
to the land or to any lot in a subdivision as defined herein until all
requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.



   (B)   Private agreements. This chapter is not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement provided that where
the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or requirements on an easement, covenant, or other private
agreement, the requirements of this chapter shall govern.



§ 152.006  SEVERABILITY.



   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any
provision of this chapter, then such judgment shall not affect the validity
and continued enforcement of any other provision of this chapter.



   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
structure, or situation, then such judgment shall not affect the application
of that provision to any other building, structure, or situation not
specifically included in that judgment.



   (C)   If any court of competent jurisdiction rules invalid any
condition attached to an approval under this chapter, then such judgment
shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to the same
approval that are not specifically included in that judgment.



   (D)   No judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction shall be
considered final until all appeals therefore have been exhausted.



§ 152.007  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   When requesting a subdivision, combination, or recombination,
if any of the following conditions exist, the subdivider is required to
present accurately drawn site and certified survey plan information for the
proposed subdivision, combination, or recombination, have the subdivision,
combination, or recombination reviewed by the Planning Commission, reviewed
and approved by the City Council, and adhere to the park dedication
requirements of §§ 152.080 through 152.085.



      (1)   A division which results in commercial or industrial
parcels having an area of five acres or more with frontage on a public
right-of-way measuring 300 feet or more and which does not result in the
division of the parcel into two or more lots, any one of which is less than
five acres in area or 300 feet in width and which does not necessitate the
dedication of a public right-of- way. Such division shall not cause any
structure on the lot to be in violation of the zoning ordinance or said new
portions of lots to be in violation of city ordinance.



      (2)   Division of one previously platted parcel into no more
than two buildable parcels, both of which will be in full conformance with
all applicable zoning regulations, and for which no public right- of-way,
easements, or other drainage concerns are evident to the Zoning Administrator.



      (3)   The adjustment of a lot line by the relocation of a
common boundary and for which no public right-of-way, easements, or other
drainage concerns are evident to the Zoning Administrator.



      (4)   Division of an existing lot of record where the division
is to permit the adding of a parcel of land to an abutting lot or lots and
the newly created property line will not cause the other remaining portion of
the lot to be in violation with this chapter or the zoning ordinance, and for
which no public right-of-way, easements, or other drainage concerns are
evident to the Zoning Administrator.



      (5)   Combination of two or more parcels of record to create a
parcel conforming to the requirements of the applicable zoning district and
for which no public right-of-way, easements, or other drainage concerns are
evident to the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   Any easements which become unnecessary as a result of the
division or combination must be vacated. In addition, new easements must be
established as determined by the City Engineer.



   (C)   In the event that the County Recorder shall refuse to record
an administrative subdivision due to the legal description of the proposed
parcels or for any other reason, the applicant shall be required to comply
with all of the requirements of §§ 152.026 and 152.040 for preliminary
plats.



§ 152.008  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Where the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
other ordinance, code provision, or regulation, the provisions of this
chapter shall be controlling.



   (B)   Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or code
provision, or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the
provisions of the statute, other ordinance or code provision, or regulation
shall be controlling.



§ 152.009  RULES.



   For the purpose of this chapter, words used in the present tense shall
include the future; words in the singular shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular; and the word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary.



§ 152.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property



   APPLICANT. The owner, the owner’s agent, or any other person having
legal control, ownership, and/or interest in the land proposed to be
subdivided.



   BLOCK. An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by
streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the
subdivision, or a combination of the above with a river or lake.



   BOULEVARD. The portion of a street right-of-way between the limit of
the public right-of-way and the curbline, which may include pathways.



   CERTIFICATE OF SURVEY. A document prepared by a registered land
surveyor which precisely describes the area, dimensions, and location of a
parcel or parcels of land.



   CITY. The City of Monticello.



   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Monticello.



   CITY ENGINEER. The engineer employed or retained by the city, unless
otherwise stated.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. Refers to the group of maps, charts, and texts that
make up the comprehensive long-range plan of the city.



   COUNTY. Wright County, Minnesota.



   CROSSWALK. A right-of-way owned by the city or other governmental
entity which provides access for pedestrians across a street to adjacent
streets or properties.



   DESIGN STANDARDS. The specifications to landowners or subdividers for
the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other
things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as
rights-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots.



   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A written agreement between city and applicant
in conjunction with the approval by the city of a subdivision.



   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of land for the
purpose of constructing and maintaining drives, and utilities, including, but
not limited to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, communication
lines, storm sewer, or storm drainage ways and gas lines, wetlands,
conservation easements, and pathways, including sidewalks and trails.



   FINAL PLAT. A drawing or map of a subdivision meeting all of the
requirements of the city and in such form as required by the county for the
purposes of recording.



   IMPROVEMENT. Any drainage or stormwater facility, roadway, parkway,
sidewalk, trail, pathway or crossing, landscaping, lighting, off-street
parking area, grading, utility, lot improvement, or other similar facility.



   INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A septic tank, seepage tile sewage
disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device.



   INSPECTOR. An authorized representative of the City Council assigned to
make any or all necessary inspection of the work performed and materials
furnished by a developer.



   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
building development or for transfer of ownership.



   LOT OF RECORD. Any lot which is a part of a subdivision the plat of
which has been recorded in the County Recorder’s office, or a lot described
by metes and bounds the deed to which has been recorded in the County
Recorder’s office, at the time this chapter becomes effective.



   METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION. A description of real property which is
not described by reference to a lot or block shown on a map, but is described
by starting at a known point and describing the bearings and distances of the
lines forming the boundaries of the property or delineating a fractional
portion of the section, lot, or real property by described lines or portions
thereof.



   OUTLOT. A lot remnant or parcel of land after platting which is
intended as open space or other use and for which no building permit shall be
issued.



   OWNER. Includes the plural as well as the singular and where
appropriate shall include a natural person, partnership, firm, association,
syndicate, co-partnership, public or quasi-public corporation, private
corporation, trust, or a combination of them having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.



   PARCEL. An individual lot or tract of land.



   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS. Public land and open spaces in the city
dedicated or reserved for recreation purposes.



   PATHWAY. A public or private facility or area providing access for a
variety of non-motorized uses, including, but not limited to, pedestrians and
bicycles, which may be a paved or unpaved trail or sidewalk facility and its
related appurtenant facilities.



   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE. On street centerline, means the distance
vertically (up or down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for
each 100 feet of horizontal distance.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city.



   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A detailed drawing or map of a proposed subdivision
meeting requirements herein enumerated.



   PRIVATE IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement for which the city does not assume
ownership or the responsibility for maintenance operation, but which instead
is owned, maintained, and operated by a private property owner or group of
private property owners.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS. Contracts made between private parties as to the
manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving
the physical and economic integrity of any given area.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement for which the city may ultimately
assume the ownership and responsibility for maintenance and operation, or
which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is
established.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land acquired by reservation or dedication intended for
public use and intended to be occupied or which is occupied by a street,
pathway, railroad, utility lines, pipelines, water lines, sanitary sewer
lines, storm sewer lines, or other similar uses.



   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance between a building and a
street, lot line, ordinary highwater mark, or bluff line. Distances are
measured from the most outwardly extended portion of the structure at ground
level.



   SIDEWALK. A paved public or private pedestrian way located between the
curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.



   STREET. The public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians
and vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane, place, or boulevard, or otherwise
designated.



      (1)   ARTERIAL STREET. A street carrying larger volumes of
traffic and serving as a link between various sub-areas of the community.
These streets are intended to provide a collection and distribution of
traffic between highways and collector streets; hence regulation of direct
access to property is critical.



      (2)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from
local streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways. COLLECTOR
STREETS primarily provide principal access to residential neighborhoods,
including a lesser degree, direct land access.



      (3)   CUL-DE-SAC STREET. A local street with only one outlet
and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of
traffic movement.



      (4)   LOCAL STREET. A street which is used primarily for
access to abutting properties and for local traffic movement.



   SUBDIVIDER. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
co-partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity having sufficient
proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and
maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.



   SUBDIVISION. A described tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into two or more lots or parcels, the purpose of transfer of
ownership or building development of, if a new street is involved, any
division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision and, where it
is appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing
or to the land subdivided.



   TRAIL. A public or private right-of-way providing access for a variety
of non-motorized uses including pedestrians and bicycles which may be a paved
or unpaved trail and its related appurtenant facilities.



   VARIANCE. A modification or variation of the provisions of this chapter
as applicable to a specific piece of property. Modification of the allowable
use within a district shall not qualify as a VARIANCE.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel or depression through which water flows, such as
rivers, streams, ditches, or creeks and may flow year-round or intermittently.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The individual(s) assigned by the City
Administrator or City Council charged with the responsibility of
administering and enforcing this chapter.



   ZONING ORDINANCE. The zoning ordinance or resolution controlling the
use of land as adopted by the city.



§ 152.011  AMENDMENT.



   (A)   Before any amendment is adopted, the Planning Commission shall
hold at least one public hearing after proper notice has been issued.
Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall adopt findings and
recommendations on the proposed amendment as soon as practical. The City
Clerk may forward the application to the City Council without a
recommendation from the Planning Commission only if it is deemed necessary to
ensure compliance with state mandated deadlines for application review.



   (B)   The City Council may hold a public hearing on the amendment if
deemed necessary by the City Clerk. After consideration of the Planning
Commission recommendation and hearing, the Council may adopt the amendment or
any part thereof in such form as it deems advisable.



   (C)   Approval of an amendment shall require a majority vote of all
members of the City Council.



§ 152.012  VARIANCES.



   Variances to this chapter shall be processed and reviewed per the
city’s zoning ordinance, Chapter 2, § 4(C).



PROCEDURE



§ 152.025  PRE-APPLICATION.



   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the applicant or owners
may meet with the Zoning Administrator, and other appropriate officials in
order to be made fully aware of all applicable ordinances, regulations, and
plans in the area to be subdivided. At this time, or at subsequent informal
meetings, the applicant may submit for informal, non-binding comment a
general concept plan of the proposed subdivision. The concept plan can be
presented in simple form but should show that consideration has been given to
the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing city facilities, to
neighboring subdivisions and developments, to the topography of the site, and
to the suitability of proposed transportation, drainage, and utility systems.



§ 152.026  PROCEDURE FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   (A)   Filing.



      (1)   Per the published application calendar, the applicant
shall file a request for preliminary plat approval and the accompanying fee
and escrow as adopted by ordinance. After the city has received the request
for a plat approval, it shall inform the applicant within ten days whether
the submittal was complete. If deemed not complete, the applicant will be
informed of needed material or information to be made complete. If no
notification of completion is made by the city within ten days, the request
will be placed on a regular Planning Commission agenda for consideration.



      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee and escrow
as provided for by City Council ordinance.



      (3)   The application shall also be accompanied by electronic
and print copies of a preliminary plat and supportive information in
conformity with requirements of this chapter and application checklists. The
preliminary plat shall be considered as being officially submitted only when
all of the information requirements of this chapter are complied with, the
appropriate fees paid, and escrows deposited.



      (4)   Where appropriate, the city staff will meet with the
applicant to discuss the request and related information. Upon receipt of all
the required information, the Zoning Administrator may forward the
application and required information to the appropriate city staff
consultants and city commissions for review and technical reports.



      (5)   The applicant shall supply proof of title in a form
approved by the City Attorney and the legal description of the property for
which the subdivision is requested and, as applicable, supply documented
authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with
the requested subdivision.



   (B)   Hearing.



      (1)   When an application is determined to be complete, the
Zoning Administrator shall schedule a public hearing for public review of the
preliminary plat. The hearing shall be held after adequate time has been
allowed for staff and advisory body review of the plat.



      (2)   The Planning Commission shall conduct the hearing and
report its findings and make recommendations to the City Council. Notice of
the hearing shall consist of a legal property description and a description
of the request and shall be published in the official newspaper at least ten
days prior to the hearing. Written notification of the hearing shall be
mailed at least ten days prior to all owners of land within 350 feet of the
boundary of the property in question. Failure of a property owner to receive
the notice shall not invalidate any such proceedings a set forth within this
chapter, provided a bona fide attempt has been made to comply with the notice
requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Timeline for review of the preliminary plat shall be in
accordance with M.S. § 462.356, as it may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   Technical assistance reports. The Zoning Administrator shall
instruct the appropriate staff to prepare technical reports where
appropriate, and provide general assistance in preparing a recommendation on
the action to the City Council.



   (D)   Review by other commissions or jurisdictions.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall refer copies of the
preliminary plat to the Parks and Recreation Commission and/or county, state,
or other public jurisdictions for its review and comments, where appropriate
and when required as determined by the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   In cases where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to a
county or state highway, the subdivision shall be subject to county and/or
state approval.



   (E)   Planning Commission action. The applicant or a designated
representative thereof shall appear before the Planning Commission at the
public hearing in order to answer questions concerning the proposed request.
The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council
following the close of the public hearing. If the Planning Commission has not
acted upon the preliminary plat, and the statutory review period will expire
before the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting, the Council
may act on the preliminary plat without the Planning Commission’s
recommendation.



   (F)   City Council action.



      (1)   Upon completion of the report and recommendation of the
Planning Commission, the request shall be placed on the agenda of the City
Council. The report and recommendations shall be entered in and made part of
the permanent written record of the Council meeting.



      (2)   Upon receiving the report and recommendation of the
Planning Commission and city staff, the City Council shall have the option to
set and hold a public hearing if deemed necessary or take action based on
Planning Commission recommendation. The Council shall make recorded findings
of fact and may impose any condition it considers necessary to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare. The Council shall adopt a resolution
approving or denying the request.



      (3)   The City Council shall approve or disapprove the
preliminary plat within 120 days following delivery of an application
completed in compliance with this chapter, unless the time for Council
decision has been extended pursuant to a written agreement with the applicant.



      (4)   The City Council may deny or require modifications to a
proposed preliminary plat when said plat fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter, or other applicable regulations, including the
zoning ordinance. In addition, the Council may deny or require modifications
to a proposed preliminary plat when the Council finds that despite technical
compliance with applicable ordinances, the plat design results in a
likelihood of extraordinary public costs for future maintenance or the
potential for public safety hazards that are not typical for subdivisions in
the city.



      (5)   The City Council reserves the right to deny or require
modifications to a preliminary plat if due regard is not shown for the
preservation of all natural features, such as topography, trees,
watercourses, scenic points, prehistoric and historical spots, and similar
community assets, which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and stability
to the proposed development of the property.



      (6)   If the preliminary plat is denied by the City Council,
the reasons for such action shall be recorded in the proceedings of the
Council. If the preliminary plat is approved, the approval shall not
constitute final acceptance of the layout. Subsequent approval will be
required of the engineering proposals and other features and requirements as
specified by this chapter to be indicated on the final plat. The Council may
require such revisions in the preliminary plat and final plat as it deems
necessary for the health, safety, general welfare, and convenience of the
city.



      (7)   Approval of a preliminary plat shall be null and void
unless within 360 days after receiving the last required approval of the
preliminary plat there shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator a final
plat or plats for all or a portion of the approved preliminary plat in
accordance with the conditions upon which approval was granted by the City
Council. An extension from this requirement may be granted by the Council
upon the reception of a request for extension. An extension shall be
requested in writing and filed with the city at least 14 days before the
voidance of the approved preliminary plat. There shall be no charge for the
filing of such request. The request for extension shall state facts showing a
good faith attempt was made to meet the final plat submission requirement.
Such request shall be presented to the Council for a decision.



      (8)   In the event of changes to city, county, state, and
federal development regulations, the city may require a preliminary plat to
be amended to incorporate applicable changes, except as may be prohibited by
Minnesota Statutes.



      (9)   Should the applicant desire to amend a preliminary plat
as approved, an amended preliminary plat may be submitted. The city may
require the applicant to follow the same procedure as a new preliminary plat.
No public hearing will be required for the amendment if the opinion of the
city is that the scope of the changes does not constitute a new preliminary
plat. A filing fee, as established by the city, shall be charged for
amendment processing.



      (10)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall not be
considered binding in regard to subsequent final plat contemplation.



§ 152.027  PROCEDURE FOR FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Filing.



      (1)   After the preliminary plat has been approved, the final
plat shall be submitted for review as set forth in the divisions which
follow. The city may agree to review the preliminary and final plat
simultaneously. The final plat shall incorporate all changes, modifications,
and revisions required by the city. Otherwise, it shall strictly conform to
the approved preliminary plat.



      (2)   The application for final plat shall be accompanied by
electronic and print copies of a preliminary plat and supportive information
in conformity with requirements of this chapter and application checklists.



   (B)   Approval of the City Council.



      (1)   The final plat shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for distribution to the City Council and appropriate city
staff. The city staff shall examine the final plat and prepare a
recommendation to the Council. The Council shall certify final approval
within 60 days if the applicant has complied with all conditions and
requirements of applicable regulations and conditions and requirements of the
preliminary plat approval.



      (2)   If approved, the final plat and development agreement
shall be approved by resolution, which resolution shall provide for the
acceptance of all agreements for basic improvements, public dedication, and
other requirements as indicated by the City Council. If disapproved, the
grounds for any refusal to approve a plat shall be set forth in the
proceedings of the Council and reported to the person or persons applying for
such approval.



   (C)   Development agreement. Before a final plat is approved by the
City Council and prior to recording or registering a final plat, the owner or
subdivider of the land covered by the plat shall execute and submit to the
Council an agreement, which shall be binding on his, her, or their heirs,
personal representatives, and assigns, which embodies the terms and
conditions of the approval given by the Council, including, but not limited
to, requirements set forth in this chapter and which controls the
installation of all required improvements. The agreement will require all
improvements in compliance with approved engineering standards and applicable
regulations. Said development agreement shall provide for the supervision and
inspection of the construction by the City Engineer and shall provide for the
fees and securities in connection to the improvements.



   (D)   Existing special assessments. When any existing special
assessments which have been levied against the property described are to be
divided and allocated to the respective lots in the proposed plat, city staff
shall:



      (1)   Estimate the clerical cost of preparing a revised
assessment role;



      (2)   File the same with the County Auditor; and



      (3)   Make such division and allocation.



   (E)   Recording final plat.



      (1)   If the final plat and development agreement are approved
by the City Council, the applicant shall record them with the County Recorder
within 100 days after the approval or approval of the final plat shall be
considered void, unless a request for a time extension is submitted in
writing and approved by the Council. The applicant shall, immediately upon
recording, furnish the Zoning Administrator with a print and reproducible
tracing of the final plat showing evidence of the recording.



      (2)   A final plat will not be released by the city for
recording purposes until the applicant has satisfied applicable ministerial
requirements of this chapter, including payment of fees, execution of a
developer’s agreement, deposit of surety, letters of credit, Mylar copies
of the final plat, easement and deed documents, and all other requirements of
approval by resolution.



      (3)   No building permits shall be let for construction of any
structure on any lot in the plat until the construction plans have been
approved by the city, the city has received evidence of the plat and
development agreement being recorded by the county and the provisions of the
subdivision’s development agreement have been satisfactorily met.



   (F)   Recording of multiple-phased plats. If a preliminary plat is
final platted in stages, unless otherwise provided for in the development
contract, all stages must be final platted into lots and blocks (not outlots)
within three years after the preliminary plat has been approved by the City
Council. If the final plats are not approved and recorded in accordance with
this time frame, the preliminary plat approval shall be considered void,
unless a request for time extension is submitted in writing and approved by
the Council prior to the expiration of the three-year period.



   (G)   Extension. Within 30 days of the deadline of recording of the
final plat, the applicant may file with the Zoning Administrator a written
request that said deadline be extended six months beyond the date the
extension is granted. The Zoning Administrator shall place the request on the
agenda of a regularly scheduled City Council meeting to be held within 30
days of the extension filing if in their opinion no change has occurred in
any land use restriction or the Comprehensive Plan, or any other official
control affecting the use, development density, lot size, lot layout, or
dedication or platting required or permitted by the preliminary plat.



DATA REQUIRED FOR PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS



§ 152.040  PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   The owner or subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat
together with any necessary supplementary information.



   (A)   Contents. The preliminary plat shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Proposed name of subdivision; names shall not duplicate
or too closely resemble names of existing subdivisions;



      (2)   Location of boundary lines in relation to a known
section, quarter section, or quarter- quarter section lines comprising a
legal description of the property;



      (3)   Names and addresses of the record fee owner;



      (4)   Scale of plat not less than one inch to 100 feet;



      (5)   Date and north point;



      (6)   Project narrative; and



      (7)   Certificate of survey signed by a registered land
surveyor and current within six months of plat application to include legal
description, all public utilities including pipe size, material type, depths,
location, and detail of private utilities or easements, any other easements
of record.



   (B)   Existing conditions plan.



      (1)   Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated
and to a close degree of accuracy;



      (2)   Existing zoning classifications for land within and
abutting the subdivision;



      (3)   Location right-of -way width, and names of existing or
planned streets, or other public ways, parks, and other public lands,
permanent buildings and structures, easements, school districts, section and
corporate lines within the plan and to a distance 350 feet beyond shall also
be indicated;



      (4)   Boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided
land, within 350 feet, identified by name and ownership, including all
contiguous land owned or controlled by subdivider;



      (5)   Topographic data, including contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet and all surface features and structures.
Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, delineated wetlands, power transmission
poles and lines, size, location, and elevation of all appurtenances of
existing public utilities and all quasi-public utilities, including the name
and operating authority of each utility, and other significant features shall
be shown. U.S.G.S. data shall be used for all topographic mapping where
feasible. (1929 sea level data shall be used for all topographic mapping.)
The flood elevation of all lakes, river, and wetlands shall also be shown;



      (6)   An accurate soil survey of the subdivision prepared by a
qualified person;



      (7)   Location and size of existing sewers, water mains,
culverts, storm sewer, or other underground facilities within the tract and
to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract. Such data as grades, invert
elevations and locations of catch basins, manholes, and hydrants shall be
shown only on request;



      (8)   A survey prepared by a qualified person identifying tree
coverage in the proposed subdivision in terms of type, weakness, maturity,
potential hazard, infestation, vigor, density, and spacing. Deciduous trees
that are less than six inches in diameter at a point five feet above natural
grade, or trees that are diseased or invasive as defined by the Department of
Natural Resources may be exempted from this survey; and



      (9)   Wetland data report shall be required and must consist
of a wetland delineation report which identifies all wetlands, ponds, lakes,
waterways, floodplains, and shorelines, and a wetland functional assessment
summary. The wetland data report must be submitted with the preliminary plat.



   (C)   Proposed design features.



      (1)   A proposed grading plan showing the present and existing
contours at two-foot contour interval, together with off-site existing
contours depicting drainage patterns entering the proposed site, within 200
feet or more of the proposed subdivision is required unless waived by the
City Engineer. If determined to be necessary by the City Engineer, one-foot
contours may be required for proposed grading plans in order to ensure
property drainage. High and low point elevations and emergency overflow
elevations and routes shall be provided. The proposed grading plan shall
demonstrate a design for the subdivision that respects the natural
topography, and preserves existing trees, wetlands, and other natural
features;



      (2)   Layout of proposed streets showing the right-of-way
widths, centerline gradients, typical cross-sections, and proposed names of
streets. The name of any street heretofore used in the county or its environs
shall not be used unless the proposed street is a logical extension of an
already named street, in which event the same name shall be used. Street
names conform to the master street name and numbering system as adopted;



      (3)   Locations and widths of proposed streets and pathways;



      (4)   Layout, numbers, and preliminary dimensions of lots and
blocks and dimensions of street frontage;



      (5)   Tabulation of the acreage of the full subdivision;



      (6)   Tabulation statement of the approximate square footage
and dimensions of the individual lots;



      (7)   Minimum front and side street building setback lines.
When lots are located on a curve, the width of the lot is measured at the
building setback line;



      (8)   For each lot, specify building type, finished floor
elevations, and lowest opening elevations.



      (9)   Areas, other than streets, alleys, pathways, and utility
easements intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use, including the
size of the area or areas in acres;



      (10)   Proposed location and routing of proposed sewer lines
and identification of gravity mains or forcemains;



      (11)   Proposed location and routing of proposed water mains;



      (12)   A vegetation preservation and protection plan that
shows those trees proposed to be removed, those to remain, the types and
locations of trees, and other vegetation that are to be planted;



      (13)   A stormwater management plan and erosion and sediment
control plan in accordance with the requirements of the city’s Design
Manual and per zoning ordinance Chapter 4.10; and



      (14)   Open space and landscaping plan.



   (D)   Other information.



      (1)   The applicant shall supply proof of title in a form
approved by the City Attorney and the legal description of the property for
which the subdivision is requested and, as applicable, supply documented
authorization from the owner(s) of the property in question to proceed with
the requested subdivision;



      (2)   Statement of the proposed use of lots stating type of
residential buildings with number of proposed dwelling units and type of
business or industry, so as to reveal the effect of the development on
traffic, fire hazards, and congestion of population;



      (3)   If any zoning changes are contemplated, the proposed
zoning plan for the areas;



      (4)   (a)   Where the subdivider owns property adjacent to
that which is being proposed for the subdivision, the Planning Commission
shall require that the subdivider submit a sketch plan of the remainder of
the property so as to show the possible relationships between the proposed
subdivision and the future subdivision; and



         (b)   In any event, all subdivisions shall be shown to
relate well with existing or potential adjacent subdivision.



      (5)   Where structures are to be placed on large lots (over
30,000 square feet), the preliminary plat shall indicate placement of
structures so that lots may be further subdivided;



      (6)   Where potential subdivision and use of excessively deep
(over 300 feet) lots exist, the preliminary plat shall indicate placement of
structures so that lots may be further subdivided;



      (7)   A copy of all proposed private restrictions and
covenants; and



      (8)   Other information as may be requested by the engineer,
surveyor, or Planning Commission.



§ 152.041  FINAL PLAT.



   The owner or subdivider shall submit a final plat together with any
necessary supplementary information.



   (A)   Contents. The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall
be prepared in accordance with provisions of state statutes and county
regulations, and the final plat shall contain the following information:



      (1)   Names of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate or
too closely approximate the name of any existing subdivision;



      (2)   Location by section, township, range, county, and state,
and including descriptive boundaries of the subdivision based on an accurate
traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must be mathematically
close;



      (3)   The location of monuments shall be shown and described
on the final plat. Locations of the monuments shall be shown in reference to
existing official monuments on the nearest established street lines,
including true angles, and distances to the reference points or monuments.
Permanent markers shall be placed at each corner of every block or portion of
a block, points of curvature and points of tangency of street lines, and at
each angle point on the boundary of the subdivision. A permanent marker shall
be deemed to be a steel rod or pipe, one-half inch or larger in diameter
extending at least two feet below the finished grade due to the difficulty
faced with frozen ground in the winter. In situations where conditions
prohibit the placing of markers in the locations prescribed above, offset
markers will be permitted. The exact locations of all markers shall be shown
on the final plat together with accurate interior angles, bearings, and
distances. Permanent monuments shall be placed at all quarter section points
within the subdivision or on its perimeter;



      (4)   Location of lots, streets, public highways, alleys,
parks, and other features, with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of
feet, with the length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other
information necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground shall be shown.
Dimensions shall be shown from all angle points of curve to lot lines;



      (5)   Lots shall be numbered clearly. Blocks are to be
numbered, with numbers shown clearly in the center of the block;



      (6)   The exact locations, widths, and names of all streets to
be dedicated;



      (7)   Location and width and intended use of all easements to
be dedicated;



      (8)   Name of fee owner and surveyor preparing the plat;



      (9)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically and in
feet per inch), date, and north point;



      (10)   Statement dedicating all streets, alleys, and other
public areas, utility and drainage easements not previously dedicated as
follows: streets alleys, and other public areas shown on this plat and not
heretofore dedicated to public use are hereby so dedicated; and



      (11)   An accompanying letter from the County Surveyor’s
office stating that the plat or land survey has been examined and approved.



   (B)   Certifications required.



      (1)   Notarized certification by owner and by any mortgage
bolder of record of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets
and other public areas;



      (2)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor to
the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or her and that
monuments and markers shown therein exist as located and that all dimensional
and geodetic details are correct;



      (3)   Certification showing that all taxes and special
assessments due on the property have been paid in full if requested by the
City Council or County Commissioners; and



      (4)   Space for certificates of approval and review to be
filled in by the signatures of the Chairperson of the City Planning
Commission and the Mayor and City Clerk.



         (a)   The form of certificate by the Planning Commission
is as follows:



 

Reviewed by the Planning Commission of the City of Monticello this ____ day
of ______, 20___.


Signed: __________________________


      Chairperson


Attest: ___________________________


      Secretary



 



         (b)   The form of approval of the City Council is as
follows:



 

Approved by the  City of Monticello, Minnesota this ____ day of ______,
20___.


Signed: __________________________


      Mayor


Attest: ___________________________


      City Clerk



 



   (C)   Recording required. A letter from the County Recorder’s
office stating the final plat has been recorded as approved by the City
Council shall be received by the Building Official’s office before any
building permits may be issued.



SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 152.055  CONFORMITY WITH OTHER STANDARDS.



   A proposed subdivision shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan, to
related policies adopted by the city, and to all other chapters of the
official code and zoning ordinance of the city. All subdivisions shall be
designed to the city’s current Design Manual and current city
specifications.



§ 152.056  INTERPRETATION OF REQUIREMENTS.



   The design features set forth in this section are minimum requirements.
The city may impose additional or more stringent requirements concerning lot
size, streets, and overall design as deemed appropriate considering the
property being subdivided.



§ 152.057  LAND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be
subdivided. No plan shall be approved if the site is not suitable for the
purposes proposed by reason of potential flooding, topography, or adverse
soil, rock formation, or wetlands.



   (B)   Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property shall not
be subdivided until all such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate
safeguards against such hazards are provided by the subdivision plan.



   (C)   Proposed subdivisions shall be coordinated with surrounding
jurisdictions and/or neighborhoods so that the city as a whole may develop
efficiently and harmoniously.



§ 152.058  BLOCKS.



   (A)   Block length. In general, intersecting streets determining
block lengths shall be provided at such intervals so as to serve
cross-traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. Where no existing
plats control, the blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed 1,320
feet, nor be less than 500 feet in length, except where topography or other
conditions justify a departure from this standard. In blocks longer than 800
feet, pathways and/or easements through the block may be required near the
center of the block.



   (B)   Block width. The width of the block shall normally be
sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended
for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered
most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for
off-street parking and deliveries.



§ 152.059  LOTS.



   (A)   Area/width. The minimum lot area and width shall not be less
than that established by the city zoning ordinance in effect at the time of
adoption of the subdivision.



   (B)   Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have
additional width to permit appropriate building setback from both streets as
required in the zoning ordinance.



   (C)   Side lot lines. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at
right angles to street lines or radial to curved street lines.



   (D)   Building sites. Unless approved by the City Engineer upon the
basis of plans submitted showing alternative acceptable surface drainage
measures, each lot shall provide an adequate building finished floor
elevation at least 12 inches above the top of the adjacent curb.



   (E)   Frontage. Every lot must have the minimum frontage on a
city-approved right-of-way other than an alley, as required in the city
zoning ordinance.



   (F)   Access. Each individual lot shall directly access a public
street.



   (G)   Setback lines. Setback or building lines shall be shown on all
lots intended for residential use and shall not be less than the setback
required by the city zoning ordinance, as may be amended.



   (H)   Watercourses. Watercourses shall be contained within abutting
lots. Watercourses shall be protected by easement to the anticipated high
water level (as determined by the city). Lots with easements protecting
watercourses shall have sufficient dimensions and area above the normal water
mark.



   (I)   Drainage. Lots shall be graded so as to provide drainage away
from building locations, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. A
grading plan shall be submitted showing all lot grading and drainage
provisions.



   (J)   Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be
shown for all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses,
topography, historic spots, or similar conditions which, if preserved, will
add attractiveness and stability to the proposed development.



   (K)   Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left
over after subdividing of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots or
outlot, rather than be allowed to remain as unusable parcels.



   (L)   Political boundaries. No subdivision shall extend over a
political boundary or school district line without document notification to
affected units of government.



   (M)   Frontage on two streets. Double frontage, or lots with
frontage on two parallel streets, shall not be permitted except where lots
back on major collector streets or county or state highways, or where
topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise unreasonable.
Such double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at least 20 feet
in order to allow space for screen plantings and/or buffering along the back
lot line. As part of the subdivision review process, the submission of a
buffering and screening plan may be required.



   (N)   Access to major collector streets.



      (1)   In the case where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to
a major collector street, said streets to be defined by the city’s
Comprehensive Plan, there shall be no direct vehicular access from individual
lots to such streets and roads. In the subdividing of small tracts of land
fronting on limited access highways or major collector streets where there is
no other alternative, a temporary access may be granted, subject to terms and
conditions defined by the City Council and applicable county or state
agencies.



      (2)   As neighboring land becomes subdivided and more
preferable access arrangements become possible, temporary access permits
shall become void.



      (3)   In cases where direct lot access to collector or
arterial streets is allowed, special traffic safety measures including, but
not limited to, provisions for on-site vehicle turnaround shall be required.



      (4)   In cases where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to a
county or state highway, the subdivision shall be subject to county and/or
state approval.



   (O)   Outlots. Lot remnants and future subdivision development
phases shall be platted as outlots. Typically, stormwater ponds shall be
contained within outlots. In cases where outlots are created or exist, their
area shall not be utilized in calculating minimums for buildable lot area
requirements. Outlots are also prohibited from qualifying for building
permits.



§ 152.060  STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   All streets shall be dedicated for public use except by approval
through planned unit development.



   (A)   Contiguous streets. Except for cul-de-sacs, streets shall
connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions,
or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall
be a reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts. The
arrangement of arterials and collector streets shall be considered in their
relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions,
to runoff of stormwater, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served and in
compliance with the Comprehensive Plan.



   (B)   Local streets and dead-end streets. Local streets should be so
planned as to discourage their use by non-local traffic. Dead-end streets are
prohibited, but cul-de-sacs shall be permitted where topography or other
physical conditions justify their use. Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than
600 feet, including a terminal turnaround which shall be provided at the
closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not less than 60 feet. A 45-foot
street surface radius will be required on all cul-de-sacs.



   (C)   Street plans for future subdivisions. Where the subdivision to
be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or intended for
development by the applicant, a tentative plan of a proposed future street
system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and submitted by the
applicant. When determined necessary by the city, the plan shall extend
streets and utilities to the property line of the adjacent tract and/or
tracts.



   (D)   Temporary cul-de-sacs. In those instances where a street is
terminated pending future extension in conjunction with future subdivision, a
temporary turnaround facility shall be provided at the closed end, in
conformance with cul-de-sac requirements.



   (E)   Subdivisions abutting major rights-of-way. Wherever the
proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to the right-of-way of a U.S. or
state highway or county thoroughfare, provision may be made for a marginal
access street approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of the
right-of-way; provided, that due consideration is given to proper circulation
design, or for a street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of
land between the street and right-of-way. The distance shall be determined
with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach
connections to future grade separations, or for lot depths.



   (F)   Pathways.



      (1)   Pathways shall be established in accordance with the
city’s Comprehensive Plan for Parks, Pathways, and Open Space, the city’s
Proposed Pathway Connections Guide, and in other areas where trails will
serve an important transportation or recreational purpose as recommended and
approved by the City Council.



      (2)   Trail corridors shall meet the following minimum
requirements unless otherwise permitted by the City Council:



         (a)   Dedicated to the city as an easement for public
trail purposes;



         (b)   Minimum 30-foot wide corridor;



         (c)   Minimum ten-foot wide surface;



         (d)   Compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA);



         (e)   No above-ground utilities (i.e., lift stations,
utility boxes) may be within the trail corridor;



         (f)   A landscape plan, including shrubs and trees,
shall be required on trail corridors located in the side yard of residential
lots. These landscape plantings shall be in addition to those required by
other sections of this code;



         (g)   Due regard shall be shown for trees, wetlands, and
other environmental features when locating and constructing trails; and



         (h)   Compliance with city, county, and state
transportation plans.



   (G)   Compliance with city, county, and state transportation plans.



      (1)   All subdivisions adjacent to or incorporating planned
streets which are identified in the city, county, and state transportation
plans, as amended, or existing streets shall comply with the minimum
right-of-way, surfaced width and design standards as outlined in the plans or
as recommended by the City Engineer.



      (2)   Infrastructure planning for safe routes to school shall
be incorporated into subdivision and pathway design in accordance with the
city’s Comprehensive Plan for Parks, Pathways, and Open Space, and the
city’s Proposed Pathway Connections Guide.



   (H)   Street design.



      (1)   The classification of street and determined right-of-way
width shall be determined by the city’s Comprehensive Plan.



      (2)   Minimum right-of-way widths, paving widths, angles of
intersection, curb radii, distances along sides of sight triangles,
horizontal alignments, vertical alignments, as well as maximum grades shall
be in accordance with the following table:



 


Street Design




Design Element

 

Minor Arterial

 

Major Collector

 

Minor Collector

 

Local Streets

 

Cul-de- Sacs

 

Pathway

 

Private Common Access**





Right-of-way width*
 

150 ft.

 

130 ft.

 

80 - 100 ft.

 

60 ft.

 

60 ft.

 

30 ft.

 

30 ft.



Paving width**
 

52 ft.

 

52 ft.

 

44 ft.

 

32 ft.

 

32 ft./45 ft. R

 

10 ft.

 

20 ft.



Maximum grade
 

7.5%

 

7.5%

 

7.5%

 

8%

 

8%

 

8%

 

8%



Minimum grade
 

0.50%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%

 

0.5%



Cross grade
 

2 - 3% crown

 

2% max

 

2 - 3% crown



Design section
 

10 ton

 

9 ton

 

9 ton

 

9 ton

 

9 ton

 

N/A

 

9 ton



Minimum angle intersection
 

90

 

90

 

80

 

70

 

70

 

N/A

 

70



Minimum curb radius
 

65 ft.

 

50 ft.

 

35 ft.

 

20 ft.

 

15 ft.

 

-

 

20 ft.



Grades for 25 feet before intersection
 

2.00%

 

2.00%

 

2.00%

 

2.00%

 

2.00%

 

2.00%

 

2.00%



Site triangles (distance along sides of) through street/stop street
 

690/30 ft.

 

490/30 ft.

 

490/30 ft.

 

250/30 ft.

 

250/30 ft.

 

N/A

 

250/30 ft.



Horizontal align (min. radius of centerline)
 

700 ft.

 

500 ft.

 

300 ft.

 

200 ft.

 

75 ft.

 

N/A

 

100 ft.



Vertical curves (min. sight distance)
 

650 ft.

 

475 ft.

 

325 ft.

 

250 ft.

 

100 ft.

 

N/A

 

300 ft.



NOTE: Alternate right-of-way width requirements may be allowed for specific
thoroughfares based on anticipated traffic volume, planned function of
street, jurisdiction of street, topography, and character of abutting land
use. Increased width will be set by the City Council upon recommendation of
the Planning Commission and City Engineer.


Street design requirements may be altered based on existing topographic
conditions as approved by the City Council upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission and City Engineer.


Based on future roadway functional classification


*As measured from face of curb to face of curb.


**The City Council may choose to approve private common access for PUD,
townhouse development, and the like, where appropriate. Standards for said
access, however, shall comply with minimums as outlined for minor streets
(except ROW) and all other provisions as required by the Council.




 



   (I)   Streets in flood hazard area. No street shall be approved if
its final surface is at a lower elevation than two feet below the regulatory
flood protection elevation. The City Council may require profiles and
elevations of finished streets for areas subject to flooding. Fill may be
used for streets, provided such fill does not unduly increase flood heights
and provided any such fill would not result in a stage increase violating the
requirements of applicable Minnesota Statutes, and any applicable
requirements imposed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency pursuant to
its rules and regulations. Drainage openings shall not restrict the flow of
water so as to unduly increase flood heights, and provided any such drainage
opening would not violate the requirements of applicable Minnesota Statutes,
as such chapters may be amended, supplemented, or replaced from time to time,
and any applicable requirements imposed by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency pursuant to its rules and regulations.



   (J)   Reverse curves. Minimum design standards for minor arterial
and major collector streets shall comply with Minnesota Department of
Transportation State Aid Standards.



   (K)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be prohibited except under conditions accepted by the City Council.



   (L)   Private streets. Private streets and reserve strips, except in
the case of planned unit developments, shall be prohibited and no public
improvements shall be approved for any private street. If any person applies
to subdivide or replat any land or parcels adjoining an existing private
street, they shall be required to dedicate the private street for public use
and schedule for improvement to public street standards at the time of final
plat.



   (M)   Street intersections. Intersections having more than four
corners shall be prohibited. Adequate land for future intersections and
interchange construction needs shall be dedicated. Angles formed by the
intersection of two streets shall comply with the provisions of division (H)
above.



   (N)   Street intersection offsets. Street jogs in local streets
shall have a centerline offset of not less than 150 feet. Street jogs in
arterial and collector streets shall have a centerline offset of not less
than 300 feet.



   (O)   Centerline curvature. The minimum horizontal curvature of
streets shall be in accordance with the MNDOT Highway Design Manual for the
type of street and design speed.



   (P)   Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where it
will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided, in which case the dedication of a half
street may be permitted. The probable length of time elapsing before
dedication of the remainder shall be considered in this decision. No
permanent street improvement shall be permitted within a half street
right-of-way. All lots having frontage or access solely from a half street
are prohibited from being eligible for building permits.



   (Q)   Dedication. All proposed streets shown on the subdivision
shall be in conformity to city, county, and state plans and standards and be
offered for dedication as public streets unless otherwise determined by the
City Council.



   (R)   Curbs and gutters. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be
required on all streets, unless otherwise directed by the City Council at the
time the subdivision is approved.



   (S)   Pavement. Pavement shall be installed in accordance with the
City Design Manual.



   (T)   Sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be provided on one side of all
roadways and shall be installed in accordance with standards and
specifications approved by the City Council.



   (U)   Private utilities. In all subdivisions, all telephone,
electric, and gas lines shall be placed underground within dedicated public
ways or recorded easements in such a manner as to not conflict with other
underground services. All underground installation of service lines within
street rights-of-way shall be completed in a manner that will not disturb
street surfacing.



§ 152.061  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Municipal utility improvements lying within public easements.
Municipal utility improvements lying within public easements shall become
city property without further notice or action, with exception of approved
private streets and private storm sewer systems.



   (B)   Disturbance of surface of easement area. If the surface of the
easement area of any portion thereof shall be disturbed by the operation,
maintenance, replacement, or removal activities in connection with the use of
the easement, said surface and improvements shall be promptly restored by the
fee owner of the easement area to their condition prior to the disturbance.



   (C)   Width and location. An easement for drainage and utilities at
least six feet wide shall be provided along each side line of each lot and an
easement of 12 feet wide shall be provided along the front and rear line of
each lot.



   (D)   Continuous utility easement locations. Drainage and utility
easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining properties.
These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed without the
approval of the City Council after a public hearing.



   (E)   Guy wires. Additional easements for pole guys should be
provided, where appropriate, at the outside of turns. Where possible, lot
lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior angle so that pole guys fall
alongside lot lines.



   (F)   Stormwater management ponds. New stormwater management ponds
that are constructed as part of subdivisions shall be covered by drainage and
utility easements or outlots that are dedicated to the city. At least one
side of a pond should be located adjacent to public right-of-way or an
approved maintenance access route and adequate easement dedicated to provide
access for future maintenance.



§ 152.062  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL DRAINAGE.



   (A)   Erosion and sediment control standards shall comply with the
city’s engineering design guidelines (“Design Manual”) as well as
Chapter 4 of the city’s zoning ordinance.



   (B)   The development shall conform to the natural limitations
presented by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil
erosion.



   (C)   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated
with the different stages of construction. Appropriate control measures shall
be installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion.



   (D)   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such
that adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one
period of time.



   (E)   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest
feasible period of time.



   (F)   In the event that permanent stabilization cannot be feasibly
obtained within 14 days after construction activity in that portion of the
site has temporarily or permanently ceased, and seven days if discharge
points are located within one mile of an impaired or special water body,
temporary soil stabilization BMPs must be implemented within the time frame.



   (G)   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be
set aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored
to a depth of four inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to the
soil quality prior to development.



§ 152.063  DRAINAGE.



   Drainage facilities shall be in accordance with the City Design Manual
and approved by the City Engineer.



§ 152.064  STEEP SLOPES.



   Subdivision design shall be consistent with limitations presented by
steep slopes. Subdivisions shall be designed so that no construction or
grading will be conducted on slopes steeper than 3:1 in grade, unless
otherwise approved by the City Engineer based on exiting topographic
conditions.



§ 152.065  WETLAND SYSTEMS.



   (A)   Where the subdivision of a lot or tract of land contains
drainageways, watercourses floodable areas, or wetlands, and thus may be
unsuitable for development, the areas shall be handled as follows.



      (1)   If the land is designated in whole or in part for public
use on an adopted plan of the city, the developer shall dedicate the land to
the city in accordance with § 152.080 through 152.085.



      (2)   If the land is not designated for public use on an
official plan, then the developer shall cause the land to be carried in a
private easement in the individual deeds affected thereby, and no permit
shall be issued for a building permit.



   (B)   The developer may submit a proposal for development indicating
how, through site and engineering design, the intent of this chapter will not
be violated if approved. In addition, the developer shall provide a surety
bond to the approving city to ensure that such will be done at a specific
time if approved.



   (C)   Any development or platting shall comply with the city’s
zoning ordinance and/or county shoreland regulations.



§ 152.066  OPEN SPACE AND LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   (1)   Every subdivision shall include a landscape plan that
identifies areas of public value, including significant views, natural
vegetation, or watercourses, even where the features may be located upon
private lots.



      (2)   The landscape plan shall provide for the addition of
trees, shrubs, and ground covers or grasses that achieve the following
objectives:



         (a)   Establish naturalized woodland areas in large
spaces;



         (b)   Establish naturalized areas around stormwater
ponds; and/or



         (c)   Establish naturalized woodland areas at the edges
of subdivisions, particularly in areas of land use changes or where the
subdivision abuts a major roadway, utility line, or railroad.



   (B)   The landscaping plan shall be accompanied by a reliable
estimate of installation costs. The subdivider shall provide a financial
security that guarantees live growth of the plant materials for one complete
year or two growing seasons from the date of installation. In the event the
plant materials under this plan must be replaced due to death, disease, or
other reason, the financial security shall be extended to cover an additional
two years from the date of replacement.



§ 152.067  PROTECTED AREAS.



   (A)   Where land proposed for subdivision is deemed environmentally
sensitive by the city due to the existence of wetlands, drainageways,
watercourses, floodable areas, or steep slopes, the design of the subdivision
shall clearly reflect all necessary measures of protection to ensure against
adverse environmental impact.



   (B)   Based upon the necessity to control and maintain certain
sensitive areas, the city shall determine whether protection will be
accomplished through lot enlargement and redesign or dedication of those
sensitive areas in the form of easements or outlots.



   (C)   In general, measures of protection shall include design
solutions which allow for construction and grading involving a minimum of
alteration to sensitive areas. Where these areas are to be incorporated into
lots within the proposed subdivision, the applicant shall be required to
demonstrate that the proposed design will not require construction on slopes
over 18%, or result in significant alteration to the natural drainage system
such that adverse impacts cannot be contained within the plat boundary.



§ 152.068  MAIL AND PAPER BOX LOCATIONS.



   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BOXES. All mail boxes, paper boxes, and advertising boxes,
wherein either mail is distributed, newspapers and magazines are distributed
or advertising placed for the use of residents of the city.



   (B)   Requirements; location of boxes on city streets. The placement
of all boxes shall comply with the following specifications.



      (1)   No boxes shall be placed within ten feet of any stone
sewer inlet or any fire hydrant.



      (2)   Where there is more than one house on a city block,
boxes shall be located in a cluster. Paper boxes and advertising boxes must
be located in the same cluster as the mail boxes. The clusters shall be
centrally located in the middle of the homes to be served.



      (3)   For cul-de-sacs, the cluster shall be placed a minimum
of ten feet from the beginning of the radius of the cul-de-sac.



PARKS, OPEN SPACE, AND PUBLIC USE



§ 152.080  DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The City Council recognizes that the preservation of land for
park, open space, and public use is essential to the health, safety, and
welfare of residents of the city. Therefore, pursuant to M.S. § 462.358,
subd. 2b, as it may be amended from time to time, the Council shall require
all developers requesting platting or replatting of land to be used for
residential purposes in the city to contribute an amount of land for public
park and pathway purposes. The location of the land shall be at the
discretion of the Council.



   (B)   The amount of the land shall be reasonably commensurate with
demand that the platting or replatting places on the city park system, as
described in the Comprehensive Plan. For purposes of this section, an amount
of land equal to 11% of the total gross land area of the plat shall be
presumptively defined as REASONABLY COMMENSURATE.



   (C)   In the event that the subdivider objects to the 11% standard,
the city shall, at the developer’s request and expense, conduct a specific
dedication study of the park system and the demand placed on the system by
the proposed plat. Prior to conducting the study, the city shall obtain a
waiver of statutory time lines for plat approval during the conduct of the
study. No approval of final plats, nor construction of any improvements,
shall occur until the park dedication study is completed. In lieu of land
dedication, the City Council may require a cash contribution in accordance
with state statutes or a combination of both. The Council’s decision on
land and/or cash shall be made following recommendations from the city’s
Park and Recreation Commission and staff, in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.



   (D)   In accordance with state statutes, where the City Council
determines that the park dedication requirements shall be paid in a cash
contribution, the amount of the contribution shall be based on the market
value of the raw land not later than at the time of final plat.



   (E)   The city may require that the subdivider provide an appraisal
or other comparable documentation to determine the market value. In the
alternative the city may, by ordinance, establish a fee per residential unit
that will meet the cash dedication requirement. The determination of the
appropriate fee calculation shall be made by the City Council.



   (F)   (1)   To be eligible for park dedication credit, the land
to be dedicated as a requirement of this section shall be useable,
developable land.



      (2)   The City Council shall not accept for credit against a
subdivider’s park dedication requirement any of the following:



         (a)   Delineated wetlands;



         (b)   Land within a designated floodplain;



         (c)   Land encumbered by a utility easement such as a
petroleum or electric power transmission line (except where such easement is
a standard platting requirement of the city pursuant to § 152.061, and where
the city determines that the land within the easement will be usable for
park, trail,



or open space purposes); or



         (d)   Land within a drainage easement or other land
required for stormwater treatment.



   (G)   The city may, at its discretion, accept lands in the above
categories for park dedication purposes if it deems the dedication to be of
public benefit. No credit shall be given against the subdivider’s park
dedication requirement, however, unless the city determines that the land
will be used for a specific public park, pathway, or open space purpose.



   (H)   Land dedicated for park purposes shall be transferred to the
city by warranty deed. The transfer of the land shall occur at the time of
recording of the final plat. For multiple-phased developments, all of the
park dedication land shown on the approved preliminary plat shall be
transferred to the city upon recording of the first final plat, in the form
of outlot(s) at the discretion of the city, and shall not be shown as
“park” on the plat. The development agreement may permit the phasing of
the land transfer.



   (I)   In addition, the development agreement shall grant the
subdivider a license to enter the park dedication land for the purposes of
required grading, seeding, or other work approved by the City Council.



   (J)   Parkland dedication requirements for planned unit developments
(PUDs) shall provide the minimum of 11% for park, open space, or public use
or cash in lieu of land per this chapter.



   (K)   The removal of trees, topsoil, storage of construction
equipment, burying of debris, or stockpiling of surplus soils is strictly
prohibited on land to be dedicated per this section.



   (L)   The subdivider shall provide the city with a certificate of
survey that shows all features of the land to be dedicated.



   (M)   Agreements in this section shall be made as part of the
development agreement presented for approval with the final plat. Failure of
the City Council and subdivider to reach agreement regarding he matters in
this section shall constitute the basis for consideration to deny the plat.



§ 152.081  CASH CONTRIBUTION.



   All monies collected from cash contributions shall be placed in a
special fund from which only those public uses as listed in above may be
constructed or improved or land for those same uses may be acquired.



§ 152.082  COMBINATION OF LAND DEDICATION AND CASH CONTRIBUTION.



   A combination of land and cash may be required and approved by the City
Council in satisfaction of the requirements of this chapter. In the event a
combination of land and cash is required, the amount of land to be dedicated
shall be credited against the total park dedication requirements and the
remaining cash contribution shall be based on the percent of the remaining
unfulfilled park dedication obligation.



§ 152.083  DELAYED DEDICATION PAYMENT.



   (A)   Upon petition by the developer, the City Council may approve a
delay in the actual dedication of the cash required in lieu of land until
such time as development occurs on the property being platted, provided that
a proper legal agreement is executed guaranteeing such dedication.



   (B)   Delayed dedication payment may be subject to interest payment
per year as set by the Council.



§ 152.084  PURCHASE OR CONDEMNATION OF LANDS.



   (A)   Where a proposed park, playground, or other recreational area,
proposed school site, or other public ground that has been indicated in the
official map and/or master plan is located in whole or in part within a
proposed subdivision, the proposed public site shall be designated as such
and should be dedicated to the city, school district, or other proper
governmental unit.



   (B)   If the subdivider chooses not to dedicate an area in excess of
the land required hereunder for such proposed public site, the City Council
may consider acquiring the site through purchase or condemnation.



§ 152.085  LOCATION AND CONFIGURATION OF DEDICATION.



   In such cases where the developer is required to dedicate land area,
the City Council shall have the right to determine the geographic location
and configuration of the dedication.



BASIC REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS



§ 152.100  GENERAL.



   (A)   Development agreement.



      (1)   Before a final plat is approved by the City Council and
prior to recording or registering a final plat, the owner or subdivider of
the land covered by the plat shall execute and submit to the Council an
agreement, which shall be binding on his, her, or their heirs, personal
representatives, and assigns, which embodies the terms and conditions of the
approval given by the Council, including, but not limited to, requirements
set forth in this chapter and which controls the installation of all required
improvements. The agreement will require all improvements in compliance with
approved engineering standards and applicable regulations. Said development
agreement shall provide for the supervision and inspection of the
construction by the City Engineer and shall provide for the fees and
securities in connection to the improvements.



      (2)   The owner or subdivider shall cause no private
construction to be made on the plat or file or cause to be filed any
application for building permits for the construction until all improvements
required under this chapter have been made or arranged for in the following
manner, as respects the streets to which the lots sought to be constructed
have access.



   (B)   Trunk utility area fees. As a condition to subdivision plat
approval, subdivider shall pay both a trunk storm sewer, trunk sanitary sewer
fee, and a trunk water main fee to the city to fund the trunk storm sewer,
trunk sanitary sewer, and trunk water main improvements required by the
proposed development.  The city shall establish the trunk fees by
ordinance.  The city shall incorporate these trunk fees into the development
agreement with the subdivider, which shall be collected with any new
subdivisions in accordance with the public improvement financing policy of
the city, as may be amended.



   (C)   Securities. In order to cover the legal, engineering, and
administrative costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the
review and approval of the subdivision and the inspection of the actual
installation and construction of the improvements, the owner or subdivider,
shall, before recording the final plat, deposit with the city an escrow
amount, which shall be based on a percentage of the engineer’s estimate of
the cost of the construction of the improvements. The percentages shall be
set in the city fee schedule.



   (D)   Construction plans. Construction plans and specification for
the required improvements conforming in all respects with all ordinances of
the city shall be prepared at the expense of the owner or subdivider by a
professional engineer registered by the state. Such plans and specifications
shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall become a part of the
development agreements. Prints of said plans shall be filed with the city, as
required by the City Engineer.



§ 152.101  CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   No final plat shall be approved by the City Council
without first receiving a report from the City Engineer certifying that the
improvements described herein, together with the agreements and documents
required herein, meet the minimum requirements of all applicable ordinances.



      (2)   Drawings showing all improvements as built shall be
filed with the City Clerk.



   (B)   No final plat shall be approved by the City Council on land
subject to flooding or containing poor drainage facilities and on land which
would make adequate drainage of the streets and lots impossible. However, if
the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, make the area completely safe for residential occupancy and
provide adequate street and lot drainage and conform to applicable
regulations of other agencies such as the U.S. Corps of Engineers or the
Department of Natural Resources, the final plat of the subdivision may be
approved.



   (C)   In addition, the plats may not be approved if the cost of
providing municipal services to protect the floodplain area would impose an
unreasonable economic burden upon the city.



   (D)   As a condition of final plat approval, the development
agreement shall make provision in the manner hereinafter set forth for the
installation, at the sole expense of the subdivider, of such improvements as
shall be required by the city, which improvements may include, but are not
limited to items included in division (G) below. The installation of said
improvements shall be in conformity with city approved construction plans and
specifications and all applicable city standards and sections of this code.
The subdivider shall not commence with construction of improvements until
financial assurances are provided as contained in the development agreement.



   (E)   Developer installed improvements.



      (1)   No owner or subdivider shall be permitted to start work
on any improvements without providing the city a financial security, in a
form acceptable to the city and consistent with city ordinance or policy as
adopted by the City Council, guaranteeing the improvement will be installed
in accordance with all laws, rules, regulations, and policies as approved by
the city. The amount of the financial security shall be 125% of the
engineer’s estimate of the total cost of the improvements to be installed,
as verified by the City Engineer and set forth in the development agreement.
In the event the required improvements are not completed within the specified
timeline, all amounts held in the development agreement as security may be
drawn upon by the city and applied by the city to the cost of completing the
required improvements. If the available securities are not sufficient to
complete the required improvements, the necessary additional cost to the city
shall be assessed against the subdivision.



      (2)   Securities may be reduced from time to time prior to
improvement acceptance upon submission of formal request by the owner or
subdivider. No reduction of security shall be authorized unless the
improvements associated with the reduction request have been inspected by the
city and found to be in compliance with this chapter and satisfactory
evidence of contractor payment has been provided.



      (3)   Prior to any public improvement being accepted by the
city, the owner or subdivider shall post a maintenance bond or other security
in a form acceptable to the city naming the city as obligee in an amount
deemed appropriate by the City Council to insure the maintenance of the
improvements for a period of 24 months from the date of acceptance or
approval by the city.



      (4)   The owner or sudivider shall continue to be responsible
for defects, deficiencies, and damage to improvements during development of
the subdivision. No inspection approval of release or reduction of funds from
the security as to any component or category shall be deemed to be city final
approval of the improvements or otherwise release the owner or subdivider of
its obligation relating to the completion of the improvement within the final
subdivision until a release on all improvements and maintenance is issued by
the City Council declaring that all improvements have in fact been
constructed as required.



      (5)   The applicant shall provide to the city grading and
utility as-built drawings of all improvements.



      (6)   The owner or subdivider engaged in the development of
lands and properties may request city participation in the payment of the
costs of certain improvements. City participation shall be negotiated with
the subdivider and established by the City Council pursuant to entering into
a development agreement. The Council shall on a case-by-case basis determine
infrastructure impact on areas outside the subdivision. City required
oversizing of infrastructure beyond the appropriate standard residential or
commercial equivalent shall be eligible for funding by the city. Source of
city funding shall not be a determinate of financial participation.



      (7)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit or prevent the
city from establishing a fee, charge, or assessment against the subsequent
subdivider/developers which benefit from the prior improvements for the
purpose of maintaining or upgrading the public improvements.



      (8)   All of the required improvements to be installed under
the provisions of this subchapter shall be inspected during the course of
their construction by the City Engineer. All of the inspection costs pursuant
thereto shall be paid by the owner or subdivider in the manner prescribed in
§ 152.100(C).



      (9)   The city shall have the right to install any or all of
the required improvements as it may elect and upon such terms and conditions
as it may deem appropriate under the circumstances.



   (F)   City installed improvements.



      (1)   Any person desiring to have improvements installed may
request the city to install the improvements, if the request is accompanied
by a written petition signed by 100% of the landowners pursuant to M.S. Ch.
429, as it may be amended from time to time, and a waiver of assessment
appeal. Acceptance of the request shall be discretionary on the part of the
City Council, based on the benefit to the property owners, and subject to the
following conditions and as authorized by state law.



      (2)   (a)   Prior to the making of such required
improvements, the City Council shall require the owner or subdivider to pay
to the city an amount equal to a minimum of 25% and up to 100% of the
estimated total cost of the improvements, including not only construction but
all indirect costs.



         (b)   The actual percentage to be determined by the city
in each case based on its review of the following:



            1.   The financial background of the developer;



            2.   The normalcy of the unit charge for putting
in the improvement;



            3.   An evaluation of the cost recovery potential
through the sale of the land;



            4.   The likelihood of success of the development;
and



            5.   Developer default on any outstanding
assessment payment in the past 12 months.



      (3)   This payment must be made to the city prior to the City
Council adopting the resolution ordering the project.



      (4)   If approved by the City Council, the city may cause the
improvements to be made and special assessments for all costs of the
improvements to be levied on the benefitted land, except any land which is or
shall be dedicated to the public. The total project cost, less the deposit,
will be assessed 100% against the benefitted property payable in not more
than ten annual installments with interest at a rate of at least 1.5%
(rounded up to the nearest 0.25%) over the rate paid on bonds issued to
finance the improvements or, if financed internally, over the then equivalent
rate the city determined it would have to pay on bonds issued at that time;
provided, however, at the entire assessment balance outstanding against a
given parcel is to be paid in full prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy permit for principal use of new construction on that parcel or
within 180 days after a building permit for new construction is issued,
whichever comes first.



      (5)   Water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer lateral lines
shall be assessed 100% against the benefitted property within the proposed
subdivision. These assessments shall be made on a residential housing unit
basis.



      (6)   Water, sanitary, and storm sewer trunk fees will be due
at the time of platting or in cases where properties have already been
platted, applicable trunk fees will be collected at such time a new building
permit is issued.



      (7)   (a)   The cost of constructing permanent streets,
including curb and gutter, will be 100% assessed against benefitted property
based on front footage. Corner lots shall be assessed for frontage only with
no charge made for the long side lot footage. Costs resulting from
intersections and side lot footage shall be included in the total amount to
be assessed and apportioned over the net assessable footage.



         (b)   In the case of odd-shaped lots, the footage shall
be measured at the building setback line; however, in no event shall the
assessable footage be less than the minimum lot width as required by the city.



      (8)   In the event a building permit is applied for prior to
completion of installation of the improvements, an escrow payment to the city
shall be deposited in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated total
assessment.



      (9)   Upon completion of the project and determination of the
actual cost to be assessed, any overcharge will be refunded and any
additional cost will be due the city within 30 days of notification of the
additional cost. If, for any reason, subsequent to having made the advance
payment to the city the developer should withdraw from the project, the city
is entitled to retain an amount equal to the city’s cost related to the
project to that time, and the balance shall be refunded to the developer.



      (10)   At the request of the owner or subdivider, the city may
agree to spread all of the assessments against the subdivision on a per lot
or residential housing unit basis rather than on the various methods set
forth in divisions (F)(5), (F)(6), or (F)(7) above.



      (11)   In all cases, the procedure for local improvements
prescribed in M.S. Ch. 429, as it may be amended from time to time, shall be
followed.



      (12)   The requirements of this subchapter are intended to be
compatible with the assessment policy in this division (F).



   (G)   Minimum improvements.



      (1)   It is hereby the policy of the city to, as soon as
practicable after the approval of the proposed plat, require the installation
of all of the following improvements within the subdivision.



      (2)   In addition to those below, additional improvements may
be required by development agreement:



         (a)   Trunk and lateral sanitary sewer;



         (b)   Trunk and lateral water main;



         (c)   Storm drainage facilities;



         (d)   Stormwater maintenance;



         (e)   Streets;



         (f)   Concrete curb and gutter;



         (g)   Street traffic control devices;



         (h)   Lot grading;



         (i)   Trail development;



         (j)   Sidewalk development;



         (k)   Electricity (within one-fourth mile);



         (l)   Natural gas (within one-fourth mile);



         (m)   Communications (within one-fourth mile);



         (n)   Water shut-off boxes;



         (o)   Street striping and signing;



         (p)   Streetlights;



         (q)   Landscaping;



         (r)   Monuments;



         (s)   As-built plans; and



         (t)   Easement and deeds



§ 152.102  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded, including
the subgrade of the areas to be paved, in accordance with standards and
specifications as approved by the City Engineer.



   (B)   All streets to be paved shall be of an overall width in
accordance with the standards and specifications as approved by the City
Engineer.



   (C)   Curb and gutter will be constructed as required by the
standards and specifications as approved by the City Engineer.



   (D)   If deemed necessary by the City Engineer and City Council, the
owner or subdivider shall install street traffic control signals. The
signalization shall be constructed in conjunction with the street unless the
Council grants a waiver to delay signalization. In the event such waiver is
granted, the owner or subdivider shall deposit with the city a sum of money
equivalent to the engineer’s estimated cost of the signalization.



   (E)   Street trees and boulevard sodding shall be planted in
conformance with the standards and specifications as approved by the City
Engineer.



   (F)   Street signs shall be installed in conformance with the
standards and specifications as approved by the City Engineer.



   (G)   Street lights shall be installed in conformance with the
standards and specifications as approved by the City Engineer.



   (H)   Mailbox clusters shall in installed in conformance with the
standards and specifications as approved by the City Engineer.



§ 152.103  SANITARY SEWER AND WATER DISTRIBUTION IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Sanitary sewers shall be installed as may be required by
standards and specifications approved by the City Engineer.



   (B)   Sanitary sewer mains and service connections stubbed in to the
property line shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision and
other such properties served by the subdivision sewer main, when the location
of such plat is within an area of the city which is either being assessed for
sanitary sewer service or for which such service has been authorized by the
City Council.



   (C)   Water mains and service connections stubbed in to the property
line shall be installed to serve all lots in the subdivision and other such
properties served by the subdivision water main when the location of such
plat is within an area of the city which is either being assessed for water
service or for which such service has been authorized by the City Council.



   (D)   City water facilities, including pipe fittings, hydrants, and
the like, shall be installed as may be required by standards and
specifications approved by the City Council. Where city water facilities are
not available for extension into the proposed subdivision, the Council may by
ordinance grant approval for such water facilities to serve all properties
within a subdivision where a complete and adequate neighborhood water
distribution system is designed in conjunction with the subdivision and
complete plans for the system are submitted for approval of the Council.



   (E)   Where city sewer and water facilities are not available for
extension into proposed subdivision, the City Council may permit the use of
individual water and sewer systems in accordance with appropriate state
regulations.



§ 152.104  GRADING, DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   Storm drainage.



      (1)   A system of drainage shall be provided that will conform
and implement the city’s comprehensive stormwater plan.



      (2)   Storm sewers, culverts, stormwater inlets, and other
drainage facilities will be required where they are necessary to ensure
adequate stormwater drainage for the subdivision. Where required, the
drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications as adopted by the City Council.



   (B)   Stormwater maintenance. Upon successful establishment of
permanent erosion control facilities the subdivider shall safeguard the storm
sewer system from excess siltation caused by construction until full buildout
within a subdivision, including the sodding. The subdivider shall clean all
storm sewers and shall also remove silt from all ponding areas which received
runoff from the development as well as all temporary erosion control devices
(i.e., silt fence).



   (C)   Lot grading. All lots shall be graded in accordance with the
final grading plan. In addition, erosion control measures shall be followed
to eliminate erosion. Upon completion of the grading, at least four inches of
topsoil shall be applied to all exposed ground areas. And said areas shall be
landscaped in accordance with the final landscape plan.



§ 152.105  UTILITIES.



   All necessary utility easements must be recorded prior to utility
installation.



   (A)   Electricity. The subdivider shall be responsible for providing
electric service to the plat. Whenever possible, a joint trench shall be
utilized for small utilities (cable, fiber, gas, electric, telephone).



   (B)   Communications. The subdivider shall be responsible for
providing phone service to the plat. Whenever possible, a joint trench shall
be utilized for small utilities (cable, fiber, gas, electric, telephone).



   (C)   Natural gas. The subdivider shall be responsible for providing
natural gas service to the plat. Whenever possible, a joint trench shall be
utilized for small utilities (cable, fiber, gas, electric, telephone).



§ 152.106  MONUMENT AND SURVEY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Official monuments, as designated and adopted by the County
Surveyor’s office and approved by the County District Court for use as
judicial monuments, shall be set at each corner or angle on the outside
boundary of the final plat or in accordance with a plan as approved by the
City Engineer. The boundary line of the property to be included with the plat
to be fully dimensioned; all angles of the boundary excepting the closing
angle to be indicated; all monuments and surveyor’s irons to be indicated,
each angle of the point of the boundary perimeter to be so monumented.



   (B)   Proper survey monumentation shall be placed at each lot corner
and points of curvature and tangency along street rights-of-way. All Unites
States, state, county, or other official bench marks, monuments, or
triangular stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position and shall be recorded on the plat. All lot and block
dimensions shall be shown on the plat and all necessary angles pertaining to
the lots and block, as an aid to future surveys, shall be shown on the plat.



   (C)   To ensure that all irons and monuments are correctly in place
following the final grading of a plat, a security shall be required until a
certificate from the surveyor has been provided to the city verifying the
placement of all monuments in accordance with this section.



§ 152.107  PATHWAYS.



   (A)   Trail development.



      (1)   Trail improvements shall be installed as shown on the
final plat and/or master trail plan.



      (2)   All accessible bikeway/walkway trailways shall be
constructed per the standard detail plats approved by the City Engineer.



      (3)   Grades and specifications shall be as approved by the
City Engineer and shall meet all city, state, and federal requirements.



   (B)   Sidewalks.



      (1)   All single-family subdivisions shall have not less than
a six-foot-wide concrete sidewalk on at least one side of each through street
or anticipated through street to provide for safe pedestrian traffic.



      (2)   All multi-family subdivisions shall have concrete
sidewalks not less than six feet wide on both sides of the main public street
spine, unless otherwise approved by City Council. Sidewalks may be required
on culs-de-sac.



      (3)   All sidewalks shall be located within the road
right-of-way. Wherever possible, placement of the sidewalk within the
right-of-way should allow for a minimum of a one-foot separation between the
edge of the sidewalk and the residential property line.



      (4)   Cost of sidewalk construction within the subdivision
shall be borne by the subdivider and not eligible for credit against park and
trail dedication fees.



      (5)   The design must meet current standards of the city,
comply with the Americans for Disabilities Act (ADA), and be shown on the
preliminary plat for approval. All sidewalks required by the city shall be
constructed as shown on the cities standard detail plates.



§ 152.108  OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Water shutoff boxes. The water shut-off boxes shall be
adjusted at the time the final boulevard grade is established. Water shut-off
boxes shall remain visible after the boulevard sod is installed.



   (B)   Easement acquisition and deed. Prior to the time of
construction, the owner or subdivider shall obtain and supply all easements
and deeds required for the project. At the time the project is complete and
turned over to the city, all easements not dedicated on the final plat shall
be deeded to the city in a separate recordable document.



   (C)   As-built plans. Upon completion of installation of all
required improvements, the subdivider shall file with the city copies of
plans and specifications showing all improvements as finally constructed and
installed in both digital and paper form as required by the City Engineer.
Such as-built drawings shall be certified to be true and accurate by the
registered engineer responsible for the installation of the improvements.



REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS AND CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS



§ 152.120  REGISTERED LAND SURVEYS.



   It is the intention of this subchapter that all registered land surveys
in the city should be presented to the Planning Commission in the form of a
preliminary plat in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter
for preliminary plats and that the Planning Commission shall first approve
the arrangement, sizes, and relationship of proposed tracts in such
registered land surveys and that tracts to be used as easements or roads
should be so dedicated. Unless a recommendation and approval have been
obtained from the Planning Commission and City Council respectively in
accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter, building permits
will be withheld for buildings on tracts which have been so subdivided by
registered land surveys, and the city may refuse to take over tracts as
streets or roads or to improve, repair, or maintain any such tracts unless so
approved.



§ 152.121  CONVEYANCE BY METES AND BOUNDS.



   (A)   No conveyance in which the land conveyed is described by metes
and bounds shall be made or recorded if the parcels described in the
conveyance are five acres or less in area and 300 feet or less in width
unless the parcel was a separate parcel of record at the effective date of
this chapter.



   (B)   Building permits will be withheld for buildings or tracts
which have been subdivided and conveyed by this method, and the city may
refuse to take over tracts as streets or roads or to improve repair, or
maintain any such tracts.



FEES



§ 152.135  BASE FEE PER APPLICATION.



   To defray administrative costs for processing of subdivision
applications, variances, or appeals, a base fee as adopted by resolution
shall be paid by all applicants.



§ 152.136  STAFF AND CONSULTANT FEE.



   (A)   In order to defray the additional cost of processing the
applications, all applicants shall pay the total cost of staff and/or
consulting time spent exclusively in producing materials for the
applicant’s request plus all material cost for the request.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      MATERIALS. Includes, but not be limited to, maps, graphs, charts,
drawings, and the like, and all printing or reproduction of same.



      STAFF AND/OR CONSULTING TIME. Includes any time spent in either
researching for or actual production of materials.



   (C)   The hourly rate for staff and/or consulting time shall be
established and made available to the applicant by the City Clerk prior to
production of any materials, and the applicant shall be given a reasonable
estimate of projected time and/or material costs.



§ 152.137  PAYMENT.



   (A)   Fees for application shall be payable at the time applications
are filed with the City Clerk and are not refundable unless application is
withdrawn prior to start of review for referral to the Planning Commission. A
deposit to cover staff or consulting time and materials will be established
as adopted by resolution and required by the City Clerk at the time the base
fee is paid. Any portion of the deposit not spent to defray the
above-mentioned costs will be refunded to the applicant within 90 days after
the application process is completed.



   (B)   Fees as established by the development agreement are payable
per the terms and conditions as assigned by the development agreement.



VIOLATIONS



§ 152.150  SALE OF LOTS FROM UNRECORDED PLATS.



   It shall be unlawful to sell, trade, or otherwise convey or offer to
sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or
in conformity with, any plan, plat, or replat of any subdivision or area
located within the jurisdiction of this chapter unless the plan, plat , or
replat shall have first been recorded in the office of the County Register of
Deeds.



Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.151  RECEIVING OR RECORDING UNAPPROVED PLATS.



   It shall be unlawful to receive or record in any public office any
plans, plats, or replats of land laid out in building lots and streets,
alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to public or
private use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or
adjacent thereto and located within the jurisdiction of this chapter unless
the same shall bear thereon, by endorsement or otherwise, the approval of the
City Council.



Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.152  MISREPRESENTATION AS TO CONSTRUCTION, SUPERVISION, OR INSPECTION
OF IMPROVEMENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation owning an
addition or subdivision of land within the city to represent that any
improvement upon any of the streets, alleys, or avenues of the addition or
subdivision or any sewer in the addition or subdivision has been constructed
according to the plans and specifications approved by the City Council or has
been supervised or inspected by the city when the improvements have not been
so constructed, supervised, or inspected.



Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   Anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished not more than the maximum
penalty for a misdemeanor as prescribed by state law. Each month during which
compliance is delayed shall constitute a separate offense.



CHAPTER 153:  ZONING



Section



   153.01   Adopted by reference



§ 153.01  ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The city’s zoning code, copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk, is adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 


Ord. No.

 

Date Passed

 

Description





420
 

1-10-2005

 
Cable system franchise agreement with Charter Communications for 15 years


455
 

3-12-2007

 
Electric utility franchise agreement with Northern States Power, d/b/a XCEL
Energy


456
 

3-12-2007

 
Electric utility franchise agreement with Northern States Power, d/b/a XCEL
Energy


498
 

6-8-2009

 
Electric utility franchise agreement with Wright- Hennepin Cooperative
Electric Association


499
 

6-8-2009

 
Electric utility franchise agreement with Wright- Hennepin Cooperative
Electric Association


500
 

6-8-2009

 
Natural gas franchise agreement with CenterPoint Energy Minnesota Gas


514
 

5-10-2010

 
Cable system franchise agreement with Fibernet Monticello for a period of 15
years


537
 

9-26-2011

 
Cable system franchise agreement with Bridgewater Telephone, d/b/a TDS
Telecom to expire on 3-29-2020


712
 

2-11-2019

 
Cable system franchise agreement with CC VIII Operating LLC l/k/a Charter
Communications for 15 years




TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS ...................................................................................... 1
1.1 Title .......................................................................................................................................... 1
1.2 Authority .................................................................................................................................. 1
1.3 Ordinance Purpose ................................................................................................................... 1
1.4 Effective Date ........................................................................................................................... 2
1.5 Applicability ............................................................................................................................. 2
1.6 Relation to the Comprehensive Plan ........................................................................................ 2
1.7 Relationship to Other Laws and Agreements ........................................................................... 2
(A) Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits ...................... 2
(B) Conflict with Private Agreements ........................................................................... 3
(C) Conflict Between Standards in this Ordinance ........................................................ 3
1.8 Transitional Regulations .......................................................................................................... 4
(A) Purpose .................................................................................................................... 4
(B) Violations Continue ................................................................................................. 4
(C) Uses, Structures, and Lots Rendered Nonconforming ............................................. 5
(D) Existing Legal Nonconformities .............................................................................. 5
(E) Processing of Applications Commenced or Approved Under Previous Ordinances ............................................................................................................... 5
1.9 Severability .............................................................................................................................. 6
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES .............................................. 7
2.1 Purpose ..................................................................................................................................... 7
2.2 Summary of Decision Making and Review Bodies .................................................................. 7
(A) Summary Table of Decision-Making and Review Bodies ...................................... 7
(B) City Council ............................................................................................................ 8
(C) Planning Commission .............................................................................................. 9
(D) Parks Commission ................................................................................................... 9
(E) Board of Adjustment and Appeals ......................................................................... 10
(F) Industrial and Economic Development Committee ............................................... 11
(G) Economic Development Authority (EDA) ............................................................ 11
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
Page ii City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(H) Community Development Department .................................................................. 11
2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements ...................................................................... 12
(A) Applicability .......................................................................................................... 12
(B) Authority to File Applications ............................................................................... 13
(C) Application Submission Schedule ......................................................................... 13
(D) Application Contents ............................................................................................. 13
(E) Application Acceptance ......................................................................................... 14
(F) Simultaneous Processing of Applications .............................................................. 15
(G) Pre-application Conferences .................................................................................. 15
(H) Fees ........................................................................................................................ 15
(I) Public Notification ................................................................................................. 16
(J) Continuation of Public Hearings ........................................................................... 18
(K) Withdrawal of an Application ............................................................................... 18
(L) Required Action Deadline ..................................................................................... 18
(M) Environmental Review .......................................................................................... 18
(N) Reconsideration of Land Use Approval Applications ........................................... 19
2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements ........................................................................ 19
(A) Comprehensive Plan Amendments ........................................................................ 19
(B) Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments ........................................ 21
(C) Variances ............................................................................................................... 23
(D) Conditional Use Permits ........................................................................................ 26
(E) Interim Use Permits ............................................................................................... 31
(F) Site Plan Submittals ............................................................................................... 35
(G) Appeal of Administrative Decisions ...................................................................... 42
(H) Building Permits .................................................................................................... 43
(I) Certificates of Occupancy...................................................................................... 45
(J) Sign Permits ........................................................................................................... 46
(K) Temporary Use Permits ......................................................................................... 48
(L) Administrative Home Occupation Permits ............................................................ 51
(M) Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Permit ..................................................... 54
(N) Driveway Permits .................................................................................................. 58
(O) Planned Unit Developments .................................................................................. 61
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS ........................................................................................... 77
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page iii
3.1 General Provisions ................................................................................................................. 77
(A) Adoption of Zoning Map ....................................................................................... 77
(B) Types of Zoning Districts ...................................................................................... 77
(C) District Boundaries ................................................................................................ 77
(D) Zoning Classifications for Newly Annexed Property ............................................ 77
3.2 Districts Established ............................................................................................................... 78
(A) Establishment of Base Districts ............................................................................. 78
(B) Establishment of Overlay Districts ........................................................................ 78
(C) Classification of Districts ...................................................................................... 79
(D) Organization of Base Zoning District Regulations ................................................ 79
(E) Diagrams and Photographs for Illustrative Purposes Only .................................... 79
3.3 Common District Requirements ............................................................................................. 79
(A) Building within Public Easements Prohibited ....................................................... 79
(B) Outlots ................................................................................................................... 79
(C) Principal Buildings ................................................................................................ 79
(D) Common Yard and Height Requirements .............................................................. 80
3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts .......................................................................................... 83
(A) General Purpose .................................................................................................... 83
(B) Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts ............................ 83
(C) A-O: Agricultural Open Space District ................................................................. 85
(D) R-A: Residential Amenities District ...................................................................... 87
(E) R-1: Single Family Residence District .................................................................. 89
(F) R-2: Single and Two Family Residence District ................................................... 91
(G) T-N: Traditional Neighborhood Residence District .............................................. 93
(H) R-3: Medium Density Residence District .............................................................. 95
(I) R-4: Medium-High Density Residence District..................................................... 99
(J) M-H: Manufactured Home Park District ............................................................. 103
3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts ............................................................................................ 105
(A) General Purpose .................................................................................................. 105
(B) Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts .............................. 105
(C) Neighborhood Business District .......................................................................... 107
(D) B-2: Limited Business District ............................................................................ 109
(E) B-3: Highway Business District .......................................................................... 111
(F) Regional Business District .................................................................................. 113
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
Page iv City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(G) Central Community District ................................................................................ 115
3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts ........................................................................................... 124
(A) General Purpose ................................................................................................... 124
(B) Standards Applicable to All Industrial Base Zoning Districts ............................. 124
(C) Industrial and Business Campus District ............................................................. 125
(D) I-1: Light Industrial District................................................................................. 127
(E) I-2: Heavy Industrial District ............................................................................... 129
3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts ...................................................................................................... 131
(A) General Purpose ................................................................................................... 131
(B) Relationship to Base Zoning Districts ................................................................. 131
(C) Floodplain District ............................................................................................... 131
(D) Wetland District ................................................................................................... 158
(E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District ....................................................... 167
(F) Shoreland District ................................................................................................ 182
(G) FBS: Freeway Bonus Sign District ..................................................................... 206
(H) DW: Drinking Water Supply Management Area ................................................ 207
(I) Performance Based Enhancement District .......................................................... 207
(J) Special Use Overlay District ............................................................................... 215
3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts .................................................................................... 217
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS ................................................................................. 225
4.1 Landscaping and Screening .................................................................................................. 225
(A) Section Organization ........................................................................................... 225
(B) Purpose and Intent ............................................................................................... 226
(C) General Requirements for Landscaping .............................................................. 227
(D) Landscaping Plan Requirements .......................................................................... 230
(E) Alternative Landscaping Plan .............................................................................. 232
(F) Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping .................................................. 234
(G) Standards for Perimeter Buffers .......................................................................... 239
(H) Standards for Site Landscaping ........................................................................... 243
(I) Standards for Required Screening ....................................................................... 245
(J) Zoning District Specific Landscaping Standards ................................................. 248
(K) Landscaping Installation and Maintenance Standards ......................................... 250
4.2 Tree Protection ..................................................................................................................... 252
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page v
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 252
(B) Protection of Specimen Trees .............................................................................. 252
(C) Tree Protection During Construction................................................................... 254
(D) Tree Preservation Incentives ............................................................................... 256
4.3 Fences & Walls .................................................................................................................... 257
(A) Purpose and Intent ............................................................................................... 257
(B) Applicability ........................................................................................................ 257
(C) General Requirements for Fences and Walls ....................................................... 257
(D) Requirements for Fences and Walls by District Type ......................................... 259
(E) Exemption for Security Plan................................................................................ 261
(F) Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Public Rights-of-Way ............................. 261
(G) Prohibited Fences ................................................................................................ 262
(H) Chain Link Fencing ............................................................................................. 262
(I) Barbed or Razor Wire .......................................................................................... 262
(J) Appearance .......................................................................................................... 263
4.4 Exterior Lighting .................................................................................................................. 264
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 264
(B) Applicability ........................................................................................................ 265
(C) Exemptions .......................................................................................................... 265
(D) General Standards for Exterior Lighting ............................................................. 265
(E) Design Standards for Exterior Lighting ............................................................... 266
(F) Wall Pack Lights ................................................................................................. 267
(G) Exemptions for a Security Plan ........................................................................... 267
(H) Illumination of Outdoor Sports Fields and Performance Areas ........................... 268
(I) Sign Lighting ....................................................................................................... 268
(J) Lighting Requirements for the CCD District ....................................................... 268
4.5 Signs ..................................................................................................................................... 269
(A) Findings, Purpose, and Effect .............................................................................. 269
(B) Permit Required ................................................................................................... 270
(C) Permit Not Required ............................................................................................ 270
(D) Prohibited Signs .................................................................................................. 272
(E) Nonconforming Signs and Uses .......................................................................... 273
(F) Enforcement and Penalties .................................................................................. 274
(G) Substitution .......................................................................................................... 274
(H) General Provisions .............................................................................................. 274
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
Page vi City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(I) Temporary Signs.................................................................................................. 280
(J) District Regulations ............................................................................................. 282
4.6 Underground Utilities ........................................................................................................... 285
4.7 Transitional Features ............................................................................................................ 285
(A) Purpose and Intent ............................................................................................... 285
(B) Applicability ........................................................................................................ 285
(C) Standards ............................................................................................................. 286
4.8 Off-street Parking ................................................................................................................. 291
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 291
(B) Application of Off-Street Parking Regulation ..................................................... 291
(C) Change in Use or Occupancy .............................................................................. 291
(D) Prohibited Uses Related to Off-street Parking ..................................................... 292
(E) Standards Applicable to All Uses ........................................................................ 292
(F) Standards Applicable to Residential Uses ........................................................... 304
(G) Standards Applicable to Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses ..................................................................................................................... 308
4.9 Off-street Loading Spaces .................................................................................................... 312
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 312
(B) Location ............................................................................................................... 312
(C) Surfacing.............................................................................................................. 313
(D) Accessory Use, Parking and Storage ................................................................... 313
(E) Screening ............................................................................................................. 313
(F) Size ...................................................................................................................... 313
(G) Number of Loading Berths Required................................................................... 314
4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control ..................................... 314
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 314
(B) Definitions ........................................................................................................... 315
(C) Permits ................................................................................................................. 316
(D) Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan Requirements ....................................................................................................... 316
(E) Stormwater Management ..................................................................................... 319
(F) Construction Requirements ................................................................................. 321
(G) Inspection ............................................................................................................ 325
(H) Site Maintenance ................................................................................................. 327
(I) Final Stabilization ................................................................................................ 328
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page vii
(J) Certification ......................................................................................................... 328
(K) Enforcement ........................................................................................................ 329
4.11 Building Materials .............................................................................................................. 330
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 330
(B) General Requirements ......................................................................................... 330
(C) Residential District Requirements ....................................................................... 331
(D) Business District Requirements ........................................................................... 332
(E) Industrial Requirements ....................................................................................... 333
(F) Institutional Requirements ................................................................................... 335
4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) ...................................................................... 335
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 335
(B) WECS Requirements ........................................................................................... 335
(C) Required Permits ................................................................................................. 339
(D) WECS Permit and Site Plan Application Requirements...................................... 339
4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas ........................................................................ 341
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 341
(B) Private Amateur Radio ........................................................................................ 342
(C) Private Receiving Antennae and Antenna Support Structures ............................ 343
(D) Commercial Transmission/Reception Antennae and Antenna Support Structures ............................................................................................................. 343
(E) Wireless Telecommunications Service Antennae and Antenna Support Structures ............................................................................................................. 344
(F) General provisions for wireless telecommunications service antennae and antenna support structures. ........................................................................... 346
(G) Application process and submittal requirements for wireless telecommunications service antenna support structures ...................................... 349
(H) Outside Review ................................................................................................... 351
(I) Removal of Abandoned or Unused Antennae, Antenna Support Structures, or Other Appurtenant Elements. ........................................................ 351
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS ............................................................................................... 353
5.1 Use Table ............................................................................................................................. 353
(A) Explanation of Use Table Structure ..................................................................... 353
5.2 Use-Specific Standards ........................................................................................................ 360
(A) General Regulations Applicable to All Uses ....................................................... 360
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
Page viii City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(B) Regulations for Agricultural Uses ....................................................................... 361
(C) Regulations for Residential Uses ......................................................................... 363
(D) Regulations for Civic and Institutional Uses ....................................................... 369
(E) Regulations for Commercial Uses ....................................................................... 373
(F) Regulations for Industrial Uses ........................................................................... 393
5.3 Accessory Use Standards ..................................................................................................... 406
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 406
(B) General Standards and Limitations for Accessory Uses and Structures .............. 406
(C) Table of Permitted Accessory Uses ..................................................................... 408
(D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses ................................. 412
5.4 Temporary Uses ................................................................................................................... 433
(A) Purpose ................................................................................................................ 433
(B) Permit Required ................................................................................................... 434
(C) General Standards for Temporary Uses ............................................................... 434
(D) Table of Allowed Temporary Uses and Structures .............................................. 434
(E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses .............................................................. 435
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES ....................................................................................... 441
6.1 Purpose ................................................................................................................................. 441
6.2 Authority to Continue ........................................................................................................... 441
6.3 Discontinuance ..................................................................................................................... 444
6.4 Change in Use ...................................................................................................................... 444
6.5 Building Permits and Ordinance Amendments .................................................................... 444
6.6 Existing Nonconforming Lots .............................................................................................. 445
(A) Required Merger of Common Ownership Lots ................................................... 445
(B) Vacant or Redeveloped Lots ................................................................................ 445
(C) Developed Lots .................................................................................................... 446
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT................................................................................................. 447
7.1 Purpose ................................................................................................................................. 447
7.2 Compliance Required ........................................................................................................... 447
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page ix
(A) In General ............................................................................................................ 447
(B) Approvals Required ............................................................................................. 447
7.3 Violations ............................................................................................................................. 447
(A) Failure to Comply with This Ordinance or Term or Any Condition of Approval Constitutes a Violation ........................................................................ 447
(B) Development Shall Adhere to Approved Plans ................................................... 448
7.4 Responsible Persons ............................................................................................................. 448
7.5 Enforcement Generally ........................................................................................................ 449
(A) Responsibility for Enforcement ........................................................................... 449
(B) General Inspections ............................................................................................. 449
(C) Complaints Regarding Violations ....................................................................... 450
(D) Investigation of Complaints ................................................................................ 450
(E) Notice of Violations ............................................................................................ 450
(F) Application of Penalties ...................................................................................... 451
(G) Emergency Enforcement without Notice ............................................................. 451
7.6 Remedies and Penalties ........................................................................................................ 451
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS ................................................................................... 453
8.1 General Rules for Interpretation ........................................................................................... 453
(A) Meanings and Intent ............................................................................................ 453
(B) Headings, Illustrations, and Text ......................................................................... 453
(C) Lists and Examples .............................................................................................. 453
(D) Computation of Time .......................................................................................... 453
(E) References to Other Regulations/Publications .................................................... 454
(F) Delegation of Authority ....................................................................................... 454
(G) Technical and Non-Technical Terms................................................................... 454
(H) Public Officials and Agencies ............................................................................. 454
(I) Mandatory and Discretionary Terms ................................................................... 454
(J) Conjunctions ........................................................................................................ 454
(K) Tenses, Plurals, and Gender ................................................................................ 454
(L) Terms Not Defined .............................................................................................. 455
8.2 Rules of Measurement .......................................................................................................... 455
(A) Measurements, Generally .................................................................................... 455
(B) Lots ...................................................................................................................... 455
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
Page x City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
8.3 Glossary of Abbreviations .................................................................................................... 464
8.4 Definitions ............................................................................................................................ 467
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page xi
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE 2-1: SUMMARY OF THE ROLES OF DECISION-MAKING BODIES ............................. 8
TABLE 2-2: WRITTEN NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS ....................................................... 17
TABLE 3-1: BASE ZONING DISTRICTS ....................................................................................... 78
TABLE 3-2: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS .............................................................................. 78
TABLE 3-3: A-O DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ........................................................................ 86
TABLE 3-4: R-A DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ........................................................................ 88
TABLE 3-5: R-1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ......................................................................... 90
TABLE 3-6: R-2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ......................................................................... 92
TABLE 3-7: T-N DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ........................................................................ 94
TABLE 3-8: R-3 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ......................................................................... 96
TABLE 3-9: R-4 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ....................................................................... 100
TABLE 3-10: M-H DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ................................................................... 104
TABLE 3-11: B-1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ..................................................................... 108
TABLE 3-12: B-2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ..................................................................... 110
TABLE 3-13: B-3 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ..................................................................... 112
TABLE 3-14: B-4 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ..................................................................... 114
TABLE 3-16: IBC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS..................................................................... 126
TABLE 3-17: I-1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ...................................................................... 128
TABLE 3-18: I-2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ...................................................................... 130
TABLE 3-19: WETLAND BUFFER AND SETBACKS FOR EXISTING WETLANDS, IMPACTED WETLANDS, AND MITIGATED WETLANDS ............................. 163
TABLE 3-20: WILD & SCENIC LOT REQUIREMENTS ............................................................ 170
TABLE 3-21: WILD & SCENIC PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE SETBACKS .................................. 170
TABLE 3-22: WILD & SCENIC ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACKS ............................... 170
TABLE 3-23: SHORELAND USES BY LAKE CLASSIFICATION ............................................ 189
TABLE 3-24: SHORELAND LOT STANDARDS FOR SEWERED LAKES .............................. 191
TABLE 3-25: SHORELAND LOT STANDARDS FOR UNSEWERED LAKES ......................... 192
TABLE 3-26: SHORELAND LOT STANDARDS FOR RIVERS ................................................. 193
TABLE 3-27: REQUIRED MINIMUM BASE LOT WIDTHS FOR PERFORMANCE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ........................................................................ 209
TABLE 3-28: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES DENSITY BONUS .................... 210
TABLE 3-29: DENSITY BONUSES FOR ADDITIONAL LANDSCAPING .............................. 210
TABLE 3-30: RECREATIONAL SPACE ...................................................................................... 211
TABLE 3-31: BONUSES FOR GREEN BUILDINGS ................................................................... 212
TABLE 3-32: GREEN BUILDINGS FEATURES .......................................................................... 212
TABLE 4-1: LANDSCAPED ISLAND REQUIREMENTS .......................................................... 236
TABLE 4-2: BUFFER TYPES ....................................................................................................... 240
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
Page xii City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 4-3: BUFFER TYPE APPLICATION .............................................................................. 241
TABLE 4-4: REQUIRED SITE LANDSCAPING PLANTINGS .................................................. 244
TABLE 4-5: MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LEVELS ................................................................. 267
TABLE 4-6: PARKING STALL AND AISLE STANDARDS ...................................................... 294
TABLE 4-7: MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES BY USE ........................................ 297
TABLE 4-8: OFF STREET PARKING SCHEDULE #1 ................................................................ 302
TABLE 4-9: TYPE OF REQUIRED BUFFER YARD FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS ...................................................................... 305
TABLE 5-1: USES BY DISTRICT ................................................................................................. 354
TABLE 5-3: MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE FOR VEHICLE SALES/RENTAL USES ................. 390
TABLE 5-4: ACCESSORY USES BY DISTRICT ......................................................................... 410
TABLE 5-5: REQUIRED STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE THROUGHS .............................. 419
TABLE 5-6: TEMPORARY USES & STRUCTURES ................................................................... 435
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.3 Ordinance Purpose
Subsection (A) Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 1
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS 1.1 Title
The Ordinance shall be known as "Monticello Zoning Ordinance" except as referred to herein, where it shall be known as "this ordinance." 1.2 Authority
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the Municipal Planning Act, Minnesota Statutes, Sections 462.351 to 462.363. 1.3 Ordinance Purpose
(A) This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
(1) To implement the policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan;
(2) To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community and its people through the establishment of regulations governing development and use;
(3) To promote orderly development and redevelopment;
(4) To protect the established use areas;
(5) To provide adequate light, air, and convenience of access to property;
(6) To prevent congestion in the public right-of-way;
(7) To prevent overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures by regulating land, buildings, yards, and allowed residential densities;
(8) To provide for compatibility of different land uses;
(9) To provide for administration and enforcement of this ordinance;
(10) To provide for amendments;
(11) To prescribe penalties for violation of such regulations; and MN Statutes Section 462
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.7 Relationship to Other Laws and Agreements
Subsection (A) Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
Page 2 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(12) To define powers and duties of the City staff, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the Planning Commission, and the City Council in relation to the Zoning Ordinance.
(B) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held as the minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, and welfare. 1.4 Effective Date
This ordinance shall be effective on and after January 27, 2011. The adoption of this ordinance shall not be construed to confer any protected legal status on uses in existence prior to the effective date that did not conform to previous ordinance provisions. Uses that were illegal under previous ordinance provisions shall not be converted to a legal non-conforming use by reason of adoption of this ordinance. 1.5 Applicability
This ordinance is applicable to all land located within the City both now and as may be incorporated in the future. The use of land and buildings or structures, and the construction, reconstruction, alteration, expansion, or relocation of buildings or structures shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 1.6 Relation to the Comprehensive Plan
It is the policy of the City of Monticello that the Comprehensive Plan is the City’s guiding document for the regulation of land use and development. The enforcement, amendment, and administration of this ordinance is to be accomplished with due consideration of the recommendations contained in the Comprehensive Municipal Plan as developed and amended from time to time by the Planning Commission and City Council of the City. 1.7 Relationship to Other Laws and Agreements
(A) Conflict with Other Public Laws, Chapters, Regulations, or Permits
(1) This ordinance is intended to complement other municipal, state, and federal regulations that affect land use. This ordinance is not intended to revoke or repeal any other public law, ordinance, regulation, or permit. The Comp Plan is viewable on the City of Monticello web site.
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.7 Relationship to Other Laws and Agreements
Subsection (C) Conflict Between Standards in this Ordinance
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 3
(2) Where the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other chapter or regulation; the provisions of this ordinance shall apply.
(3) Where the provisions of any statute, other chapter or regulation impose greater restrictions than this ordinance, the provisions of that statute, other chapter or regulation shall apply.
(B) Conflict with Private Agreements
(1) The existence of any easement, covenant, or other private agreement with respect to property affected by this ordinance shall not affect the duty of any interested person to comply with this ordinance.
(2) The City shall have no obligation to waive or modify the requirements of this ordinance to conform to private agreements, nor shall it be obligated to enforce such agreements.
(C) Conflict Between Standards in this Ordinance
(1) Controlling Standards
In the event of conflict between one or more of the standards in this ordinance, priority shall be established based on the following descending hierarchy:
(a) Overlay Zoning District Requirements;
(b) Base Zoning District Requirements;
(c) Section 8.2, Rules of Measurement; and
(d) Chapter 4: Finishing Standards.
(Example: if an overlay district standard conflicts with a base district standard, the overlay district standard shall control and take precedence).
Section 3.7: Overlay Zoning Districts 3.4 Residential Base Districts 3.5 Business Base Districts Section 8.2: Rules of Measurement Chapter 4: Finishing Standards
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.8 Transitional Regulations
Subsection (B) Violations Continue
Page 4 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Conflicts Between Other Standards
In cases where two or more standards conflict within the same hierarchy category identified in Section 1.7(C)(1) above, the more restrictive standard shall not necessarily control (for example, if two overlay zoning district requirements conflict, this subsection shall apply). The determination as to which control applies shall be made by the Community Development Department. The following standards shall govern the Community Development Department and the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in issuing use interpretations:
(a) Greater consistency with the goals and objectives contained within the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
(b) More supportive of the purposes of this ordinance as described in Section 1.3, Purpose;
(c) Increased compatibility with adjacent development and surrounding community character;
(d) Enhanced environmental quality and natural resource protection;
(e) Greater protection and preservation of historic and cultural resources; and
(f) A superior level of building form, design, or architecture. 1.8 Transitional Regulations
(A) Purpose
The purpose of transitional regulations is to resolve the status of properties with pending applications or recent approvals, and properties with outstanding violations, at the time of the adoption of this ordinance.
(B) Violations Continue
Any violation of previous versions of this ordinance shall continue to be a violation under this ordinance and shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement set forth in Chapter 7: Enforcement; unless the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
The Comp Plan is viewable on the City of Monticello web site. Section 1.3: Purpose Chapter 7: Enforcement
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.8 Transitional Regulations
Subsection (E) Processing of Applications Commenced or Approved Under Previous Ordinances
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 5
(C) Uses, Structures, and Lots Rendered Nonconforming
Where any use, building, structure, or lot that legally existed on the effective date of this ordinance does not meet all standards set forth in this ordinance, such building, structure, lot or parcel shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 6: Nonconformities.
(D) Existing Legal Nonconformities
Legal nonconforming lots of record and uses that existed on the effective date of this ordinance shall be controlled by Chapter 6: Nonconformities.
(E) Processing of Applications Commenced or Approved Under Previous Ordinances
(1) Pending Application
(a) Any complete application that has been submitted or accepted for review, but upon which no final action has been taken by the appropriate decision making body prior to the effective date of this ordinance, shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of ordinances in effect on the date the application was deemed complete by the City.
(b) An applicant with a pending application may waive the review available under the prior ordinance through a written letter to the Community Development Department, and instead request review under the provisions of this ordinance.
(2) Approved Projects
(a) Approved land use and other related actions by the City of Monticello authorized under the prior ordinance, including Building Permits that are valid on the effective date of this ordinance, shall remain valid until their expiration date, where applicable.
(b) Projects with valid approvals or permits shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance where the standards will not materially affect the project. Where use of these standards would materially affect the project, the project shall be completed pursuant to the development standards in effect at the time of approval, provided that the permit or approval is valid and has not lapsed.
Chapter 6: Nonconformities
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.9 Severability
Subsection (E) Processing of Applications Commenced or Approved Under Previous Ordinances
Page 6 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Any building or development for which a Building Permit was granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be permitted to proceed as permitted or approved, even if such building or development does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, as long as the Building Permit remains valid.
(d) Building permits authorized in accordance with the ordinance existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall still be valid, but shall not be renewed if the permit expires. All future permits shall only be issued if in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. 1.9 Severability
(A) If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any provision of this ordinance, then such judgment shall not affect the validity and continued enforcement of any other provision of this ordinance.
(B) If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates the application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular property, structure, or situation, then such judgment shall not affect the application of that provision to any other building, structure, or situation not specifically included in that judgment.
(C) If any court of competent jurisdiction rules invalid any condition attached to an approval under this ordinance, then such judgment shall not affect any other conditions or requirements attached to the same approval that are not specifically included in that judgment.
(D) Whenever a condition or limitation is included in an administrative action authorizing regulatory activity, then it shall be conclusively presumed that the authorizing officer, commission, or board considered such condition or limitation necessary to carry out the spirit and intent of this ordinance, and that the officer, commission, or board would not have granted the authorization to which the condition or limitation pertained except in the determination that the condition or limitation was lawful.
(E) No judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction shall be considered final until all appeals therefore have been exhausted.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.2 Summary of Decision Making and Review Bodies
Subsection (A) Summary Table of Decision-Making and Review Bodies
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 7
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES 2.1 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to identify all decision-making bodies responsible for the review of applications, the common review requirements for all applications, and the specific requirements and review procedures for various application types. 2.2 Summary of Decision Making and Review Bodies
(A) Summary Table of Decision-Making and Review Bodies
(1) Table 2-1 summarizes the general review and decision-making responsibilities of the City entities that have roles in the procedures set forth in this chapter. Other duties and responsibilities of the entities are set forth in subsequent subsections of this chapter or elsewhere within the Monticello City Code. The City may require any and all review bodies to examine specific applications as deemed appropriate by the Community Development Department or City Council.
(2) The City may request other boards, commissions, government agencies, and non-government agencies to review some applications as deemed appropriate prior to any final ruling on such applications.
Table 2-1 Monticello City Code
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.2 Summary of Decision Making and Review Bodies
Subsection (B) City Council
Page 8 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 2-1: SUMMARY OF THE ROLES OF DECISION-MAKING BODIES H = Hearing (Public Hearing Required) A = Appeal D = Decision (Responsible for Final Decision) R = Recommendation (Responsible for Review and a Recommendation) * = Will take action only if necessary for a specific application or circumstance
Procedure
Subsection
Community Development Department
IEDC & EDA [1]
Park & Recreation Commission
Planning Commission
City Council
Board of Adjustment & Appeals
Comp Plan Amendment
2.4(A)
R
*
H - R
D
Zoning Map/Text Amendment
2.4(B)
R
*
H - R
D
Variance
2.4(C)
R
A
D
Conditional Use Permit
2.4(D)
R
*
H - R
D
Interim Use Permit
2.4(E)
R
*
H - R
D
Site Plan Review
2.4(F)
D
* CCD Only
*
A
Joint Concept Review
* CCD Only
* CCD Only
Administrative Adjustments
2.4(G)
D
A
Administrative Appeal
2.4(H)
R
A
D
Building Permits
2.4(I)
D
A
Certificates of Occupancy
2.4(J)
D
A
Sign Permit
2.4(K)
D
A
Temporary Use Permit
2.4(L)
D
A
Home Occupation Permit
2.4(M)
D
A
Grading Permit
2.4(N)
D
A
Driveway Permit
2.4(O)
D
A
Planned Unit Development
2.4(P)
R
*
*
H - R
D
Subdivisions
City Code
R
*
R
H - R
D
A
[1]: Industrial & Economic Development Committee (IEDC) and the Economic Development Authority (EDA)
(B) City Council
In addition to any other authority granted to the City Council by the City Code or state law, the City Council shall have the following powers and duties related to this ordinance:
(1) To enact amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, the text of this ordinance, and Zoning Map.
(2) To hear, review, and make decisions on all Land Use Applications submitted to the City. City Code Title 1, Ch 5: City Council
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.2 Summary of Decision Making and Review Bodies
Subsection (D) Parks Commission
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 9
(C) Planning Commission
(1) Establishment, Membership, Rules and Procedures
The establishment, membership, rules and procedures for the Planning Commission are established in Title 2, Chapter 1 of the City Code.
(2) Powers and Duties
In addition to any other authority granted to the Planning Commission by the City Code, the Planning Commission shall have the following additional powers and duties related to this ordinance:
(a) Comprehensive Plan Amendments, Zoning Map Amendments, and Zoning Text Amendments
(i) To initiate amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, the text of this ordinance, the Official Zoning Map (rezoning of property), or other sections of the Monticello City Code; and
(ii) To hear, review, and make recommendations to the City Council on applications for amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, the text of this ordinance or zoning map amendments.
(b) Land Use Applications
To hear, review, and make recommendations on the following Land Use Applications before the City:
(i) Comprehensive Plan Amendment;
(ii) Zoning Map Amendment;
(iii) Zoning Chapter Text Amendment;
(iv) Conditional Use Permit;
(v) Interim Use Permit; and
(vi) Planned Unit Development.
(c) Other
To exercise such other powers, and perform such other duties, as are reasonable or necessary as provided by law.
(D) Parks Commission
(1) Establishment, Membership, Rules and Procedures
The establishment, membership, rules and procedures for the Parks Commission are established in Title 2, Chapter 6 of the City Code. City Code Title 2, Ch 1: Planning Commission City Code Title 2, Ch 6: Parks Commission
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.2 Summary of Decision Making and Review Bodies
Subsection (E) Board of Adjustment and Appeals
Page 10 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Powers and Duties
In addition to any other authority granted to the Park Commission by the City Code, the Park Commission shall have the responsibility to review and make recommendations on park needs generated by new development.
(E) Board of Adjustment and Appeals
(1) Establishment
The Board of Adjustment and Appeals is hereby established.
(2) Membership
The Planning Commission shall act as a Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
(3) Rules
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for the conduct of business and may exercise all of the powers conferred on such boards by state law.
(4) Procedures
Proceedings of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals by the Planning Commission shall be undertaken as a component of scheduled Planning Commission meetings. It shall not be necessary for the Planning Commission to adjourn and reconvene as the Board of Adjustment and Appeals to undertake such proceedings.
(5) Powers and Duties
The Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall have the following powers and duties related to this ordinance:
(a) To consider applications for variances; and
(b) To hear appeals of administrative discretionary decisions made by the Community Development Department or other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provision of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.2 Summary of Decision Making and Review Bodies
Subsection (H) Community Development Department
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 11
(F) Industrial and Economic Development Committee
(1) Establishment, Membership, Rules and Procedures
The establishment, membership, rules and procedures for the Industrial and Economic Development Committee are established in Title 2, Chapter 10 of the City Code.
(2) Powers and Duties
In addition to any other authority granted to the Industrial and Economic Development Committee by the City Code, the Industrial and Economic Development Committee shall have the responsibility to review and make recommendations on commercial and industrial land use applications when requested by the Community Development Department.
(G) Economic Development Authority (EDA)
(1) Establishment, Membership, Rules and Procedures
The establishment, membership, rules and procedures for the Economic Development Authority are established in Title 2, Chapter 3 of the City Code.
(2) Powers and Duties
In addition to any other authority granted to the Economic Development Authority by the City Code, the Economic Development Authority shall have the responsibility to review and make recommendations on commercial and industrial land use applications when requested by the Community Development Department.
(H) Community Development Department
(1) General Authorization
The Community Development Department, under the supervision of the City Administrator, shall administer the provisions of this ordinance as provided in this section.
(2) Powers and Duties
In addition to the jurisdiction, authority, and duties that may be conferred upon the Community Development Department by other provisions of the City Code, the Community Development Department shall have the following jurisdiction, powers, and duties under this ordinance: City Code Title 2, Ch 10, Industrial & Economic Development Committee City Code Title 2, Ch 3: Economic Development Authority
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (A) Applicability
Page 12 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) Interpretations
Render interpretations of all provisions of this ordinance, including, but not limited to, interpretations of the text of this ordinance; interpretation of the zoning map, and interpretation of the comprehensive plan.
(b) Enforcement
Enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
(c) Administer Ordinance
Review, approve, conditionally approve or deny applications for Building Permits and other administratively reviewed permits or applications as may be required by this ordinance.
(d) Application Tracking and Recommendations
Review, monitor, and provide recommendations on applications requiring approval by the City Council or other governmental bodies as directed by the City Administrator.
(e) Provide Expertise and Technical Assistance
Provide expertise and technical assistance to the City Council and the City’s commissions, boards, and other bodies.
(f) Maintain the Zoning Map
Update the City’s official zoning map as it may be amended from time to time.
(g) Recommendations on Procedures
Review and provide comments or make recommendations to the appropriate decision-making and review body on the various procedures, requirements or appeals established by this ordinance. 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
(A) Applicability
The requirements of Section 2.3 shall apply to all applications subject to review under this ordinance unless otherwise stated.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (D) Application Contents
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 13
(B) Authority to File Applications
(1) Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, applications may be initiated by:
(a) The owner of the property that is the subject of the application; or
(b) The owner’s authorized agent; or
(c) The City.
(2) When an authorized agent files an application under this ordinance on behalf of a property owner, the agent shall provide a signed authorization from the fee title property owner stating that the property owner agrees to be bound by all decisions, agreements, and related conditions agreed to by such agent.
(3) For all applications involving multiple owners, contract purchasers, etc; all such persons shall sign the application.
(C) Application Submission Schedule
The schedule for the submission of applications in relation to scheduled meetings of the decision-making bodies shall be maintained by the Community Development Department and made available to the public.
(D) Application Contents
(1) Organization and Copies
The organization of applications and the number of copies of required information to be submitted shall be determined by the Community Development Department.
(2) General Submittal Requirements
All applications shall include:
(a) A completed City of Monticello application form;
(b) Verification of authority to file applications per the requirements of section 2.3(B);
(c) Supporting title information establishing ownership interests in the property (e.g. a title commitment and/or signature of fee title property owner);
(d) All submittal requirements outlined in this ordinance for the specific application type;
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (E) Application Acceptance
Page 14 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(e) Electronic copies of all written narratives and plan sets required by the Community Development Department as part of the specific application.
(f) The City may require applicants to submit such technical studies as may be necessary to enable the City to evaluate the application. Such studies may include, but not be limited to, traffic studies, engineering studies, environmental impact assessments, and economic impact reports. The costs of such studies shall be borne by the applicant with the persons or firms preparing the study approved by the City.
(3) Submission of Fees
Applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the City of Monticello pursuant to the most recently adopted City of Monticello Fee Schedule.
(E) Application Acceptance
(1) Complete Application Required
The review and consideration of an application submitted under this section shall only occur if such application includes all items that are required in support of the application and is deemed complete by the Community Development Department.
(2) Waiver of Application Requirements
Except for the required application form and the associated fee, the Community Development Department may waive individual submittal requirements and deem an application complete for review if it is determined that such information will serve no purpose during the review process. However, it is the responsibility of the applicant to supply all information required by this ordinance, and a waiver issued by the Community Development Department shall not eliminate the need to provide such information at a later time if it is ultimately deemed necessary to adequately review the application. During the review process, failure of an applicant to supply information in a timely manner may result in denial of the application due to the City’s inability to comply with state mandated time deadlines.
Current Monticello Fee Schedule MN Statute 15.99 subdivision (3)(a)
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (H) Fees
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 15
(F) Simultaneous Processing of Applications
Whenever two or more forms of review and approval are required under this ordinance (e.g., a proposed rezoning and subdivision application), the applications for those approvals may, at the discretion of the Community Development Department, be processed simultaneously, so long as all applicable requirements are satisfied for all applications.
(G) Pre-application Conferences
(1) All prospective applicants are encouraged to speak with a member of the Community Development Department prior to submitting an application in order to review the proposal and to determine the specific materials to be submitted with the future application.
(2) Discussions that occur during a pre-application conference are not binding on the City and do not constitute official assurances, representations or approvals by the City or its officials on any aspects of the plan or application discussed.
(H) Fees
(1) Determination of Fees
Fees required to accompany applications submitted under this ordinance shall be in accordance with the approved fee schedule adopted yearly by the City Council.
(2) Fees to be Paid
No application shall be accepted until all applicable application fees have been paid.
(3) Refund of Application Fee
Application fees are not administratively refundable except when the Community Development Department determines that an application was withdrawn prior to any consideration or review of the application.
(4) Escrow
Application fees may also require payment of an escrow in favor of the City. The required escrow amount shall be in accordance with the approved fee schedule adopted yearly by the City Council.
(5) Staff and/or Consultant Fee
In order to defray the additional cost of processing applications submitted under this ordinance, all applicants shall pay the total cost of staff and/or consulting time Current Monticello Fee Schedule
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (I) Public Notification
Page 16 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
spent exclusively in producing materials for the applicants request and all materials for said request.
(a) "Materials" shall include, but not be limited to, maps, graphs, charts, drawings, etc., and all printing and reproduction of same.
(b) "Staff and/or Consulting Time" shall include any time spent in either researching for or actual production of materials.
(c) The hourly rate for "staff and/or consulting time" shall be in accordance with the approved fee schedule adopted yearly by the City Council.
(I) Public Notification
Applications requiring public notification shall be noticed in compliance with the following provisions.
(1) Content
Notices for public hearings, whether by publication or mailed notice, shall contain at a minimum:
(a) A bold title referring to the content of the notice.
(b) Identification of the address or location of the property or properties subject to the application.
(c) Date, Time, and Place of the Public Hearing.
(d) Nature and Scope of the Application.
(e) Where to View the Application.
(f) Where the Public May be Heard.
(g) Provision for Written Comments. The notice will describe where written comments will be received prior to the public hearing.
(2) Timing of the Notice
Unless otherwise expressly provided or required by law, all statutorily or code required notices shall be postmarked or published at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing or meeting at which the application will be considered.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (I) Public Notification
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 17
(3) Responsibilities
(a) Published notice
When the provisions of this ordinance require that notice be published, the Community Development Department shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice and publishing the notice in the City’s official newspaper. The content and form of the published notice shall be consistent with the requirements of Section 2.3(I)(1) and state law.
(b) Written (mailed) notice.
When the provisions of this ordinance require that written or mailed notice be provided, the Community Development Department shall be responsible for preparing and mailing the written notice per the requirements outlined in Table 2-2.
TABLE 2-2: WRITTEN NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS Application Type: Written Notice Provided to:
Comprehensive Plan Amendment
 For amendments which involve five acres of land or less, written notice shall be provided to all property owners within 350 feet
 For amendments which involve more than five acres of land, notice need only be published within the City’s official newspaper
Zoning Map Amendment
All property owners within 350 feet
Variance
All property owners within 350 feet
Conditional Use Permit
All property owners within 350 feet
Interim Use Permit (new and renewal)
All property owners within 350 feet
CUP/IUP Revocation
Permittee/Landowner Only
Planned Unit Developments
All property owners within 350 feet
(4) Notice Construction
(a) The Community Development Department may use property tax records to determine the names and addresses of affected property owners. A copy of the notice and a list of the owners and addresses to which the notice was sent must be attested to by the Community Development Department and must be made a part of the records of the proceedings.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.3 Common Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (M) Environmental Review
Page 18 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Minor defects in any notice shall not impair the notice or invalidate proceedings pursuant to the notice if a good faith attempt has been made to comply with applicable notice requirements. Minor defects in notice are errors that do not affect the substance of the notice (e.g., errors in a legal description, typographical or grammatical errors, errors of actual acreage, etc). Failure of a party to receive written notice shall not invalidate subsequent action. In all cases, however, the notification requirements and information specifying the time, date, and place of a hearing shall be strictly construed.
(c) When the records of the City document the publication, mailing, and posting of notices as required by this subsection, it shall be presumed that notice of a public hearing was given as required by this subsection.
(J) Continuation of Public Hearings
A public hearing for which proper notice was given may be continued during the course of such hearing to a later date without again complying with the written notice requirements of this chapter, provided that the continuance date is announced at the meeting.
(K) Withdrawal of an Application
A request for withdrawal of an application shall be submitted in writing with a signature to the Community Development Department.
(L) Required Action Deadline
All applications for land use approvals shall be approved or denied within timeframes required by applicable laws, regulation and the provisions of this ordinance in effect on the date the application was submitted.
(M) Environmental Review
(1) No development project shall be approved prior to review by the Community Development Department to determine the necessity for completion of an Environmental Assessment worksheet (EAW) or Environmental Impact Statement (EIS). Procedures for EAWs and EISs are set forth in the Minnesota Environmental Quality Review Board (EQB) regulations for the Environmental Review Program authorized by Minnesota Statute 116.D04 and 116D.04S and specified in Minnesota Rules Parts 4410.0200 to 44410.7800.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (A) Comprehensive Plan Amendments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 19
(2) Environmental reviews (EAWs and EISs) shall be conducted as early as practical in the processing of a development project. No decision on granting of a permit or other approval required may be issued until the EAW/EIS process is completed.
(N) Reconsideration of Land Use Approval Applications
No application for land use approval which has been denied by the City Council, in whole or in part, shall be reconsidered for a period of six (6) months from the date of City Council action on the application, except where there is substantial new evidence or proof of a change in conditions with respect to such application. Before any such reconsideration, the City may require the submission of the appropriate application fee and the application may be considered as a new application. 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
(A) Comprehensive Plan Amendments
(1) Purpose and Scope
This section sets out the procedure to follow when considering a change to the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
Proceedings for the amendment of the Comprehensive Plan shall be initiated by one of the following:
(a) An owner of property or an authorized representative of an owner pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications;
(b) Recommendation of the Planning Commission; or
(c) Action of the City Council.
(3) Application
(a) All applications to amend the Comprehensive Plan shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Procedures & Requirements.
(b) In addition to the common review requirements, applications for Comprehensive Plan amendments shall also include the following:
(i) The name of the applicant;
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements
City Council DECISION
PUBLIC HEARING/Planning Commission Recommendation
Community Development Department Review & Recommendation
COMPREHENSIVE PLANAMENDMENT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (A) Comprehensive Plan Amendments
Page 20 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(ii) A narrative explaining the requested change and the reasons why the Comprehensive Plan should be amended per the request;
(iii) The legal description of all real property proposed for change (if applicable);
(iv) The existing and proposed land use and zoning designations for all properties proposed to change (if applicable);
(v) A map of the properties to be modified to a different land use category, showing the addresses and land uses for adjacent properties (if applicable);
(vi) The proposed text and/or maps to be added, amended, or deleted from the Comprehensive Plan along with documentation as to the location of the text changes in the Comprehensive Plan, if applicable.
(4) Review
(a) Planning Commission
Before any amendment is adopted, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing after proper notice has been issued in accordance with Section 2.3(I). Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall adopt findings and recommendations on the proposed amendment as soon as practical. The Community Development Department may forward an application to the City Council without a recommendation from the Planning Commission only if it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with state mandated deadlines for application review.
(b) City Council
The City Council may hold a public hearing on the amendment if they deem such necessary or it is deemed necessary by the Community Development Department. After consideration of the Planning Commission recommendation and/or hearing, if applicable, the City Council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in such form as it deems advisable. Approval of an amendment shall require the approval of two-thirds of all the members of the City Council, except as may be exempted by State Statute.
(5) Approval Criteria
Recommendations and decisions on Comprehensive Plan amendments shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:
(a) Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or addresses the need resulting from some changing condition, trend, or fact arising since the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan; Section 2.3(I): Public Notification
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (B) Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 21
(b) Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the guiding principles of the Comprehensive Plan;
(c) The extent to which the proposed amendment addresses a demonstrated community need;
(d) Whether the proposed amendment will protect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the public;
(e) The impacts on the natural and built environments, including air, water, noise, stormwater management, wildlife habitat, water quality, vegetation, drainage, streets, and other engineering design or environmental factors;
(f) Whether the proposed amendment is compatible with existing and proposed uses surrounding the subject property; whether the proposed design and land uses are appropriate for the land; and whether the proposed amendment will maintain or improve compatibility among uses and ensure efficient development within the City;
(g) Whether the proposed amendment will result in a logical, orderly and
predictable development pattern; and
(h) Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the purpose of this ordinance.
(B) Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments
(1) Purpose and Scope
This section sets out the procedures to be followed in reviewing and considering a text change to this ordinance or an amendment to the zoning map with the exception of a map amendment to a planned unit development, which shall be subject to the procedures in Section 2.4(P), Planned Unit Development.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
Proceedings for the amendment of the text of this ordinance or the zoning map shall be initiated by one of the following:
(a) An owner of property or an authorized representative of an owner pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications;
(b) Action of the Planning Commission; or
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
City Council DECISION
PUBLIC HEARING & Planning Commission Recommendation
Community Development Department Review & Recommendation
ZONING TEXT OR MAP AMENDMENT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (B) Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments
Page 22 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Application by the Community Development Department; or
(d) Action of the City Council.
(3) Application
(a) All applications to amend the text of this ordinance or the zoning map shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Procedures & Requirements.
(b) In addition to the common review requirements, applications for changes to the text of this ordinance or the Zoning Map shall also include the following:
(i) The name of the applicant;
(ii) A narrative explaining the requested modification and the reasons why the changes are supported by the Comprehensive Plan;
(iii) The legal description of all real property proposed for change, if applicable;
(iv) The existing and proposed land use and zoning designations for all properties proposed for change, if applicable;
(v) A map of the properties to be modified to a different zoning designation, showing the addresses and zoning designations for the subject properties and the adjacent properties, if applicable;
(vi) The location of the proposed text to be added, amended, or deleted in this ordinance, if applicable.
(4) Review
(a) Planning Commission
Before any amendment is adopted, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing after proper notice has been issued in accordance with Section 2.3(I). Following the hearing, the Planning Commission shall adopt findings and recommendations on the proposed amendment as soon as practical. The Community Development Department may forward an application to the City Council without a recommendation from the Planning Commission only if it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with state mandated deadlines for application review.
Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements Section 2.3(I): Public Notification
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (C) Variances
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 23
(b) City Council
The City Council may hold a public hearing on the amendment if deemed necessary by the Community Development Department. After consideration of the Planning Commission recommendation and/or hearing, if applicable, the City Council may adopt the amendment or any part thereof in such form as it deems advisable. Approval of an amendment shall require a majority vote of all members of the City Council except for amendments which change all or part of the existing classification of a zoning district from residential to either commercial or industrial, which will require the approval of two-thirds of all the members of the City Council.
(5) Approval Criteria
Recommendations and decisions on zoning amendments shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:
(a) Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error in the original text or map; or
(b) Whether the proposed amendment addresses needs arising from a changing condition, trend, or fact affecting the subject property and surrounding area.
(c) Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with achieving the goals and objectives outlined in the comprehensive plan.
(C) Variances
(1) Purpose and Scope
The Variance process is intended to provide limited relief from the strict requirements of this ordinance in those cases where strict application of a particular requirement will create practical difficulties due to circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration. It is not intended that Variances be granted to allow a use not permitted by the underlying zoning district, nor to merely remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this ordinance may impose on property owners in general. Variances are intended to address extraordinary, exceptional, or unique situations that were not caused by the applicant’s act or omission.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
Variances shall be initiated by an owner of property or an authorized representative of an owner pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
City Council DECISION
PUBLIC HEARING & Board of Adjustment Recommendation
Community Development Department Review & Recommendation
VARIANCE
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (C) Variances
Page 24 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Application
(a) All applications for a Variance shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Procedures & Requirements.
(b) In addition to the common review requirements, applications for a Variance shall also include the following:
(i) A written narrative demonstrating that the criteria for a variance as set out in Section 2.4(C)(4)(a) have been met.
(ii) A site plan of the property showing all information necessary to allow the City to determine conformance with all zoning provisions, and to calculate the specific variance being requested. Information shall include but not be limited to:
1. Property and structure dimensions;
2. Setback dimensions/measurements;
3. Parking and access locations and dimensions;
(iii) If deemed necessary by the Community Development Department, a survey may be required to be submitted with the application in addition to a site plan.
(4) Review
(a) Variance Criteria
Approval of a Variance may only be made upon a determination that practical difficulties will result based on all of the following criteria:
(i) The property in question cannot be put to a reasonable use if the provisions of this ordinance are strictly applied.
(ii) The circumstances rendering the property unusable are unique to the property.
(iii) The circumstances rendering the property unusable were not created by the owner thereof.
(iv) A Variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
(v) Economic considerations alone shall not constitute a sufficient basis for a Variance if reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of the regulation.
Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements MN Statute 462.357 (6)(2) variances
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (C) Variances
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 25
(b) Board of Adjustment and Appeals
Before any variance is approved, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall hold at least one public hearing after proper notice has been issued in accordance with Section 2.3(I). Following the hearing, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall consider the request(s) against the variance review criteria outlined in Section 2.4(C)(4)(a) and take action on the request(s). In approving a variance, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals may impose conditions on the approval as are deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with the approval and to protect adjacent properties. Denial of any request shall be accompanied by findings of fact at to how the request did not meet one or more of the review criteria.
(c) Appeal of Variance Decision
Decisions of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals are final unless the applicant or an affected party, including any member of the City Council, files a written appeal outlining the basis for the appeal within ten (10) business days of the decision. Variance appeals shall be reviewed by the City Council as outlined in Section 2.4(H)(3)(c) subject to the review criteria in Section 2.4(H)(4).
(5) Effect of a Variance
(a) The issuance of a Variance shall authorize only the particular variation that is approved by either the Board of Adjustment and Appeals or City Council.
(b) A Variance, including any conditions, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
(6) Subsequent Development
Development authorized by the Variance shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other approvals required by this ordinance or any other applicable chapters or regulations. The granting of a Variance does not constitute, imply, or guarantee the granting of any other such required approval (i.e.: a building permit).
(7) Time Limit
(a) Unless otherwise specified in the Variance, if a Building Permit has not been secured within one (1) year of the date of the Variance approval, the Variance shall become invalid. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners. Section 2.3(I): Public Notification Section 2.4(H)(3)(c): Review [of appeals] by the City Council
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (D) Conditional Use Permits
Page 26 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Upon written request, one extension of one (1) year may be granted by the Community Development Department if the applicant can show good cause.
(8) Amendment
A Variance may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established for originally securing the variance. A request for a change in the conditions of approval of a Variance shall be considered an amendment and subject to the full review procedure set forth in this subsection. An additional application fee may be required before consideration of the amendment request.
(D) Conditional Use Permits
(1) Purpose and Scope
The Conditional Use Permit process is intended to provide the City with an opportunity to review a proposed use in order to establish reasonable conditions necessary to ensure compatibility between the proposed location and use and surrounding properties. Approval of a conditional use at a location within a zoning classification does not mean the same conditional use can be conducted on any other parcel with the same specific zoning classification. Every application for a CUP will be individually reviewed on its own merits, and the facts surrounding the subject property will determine the appropriateness of the proposed use.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
A request for a Conditional Use Permit shall be initiated by an owner of property or an authorized representative of an owner pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(3) Application
(a) All applications for a Conditional Use Permit shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
(b) In addition to general review requirements, applications for a Conditional Use Permit shall also include the following:
(i) A written narrative which includes:
1. A description of the proposed conditional use, how it will function on the property, hours of operation (if applicable), and any other information necessary to fully describe the request; and
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements
City Council DECISION
PUBLIC HEARING & Planning Commission Recommendation
Commercial & Industrial Requests
Industrial / Economic Dev. Commission Review & Rec.
Community Development Department Review & Recommendation
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (D) Conditional Use Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 27
2. An explanation of how the proposed conditional use will meet each of the criteria set forth in Section 2.4(D)(4)(a), as well as any additional criteria that may apply for the specific use as listed in Chapter 5.
(ii) A location map showing the general location of the proposed use within the community and the principal land uses surrounding the parcel on which the conditional use is proposed;
(iii) Development plans for the proposed use showing all information deemed necessary by the Community Development Department to ensure that the City can determine whether the proposed use will conform to all City Code standards. Such information may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
1. Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and existing topography;
2. Location of all existing and proposed buildings and the size of each (including square footage);
3. Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks;
4. Natural features such as woodlands, wetlands, shorelines, etc;
5. Landscaping and screening plans, including species and size of trees and shrubs proposed;
6. Proposed finished grading and drainage plan sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulated;
7. Type of business or activity and proposed number of employees;
8. Proposed floor plan and elevations of any building with use indicated;
9. Proposed outdoor storage spaces (if applicable);
10. Signage plan.
(iv) If deemed necessary by the Community Development Department, a survey may be required to be submitted with the application in addition to or in lieu of a site plan.
(v) Color profile elevation drawings of new structures to illustrate the proposed visual appearance of new construction.
(vi) Any other information that may be reasonably required by the City to evaluate the application.
Sec 4.8, Off-street Parking Sec 4.9, Off-street Loading Sec 4.1(D), Landscape Plan Requirements Sec 4.10(D), Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan Requirements Sec 2.4(K)(3)(b), Sign Permit Application Requirements
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (D) Conditional Use Permits
Page 28 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(4) Review
(a) Conditional Use Permit Criteria
Approval of a Conditional Use Permit application requires that the City find that conditions can be established to ensure that all of the following criteria will always be met:
(i) The conditional use will not substantially diminish or impair property values within the immediate vicinity of the subject property;
(ii) The conditional use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of persons residing or working near the use;
(iii) The conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for permitted uses predominant in the area;
(iv) The conditional use will not pose an undue burden on public utilities or roads, and adequate sanitary facilities are provided;
(v) The conditional use can provide adequate parking and loading spaces, and all storage on the site can be done in conformance with City code requirements;
(vi) The conditional use will not result in any nuisance including but not limited to odor, noise, or sight pollution;
(vii) The conditional use will not unnecessarily impact natural features such as woodlands, wetlands, and shorelines; and all erosion will be properly controlled;
(viii) The conditional use will adhere to any applicable additional criteria outlined in Chapter 5 for the proposed use.
(b) Planning Commission
Before any Conditional Use Permit is considered, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing after proper notice has been issued in accordance with Section 2.3(I). Following the hearing and subsequent discussion on the merits of the proposal, the Planning Commission shall adopt findings and recommendations on the general conditional use permit review criteria outlined in Section 2.4(D)(4)(a) and any specific criteria outlined for the specific use in Chapter 5. Recommendations for approval may include such conditions as are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with each of the Conditional Use Permit review criteria. Denial recommendations shall be supported by findings of fact as to why the permit request was denied. The Community Development Department may forward an application to the City Council without a recommendation from the Planning Commission only if it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with state mandated deadlines for application review. Section 5.3(D): Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses Section 5.2: Use-Specific Standards Section 2.3(I): Public Notification
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (D) Conditional Use Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 29
(c) Industrial and Economic Development Committee
Conditional use permits in commercial or industrial areas may, at the discretion of the Community Development Department, be placed before the Industrial and Economic Development Committee for review and recommendation.
(d) City Council
Upon receiving the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider the request against the Conditional Use Permit review criteria outlined in Section 2.4(D)(4)(a) and take action on the request(s). In approving a Conditional Use Permit, the City Council may impose conditions on the approval as are deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with each of the Conditional Use Permit review criteria. Denial of any request shall be accompanied by findings of fact as to why the requested permit can not be approved.
(5) Reasonable Conditions
In approving a CUP, the City may adopt and impose such reasonable conditions and requirements as it deems necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with the conditional use permit review criteria.
(6) Effect of a Conditional Use Permit Approval
(a) The issuance of a Conditional Use Permit shall authorize only the improvements approved by the City Council.
(b) A Conditional Use Permit, including any conditions, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
(7) Subsequent Development
Development authorized by the Conditional Use Permit shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other approvals required by this ordinance or any other applicable ordinances or regulations. The granting of a Conditional Use Permit does not constitute, imply, or guarantee the granting of any other such required approval (i.e. a building permit).
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (D) Conditional Use Permits
Page 30 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(8) Time Limit
(a) Unless otherwise specified in the Conditional Use Permit, the operation of the use and/or issuance of building permits for permitted structures shall begin within one year of the date of the Conditional Use Permit approval. Failure to do so will invalidate the Conditional Use Permit. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners.
(b) If the operation of the use and/or issuance of building permits has not commenced within one year of the date of approval, the applicant may petition for an extension of time in which to commence the work that has been granted by the Conditional Use Permit. Such extension shall be requested in writing and filed with the Community Development Department at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the one year period. The request for extension shall state facts supporting good cause for extension of the conditional use permit. Such petition shall be presented to the Planning Commission for a recommendation and to the City Council for a decision.
(c) If a use operating pursuant to an approved conditional use permit is discontinued for a period of at least one year, any further use of the property shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance. A discontinued conditional use shall not begin operations again without first obtaining approval of a new conditional use permit.
(9) Revocation
In the event that any of the conditions set forth in the permit are violated, the City Council shall have the authority to revoke the conditional use permit. Before the revocation is considered, the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing after proper written notice has been issued in accordance with Section 2.3(I). Following the hearing and subsequent discussion, the City Council may revoke the CUP by adopting findings of fact showing there has not been substantial compliance with the required conditions.
(10) Amendments
A Conditional Use Permit may be amended or modified only in accordance with the procedures and standards established when originally securing the conditional use permit. A request for a change in the conditions of approval of a Conditional Use Permit shall be considered an amendment and subject to the full review procedure set forth in this subsection. An additional application fee may be required before the consideration of the amendment request.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (E) Interim Use Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 31
(E) Interim Use Permits
(1) Purpose and Scope
The purpose and intent of allowing interim uses is:
(a) To allow a use for a brief period of time until a permanent location is obtained or while the permanent location is under construction.
(b) To allow a use that is presently judged acceptable by the City Council but that, with anticipated development or redevelopment, will not be acceptable in the future or will be replaced in the future by a permitted or conditional use allowed within the respective district.
(c) To allow a use which is reflective of anticipated long-range change to an area and which is in compliance with the comprehensive plan provided that said use maintains harmony and compatibility with surrounding uses and is in keeping with the architectural character and design standards of existing uses and development.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
A request for an Interim Use Permit shall be initiated by an owner of property or an authorized representative of an owner pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(3) Application
(a) All applications for an Interim Use Permit shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
(b) In addition to general review requirements, applications for an Interim Use Permit shall also include the following:
(i) A letter from the applicant explaining the proposal and stating the date or event that will terminate the use;
(ii) A location map showing the general location of the proposed use within the community and the principal land uses surrounding the parcel on which the interim use is proposed;
(iii) Development plans for the proposed use showing all information deemed necessary by the Community Development Department to ensure that the City can determine whether the proposed use will conform to all City Code standards. Such information may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements
City Council DECISION
PUBLIC HEARING / Planning Commission Recommendation
Commercial & Industrial Rquests
Industrial / Economic Dev. Commission Review & Rec.
Community Development Department Review & Recommendation
INTERIM
USE PERMIT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (E) Interim Use Permits
Page 32 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
1. Site plan drawn to scale showing parcel and existing topography;
2. Location of all buildings and the size of each, including square footage;
3. Curb cuts, driveways, access roads, parking spaces, off-street loading areas, and sidewalks;
4. Natural features such as woodlands, wetlands, shorelines, etc;
5. Landscaping and screening plans, including species and size of trees and shrubs proposed;
6. Proposed finished grading and drainage plan sufficient to drain and dispose of all surface water accumulated;
7. Type of business or activity and proposed number of employees;
8. Proposed floor plan and elevations of any building with use indicated;
9. Proposed outdoor storage spaces (if applicable);
10. Signage plan.
(iv) If deemed necessary by the Community Development Department, a survey may be required to be submitted with the application in addition to or in lieu of a site plan.
(v) A signed consent agreement, provided by the City of Monticello, agreeing:
1. That the applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user has no entitlement to future re-approval of the Interim Use Permit;
2. That the interim use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to fully or partially take the property in the future; and
3. That the applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user will abide by conditions of approval that the City Council attaches to the Interim Use Permit.
(vi) Any other information that may be reasonably required by the City to evaluate the application.
(4) Review
(a) Interim Use Permit Criteria
Approval of an Interim Use Permit application requires that the City find that conditions can be established to ensure all of the following criteria will always be met:
(i) The use is allowed as an interim use in the respective zoning district and conforms to standard zoning regulations. Sec 4.8, Off-street Parking Sec 4.9, Off-street Loading Sec 4.1(D), Landscape Plan Requirements Sec 4.10(D), Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan Requirements Sec 2.4(K)(3)(b), Sign Plan Requirements
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (E) Interim Use Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 33
(ii) The use will not adversely impact nearby properties through nuisance, noise, traffic, dust, odor, or unsightliness and will not otherwise adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the community.
(iii) The use will not adversely impact implementation of the comprehensive plan.
(iv) The date, event, or change in circumstances that will terminate the use is identified with certainty.
(v) The applicant has signed a consent agreement stating that the applicant, owner, operator, tenant and/or user has no entitlement to future re-approval of the Interim Use Permit as well as agreeing that the interim use will not impose additional costs on the public if it is necessary for the public to fully or partially take the property in the future.
(vi) The applicant agrees to all conditions that the City Council deems appropriate to allow the use including the requirement of appropriate financial surety to cover the cost of removing the interim use and any interim structures upon the expiration of the interim use permit.
(vii) There are no delinquent property taxes, special assessments, interest, or City utility fees due upon the subject parcel.
(viii) The interim use will adhere to any applicable additional criteria outlined in Chapter 5 for the proposed use.
(b) Planning Commission
Before any Interim Use Permit is considered, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing after proper notice has been issued in accordance with Section 2.3(I). Following the hearing and subsequent discussion on the merits of the proposal, the Planning Commission shall adopt findings and recommendations on the general interim use permit review criteria outlined in Section 2.4(E)(4)(a) and any specific criteria outlined for the specific use in Chapter 5. Recommendations for approval may include such conditions as are deemed necessary to ensure compliance with each of the Interim Use Permit review criteria. Denial recommendations shall be supported by findings of fact as to why the permit request was denied. The Community Development Department may forward an application to the City Council without a recommendation from the Planning Commission only if it is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with state mandated deadlines for application review.
Section 5.2: Use-Specific Standards Section 5.3(D): Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses Section 2.3(I): Public Notification
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (E) Interim Use Permits
Page 34 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Industrial and Economic Development Committee
Interim use permits in commercial or industrial areas may, at the discretion of the Community Development Department, be placed before the Industrial and Economic Development Committee for review and recommendation.
(d) City Council
Upon receiving the recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall consider the request against the Interim Use Permit review criteria outlined in Section 2.4(E)(4)(a) and take action on the request(s). In approving an Interim Use Permit, the City Council may impose conditions on the approval as are deemed appropriate to ensure compliance with each of the Interim Use Permit review criteria. Denial of any request shall be accompanied by findings of fact at to how the request did not meet one or more of the review criteria.
(5) Reasonable Conditions
In approving an Interim Use Permit, the City may adopt and impose such reasonable conditions and requirements as it deems necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with the Interim Use Permit review criteria.
(6) Effect of an Interim Use Permit Approval
(a) The issuance of an Interim Use Permit shall authorize only the improvements and use approved by the City Council as an interim use over the specified timeframe.
(b) An Interim Use Permit, including any conditions, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
(7) Termination
An interim use shall be terminated and removed for any of the following reasons, whichever occurs first:
(a) The date, event or circumstances stated in the permit.
(b) Upon violation of conditions under which the permit was issued.
(c) Upon change in the City’s zoning regulations which renders the use nonconforming.
(d) The redevelopment of the use and property upon which it is located to a permitted or conditional use as allowed within the respective zoning district.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (F) Site Plan Submittals
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 35
(8) Revocation
The City Council may revoke an Interim Use Permit upon finding that any of the conditions set forth in the permit are violated. Before the revocation is considered, the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing after proper written notice has been issued in accordance with Section 2.3(I). Following the hearing and subsequent discussion, the City Council may revoke the IUP by adopting findings of fact showing there has not been substantial compliance with the required conditions.
(9) Amendments
All requested amendments to an existing interim use permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
(10) Renewal
All renewals of an existing interim use permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
(F) Site Plan Submittals
(1) Purpose and Scope
The City Council declares it necessary and appropriate to require site plan review of development in certain zoning districts to preserve and promote attractive, well-planned, stable urban conditions. Site plan approval by the Community Development Department must be obtained before a building permit is issued in order to ensure the following:
(a) A proposed project’s compatibility with the area environment and with other existing land uses and buildings in the surrounding area.
(b) The quantity, quality, utility, size, and type of a proposed project’s required open space and proposed landscaping improvements.
(c) The ability of a proposed project’s traffic circulation system to provide for the convenient and safe internal and external movement of vehicles and pedestrians.
(d) The quantity, quality, utility, size, and type of a proposed project’s required community facilities.
(e) The location and adequacy of a proposed project’s provision for drainage and utilities. MN Statutes, Chapter 14 Section 2.3(I): Public Notification
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Appeal Option if Applicant Disagrees with Decision
Section 2.4(H)
Community Development Department Review / DECISION
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (F) Site Plan Submittals
Page 36 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(f) Security, fire protection, and life/safety issues.
(2) Applicability
(a) Unless exempted pursuant to Section 2.4(F)(3) below, Site Plan review shall be required for all residential and nonresidential development (including changes to required parking areas, proposed changes to outside commercial sales or storage areas, etc) prior to the issuance of a Building Permit or other approval.
(b) The Community Development Department is authorized to review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny Site Plan reviews in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.
(c) Site Plan Review shall be required for all new development projects in the CCD, Central Community District, which substantively change the area and/or bulk of any building or use. Such Site Plan Review shall be conducted by the Planning Commission, but shall not be formal Public Hearing. The Planning Commission may choose, at its sole option, to provide for and consider public comment.
(d) In lieu of Subp. (c) of this Section, an applicant may choose to request a Concept Review joint meeting between the Planning Commission and City Council, in accordance with the process identified in Section 2.4 (O)(9)(a.).
(3) Exemptions
The following may be exempted from Site Plan review:
(a) Detached residential uses (i.e. single family homes).
(b) Residential accessory buildings or other similar structures as determined by the Community Development Department.
(c) The internal construction or change in floor area of a development that does not increase gross floor area, increase the intensity of use, or affect parking requirements on a site that meets all development and site design standards of this ordinance.
(d) Temporary uses.
(e) Any building exempted by state statute.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (F) Site Plan Submittals
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 37
(f) Additions to existing buildings, structures or uses, if, in the opinion of the Community Development Department, such addition does not substantially affect the proposed or current development of adjacent or nearby properties.
(4) Initiation
An application for Site Plan review may be initiated by the property owner or other person with authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(5) Submittal
(a) All submittals for Site Plan review shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
(b) In addition to the common application requirements of Section 2.4(F)(5)(a) above, submittals for site plan review shall also include at least the following to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department). All documents shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor, registered professional engineer, or other qualified professional as directed by the Community Development Department.
(i) Name of the project;
(ii) Name, address and telephone number of applicant, engineer, architect, surveyor and owner of record;
(iii) Legal description;
(iv) Date proposed, north arrow, engineering scale, number sheets and name drawer;
(v) Vicinity map showing relationship of the development to surrounding streets, rights-of- way and the like;
(vi) Description of intended use of site, buildings, structures, including type of occupancy and occupancy load;
(vii) Tabulation box, indicating the following:
1. Size of parcel in acres and square feet;
2. Gross floor area of each building;
3. Percent of site covered by impervious surface;
4. Projected number of employees;
5. Number of seats if intended use is a restaurant or place of assembly;
6. Number of parking spaces required;
7. Number of parking spaces provided, including handicapped;
8. Dimension of parking spaces and aisles; Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements Section 4.8: Off-Street Parking Requirements
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (F) Site Plan Submittals
Page 38 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
9. Existing zoning and land use designations; and
10. Area of public open space (if applicable).
(viii) Property line dimensions, location of all existing and proposed structures with distance from boundaries, distance between structures, building dimensions and floor elevations within proposed site plan boundary shown and to a distance of 150 feet beyond;
(ix) Topographic data within the property to be subdivided and 200 feet beyond the property boundary, showing contours as follows:
1. All areas of the proposed area with a slope greater than 25% must be clearly indicated:
2. Two-foot contours where slope is 7% or less;
3. Two-foot contours where slope is from 7% to 15%; and
4. Ten-foot intervals where slope is greater than 15%.
(x) Grading, drainage and erosion control plan prepared by a registered professional engineer, providing all information outlined in Section 4-10(D).
(xi) Utility plans prepared by a registered professional engineer consisting of the following:
1. Location, size and grades of all existing sanitary sewer, water main, hydrants and storm sewer on site or adjacent to for proposed connection;
2. Location of all existing gas mains, electric and phone cables, light poles, power boxes and the like;
3. Location, size, grades and materials for all proposed public sanitary sewer, water main, hydrants and storm sewer;
4. Supplemental calculations for trunk sanitary sewer and water main, if required by the Community Development Department;
5. Supplemental storm sewer computation sheet verifying capacities and volumes for all pipe segments, if required by the Community Development Department; and
6. Existing and proposed drainage and utility easements.
(xii) Street plans prepared by a registered professional engineer showing the following:
1. All existing and proposed points of ingress/egress;
2. Widths at property lines;
3. Turning radii abutting right-of-way; Section 4.10(D): Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, & Erosion Control
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (F) Site Plan Submittals
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 39
4. Center line, paving width, existing and proposed median and curb cuts and intersection of streets and driveways; and
5. Access alignment and grades.
(xiii) Vehicular circulation system showing location and dimension for all driveways, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, service roads, loading areas, fire lanes, emergency access, if necessary, public and private streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, direction of traffic flow and traffic control devices;
(xiv) Landscape plan prepared by a qualified professional providing all information outlined in Section 4.1(D);
(xv) Location, access and screening detail of large trash handling and recycling collection areas in compliance with the requirements of Section 5.3(D)(34);
(xvi) Building elevations (colored renderings) which detail the materials being used;
(xvii) Location and screening detail of roof top equipment;
(xviii) Location and detail of signage providing all pertinent information outlined in Section 2.4(K)(3)(b) as determined by the Community Development Department;
(xix) Lighting location, style and mounting and light distribution plan;
(xx) Project narrative; and
(xxi) Any other information that may be reasonably required by the City to evaluate the application including but not limited to floor plans, building elevations, rendered drawings, and materials samples.
(6) Review
(a) Site Plan Review Criteria
Recommendations and decisions on a Site Plan shall be based on consideration of the following criteria:
(i) Whether the proposed development is consistent with all the requirements of this ordinance and the City Code;
(ii) Whether the proposed development is in compliance with the applicable zoning district and overlay districts;
(iii) Whether the proposed development is in compliance with other City approved planning documents (e.g. Downtown Revitalization Plan); and
(iv) Whether the proposed development meets all the requirements or conditions of any applicable development approvals. Section 4.1(D): Landscape Plan Requirements Section 4.1(I)(5): Rooftop Screening Section 2.4(K)(3)(b): Sign Plan Requirements Section 4.4: Exterior Lighting City Code Title 11, Chapter 1: Subdivision Code
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (F) Site Plan Submittals
Page 40 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Site Plan Review Process
(i) Upon receiving a complete submittal for site plan review, the Community Development Department shall review the plans to determine their conformance to all ordinance requirements. The Community Development Department may be assisted in conducting site plan reviews by representatives from other City departments or divisions.
(ii) Site Plan submittals determined to conform with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(F)(6)(a) shall be approved by the Community Development Department with any conditions deemed necessary. A notice of site plan approval shall be provided to the submitter that includes all conditions, comments, and recommendations.
(iii) Site Plans not conforming with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(F)(6)(a) shall be revised by the submitter to meet the requirements of the City ordinance prior to approval of any other permit.
(iv) The approval of a site plan by the Community Development Department does not in any way guarantee future approval of other applications that may be required by the regulations of the City (e.g. a Building Permit, Certificate of Occupancy, subdivision approval, conditional use approval, etc).
(7) Subsequent Development
Development authorized by a Site Plan approval shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other approvals required by this ordinance or any other applicable regulations. Such permits and approvals shall only be granted once all conditions of the site plan review and all relevant portions of this ordinance are met.
(8) Time Limit
(a) Unless otherwise specified in the Site Plan approval, an application for a Building Permit shall be applied for must receive approval within one year of the date of the Site Plan approval, otherwise the Site Plan shall become invalid. Permitted timeframes do not change with successive owners.
(b) Upon written request, one extension of six months may be granted by the Community Development Department if the applicant can show good cause.
(9) Amendments of an Approved Site Plan
(a) Requested amendments that involve one of the following shall be reviewed as a new site plan submittal:
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (F) Site Plan Submittals
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 41
(i) The density of the development is to be increased;
(ii) The gross square footage of nonresidential buildings is to be increased or the number of stories is to be increased;
(iii) Approved landscaping elements are to be modified;
(iv) Required open space is to be modified;
(v) Drainage, streets, or other engineering design changes will materially alter items approved in the Site Plan; and/or
(vi) Major changes are proposed that could potentially create an adverse impact on stormwater quality, stormwater quantity management, or other stormwater management ordinance requirements.
(b) Requested Site Plan amendments that do not fall into one of the categories outlined in Section 2.4(F)(10) above may be approved by the Community Development Department if it is determined that the requested change will NOT:
(i) Substantially affect the terms of the original approval; and
(ii) Result in significant adverse impacts on the surrounding properties or the City at-large.
(c) If, in the opinion of the Community Development Department, a proposed change will substantially affect the terms of the original approval or would result in significant adverse impacts on the surrounding properties or the City at-large, then a re-submittal of a new site plan may be required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(10) Appeal
The applicant for a Site Plan review may appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 2.4(H).
Section 2.4(H): Administrative Appeals
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (G) Appeal of Administrative Decisions
Page 42 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(G) Appeal of Administrative Decisions
(1) Purpose and Scope
This subsection sets out the procedure to follow when a person claims to have been aggrieved or affected by an administrative decision made under this ordinance.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
Appeals shall be initiated by the person aggrieved or affected by any order, decision, determination, or interpretation made by the Community Development Department or other administrative official of the City charged with the administration or enforcement of this ordinance.
(3) Procedure
(a) Submission of Appeal (Application)
(i) An Appeal pursuant to this subsection shall be initiated by filing a
written appeal of the administrative decision or determination within 10 business days of the date of the order, decision, determination, or interpretation with the Community Development Department or other administrative official from whom the Appeal is taken.
(ii) All applications for an appeal shall be in accordance with Section 2.3,
Common Review Requirements.
(b) Review by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals
(i) Upon receiving the written Appeal of the administrative decision or determination, the Community Development Department shall place the matter on the next available agenda of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals.
(ii) A report prepared by the Community Development Department which is accompanied by all relevant papers, documents, and other materials relating to the order, decision, determination, or interpretation shall be provided to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals prior to the meeting. These materials shall constitute the record of the appeal.
(iii) Following review of the appeal, the Board of Adjustment and Appeals shall adopt findings of fact and make a decision on the appeal.
(iv) Decisions of the Board of Adjustment and Appeals are final unless an affected party files a second written appeal outlining the basis for the appeal within five (5) business days of the decision.
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Option to Appeal the Board's Decision to the City Council
Board of Adjustment Review / DECISION
Community Development Report Writen for the Board of Adjusment
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (H) Building Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 43
(c) Review by the City Council
(i) Upon receiving a second written appeal of the decision rendered by the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the Community Development Department shall place the matter on the next available agenda of the City Council scheduled at least seven (7) days after the date of the appeal.
(ii) Materials constituting the record of appeal from the Board of Adjustment and Appeals review shall be provided to the City Council for examination prior to the meeting.
(iii) Following review of the appeal, the City Council shall review and decide on the appeal in accordance with this chapter and state law.
(4) Review Criteria
An order, decision, determination, or interpretation shall not be reversed or modified unless there is competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record that the order, decision, determination, or interpretation fails to comply with either the procedural, substantive requirements, or intent of this ordinance or state law.
(5) Conditions
The City Council may impose conditions upon their decision to ensure that the requirements and purposes of this ordinance are followed.
(H) Building Permits
(1) Purpose
This section establishes when obtaining a building permit is required, how it will be reviewed, what surveys may be required to track construction, and how unauthorized work will be handled.
(2) In General
(a) No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, alter, construct, enlarge, expand, repair, move, improve, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building, structure, or portion thereof, within the City of Monticello until proper permits have been issued by the Community Development Department.
(b) No building permit or other permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued unless such building is designed and arranged to conform to the provisions of this ordinance.
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Appeal Option if Applicant Disagrees with Decision
Section 2.4(H)
Community Development Department Review / DECISION
BUILDING
PERMIT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (H) Building Permits
Page 44 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Exemptions
Building permits shall not be required for those structures and improvements specifically exempted by the adopted building code as may be amended.
(4) Surveys Required
(a) Every application for building permit shall be accompanied by a certified site survey (excluding interior remodels, re-roofs, re-siding and general maintenance) at a scale and in quantities deemed necessary by the Community Development Department. Because the survey will be used to determine an application’s conformance with City Code, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure information provided on the survey corresponds to submitted building plans (including existing and proposed topography). An issued building permit shall authorize only land alterations identified on the survey. Surveys shall include all information as deemed necessary by the Community Development Department to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance.
(b) All new structures shall provide to the City an as-built foundation survey upon completion of work to the foundation unless exempted by the Community Development Department. The as-built foundation survey shall certify both the final setbacks of the structure being built, and the elevations at which the new structure exists. Failure to provide a foundation survey upon foundation completion will result in the builder continuing with construction at his/her own risk. Expenditures incurred beyond the construction of the foundation will not be considered in determining the actions required to bring the building back into conformance if not built to approved plans. The foundation survey shall be on-site before the framing inspection is done and approved by the building official.
(c) All new structures shall provide to the City an as-built grading survey upon completion of work unless exempted by the Community Development Department. The as-built grading survey shall certify the final topography of the site and verify the drainage patterns existing upon completion of work. The City reserves the right to withhold the Certificate of Occupancy for a dwelling until final grading addresses all problems that may be detrimental to adjacent properties.
(5) Review
The Community Development Department shall review all building permit applications for conformance to ordinance requirements. MN Rule chapter 1300 “Administration of the State Building Code”
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (I) Certificates of Occupancy
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 45
(6) Unauthorized Work
Work done without the authorization of a permit and/or found to be out of conformance with approved plans shall be immediately halted and subject to the remedies and penalties described in Section 7.6 of this ordinance. Structures being built out of conformance shall be brought into conformance.
(I) Certificates of Occupancy
(1) Purpose
This section establishes the requirement for City approval prior to the use or occupation of new buildings or structures, or prior to a change in use within an existing structure. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy signifies that the building or structure complies with all code requirements.
(2) Required
(a) No building or structure hereafter erected or moved, or that portion of an existing structure or building erected or moved, shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Community Development Department stating that the building or structure complies with all provisions of this ordinance.
(b) No change in use of an existing building or structure shall occur until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Community Development Department stating that the building or structure complies with all provisions of this ordinance.
(3) Application
A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincident with an application for a building permit or prior to a proposed change in use.
(4) Issuance
A certificate of occupancy will be issued within ten (10) days after the Community Development Department shall have completed a final inspection and found the building or structure conforming to all code requirements.
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Appeal Option if Applicant Disagrees with Decision
Section 2.4(H)
Community Development Department Review / DECISION
CERTIFICATE OFOCCUPANCY
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (J) Sign Permits
Page 46 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(J) Sign Permits
(1) Purpose and Scope
This subsection sets out the procedures to follow when requesting a sign permit.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
A request for a Sign Permit shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(3) Application
(a) All applications for a Sign Permit shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
(b) In addition to general review requirements, applications for a Sign Permit shall also include at least the following to be considered complete (except as
exempted by the Community Development Department):
(i) Names and addresses of the applicant, owners of the sign and lot.
(ii) The address(es) at which the sign(s) are to be erected.
(iii) The lot, block and addition at which the signs are to be erected and the street on which they are to front.
(iv) Type and size of sign (e.g., wall sign, pylon sign).
(v) A site plan (or survey if required by the Community Development Department) which is to scale showing the location of lot lines, building structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs and any other physical features.
(vi) Plans, location and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the buildings or placement method on the ground.
(vii) Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing that the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this and all other laws and ordinances of the City, if required.
(viii) Written consent of the owner or lessee of any site on which the sign is to be erected.
(ix) Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign.
(x) A detailed description of any electronic or electrical components that are proposed to be added to the sign.
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz All sign requirements can be found in Section 4.5: Signs Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements
Appeal Option if Applicant Disagrees with Decision
Section 2.4(H)
Community Development Department Review / DECISION
SIGN
PERMIT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (J) Sign Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 47
(xi) If the proposed sign is a sandwich board sign to be located in the CCD District, the owner of the sign shall provide a certificate of general liability insurance with minimum coverage of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) naming the City as an additional insured for the sign to be located upon the public right-of-way within the CCD, Central Community District.
(xii) Other information to demonstrate compliance with this and all other ordinances of the City.
(4) Review
(a) Sign Review Criteria
Approval of a Sign Permit application shall be based on the following criteria:
(i) Whether the proposed sign is consistent with all the requirements of this ordinance and any other City Code requirements;
(ii) Whether the proposed sign is in compliance with the applicable zoning district and overlay district regulations; and
(iii) Whether the proposed sign meets all the requirements or conditions of any applicable development approvals or agreements.
(b) Sign Review Process
(i) The Community Development Department will review all sign permit requests.
(ii) Applications determined to conform with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(K)(4)(a) shall be approved by the Community Development Department with any conditions deemed necessary. A copy of the approved permit shall be provided to the applicant which includes all conditions and comments.
(iii) Applications not conforming with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(K)(4)(a) shall be denied by the Community Development Department. A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant which includes all identified reasons for denial.
(5) Reasonable Conditions
In approving a sign permit, the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable conditions and requirements as it deems necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with a sign permit review criteria.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (K) Temporary Use Permits
Page 48 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(6) Effect of a Sign Permit Approval
(a) The issuance of a Sign Permit shall authorize only the installation or replacement of signage approved by the Community Development Department.
(b) A Sign Permit, including any conditions, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
(7) Time Limit
(a) Failure to install the approved signage within six months of the date of approval will invalidate the permit.
(b) Upon written request, one extension of six months may be granted by the Community Development Department if the applicant can show good cause.
(8) Amendments
All requested amendments to an existing sign permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
(9) Appeal
The applicant for a Sign Permit may appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 2.4(H).
(K) Temporary Use Permits
(1) Purpose and Scope
This subsection sets out the procedures to follow when requesting a Temporary Use permit.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
A request for a Temporary Use Permit shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(3) Application
(a) All applications for a Temporary Use Permit shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Appeal Option if Applicant Disagrees with Decision
Section 2.4(H)
Community Development Department Review / DECISION
TEMPORARY
USE PERMIT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (K) Temporary Use Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 49
(b) In addition to general review requirements, applications for a Temporary Use Permit shall also include at least the following to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department):
(i) A written narrative which includes:
1. A description of the proposed temporary use, how it will function on the property, hours and dates of operation, and any other information necessary to fully describe the request; and
2. An explanation of how the proposed temporary use will meet each of the criteria set forth in Section 2.4(L)(4)(a), as well as any additional criteria that may apply for the specific use as listed in Chapter 5.
(ii) A site plan of the property showing all information necessary to accurately depict how the proposed use will function on the site. Information required on the site plan shall include but not be limited to:
1. The location of all existing and proposed structures;
2. Driveways and parking areas;
3. Proposed storage spaces;
4. Natural features such as woodlands, wetlands, shorelines, etc;
5. Proposed number of parking spaces (if applicable).
(iii) Any other information that may be reasonably required by the City to evaluate the application.
(4) Review
(a) Temporary Use Permit Review Criteria
Approval of a Temporary Use Permit shall only be granted once the Community Development Department has determined the use shall:
(i) Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare;
(ii) Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on the site;
(iii) Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on nearby residential neighborhoods;
(iv) Not include permanent alterations to the site;
(v) Not maintain temporary signs associated with the use or structure after the activity ends;
(vi) Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a site or use on the site;
(vii) Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property; and Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (K) Temporary Use Permits
Page 50 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(viii) Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use, structure, or special event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate the parking and traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without disturbing environmentally sensitive lands.
(b) Temporary Use Permit Review Process
(i) The Community Development Department will review all Temporary Use Permit applications.
(ii) Applications determined to conform with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(L)(4)(a) shall be approved by the Community Development Department with any conditions deemed necessary. A copy of the approved permit shall be provided to the applicant which includes all conditions and comments.
(iii) Applications not conforming with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(L)(4)(a) shall be denied by the Community Development Department. A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant which includes all identified reasons for denial.
(5) Reasonable Conditions
In approving a Temporary Use Permit, the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable conditions and requirements as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with ordinance requirements.
(6) Effect of a Temporary Use Permit Approval
(a) The issuance of a Temporary Use Permit shall authorize only the specific temporary use approved by the Community Development Department over the specified timeframe.
(b) A minimum of ninety (90) days shall be required between the expiration of a Temporary Use Permit and the issuance of another Temporary Use Permit on the same site for an identical or similar use as determined by the Community Development Department.
(7) Time Limit
No permit shall authorize a temporary use for more than the allowable duration specified in Table 5-6 for the specific temporary use. Table 5-6: Temporary Uses
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (L) Administrative Home Occupation Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 51
(8) Amendments and Withdrawals
(a) All requested amendments to a Temporary Use Permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
(b) Amendments may not alter the allowed timeframe for a temporary use if the temporary use authorized under an existing permit has already begun.
(c) Approved temporary use permits may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to the temporary use beginning to avoid the ninety (90) day between temporary uses requirement in Section 2.4(L)(6)(b).
(d) Approved permits for temporary uses that have already begun cannot be withdrawn.
(9) Appeals
The applicant for a Temporary Use Permit may appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 2.4(H).
(L) Administrative Home Occupation Permits
(1) Purpose and Scope
This subsection sets out the procedures to follow when requesting an Administrative Home Occupation Permit.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
A request for an Administrative Home Occupation Permit shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(3) Application
(a) All applications for an Administrative Home Occupation Permit shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
(b) In addition to general review requirements, applications for an Administrative Home Occupation Permit shall also include at least the following to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department):
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Appeal Option if Applicant Disagrees with Decision
Section 2.4(H)
Community Development Department Review / DECISION
HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (L) Administrative Home Occupation Permits
Page 52 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) A narrative regarding the home occupation which addresses the following issues:
1. How many employees will be working at the home occupation site;
2. What activities will be occurring in conjunction with the home based occupation (i.e. office work, customer visits, sales, stock storage, etc);
3. Vehicle related issues (e.g. will there be a vehicle(s) used in conjunction with the business? Will the business require any non-standard deliveries to the site? Where will customers park? etc).
4. A calculation of the square footage within structures to be used by the home occupation.
(ii) A site plan showing in general how the home occupation will operate on the site. The site plan should show (as applicable):
1. All buildings to be used by the home occupation;
2. Proposed outdoor storage areas;
3. Proposed parking areas for vehicles and/or customers;
4. Proposed sign location(s) in conformance with sign regulations;
5. Any proposed alterations to buildings to accommodate the home occupation;
6. Any proposed features necessary to hide visible evidence of the home occupation from either the public right-of-way or adjacent properties (e.g. plantings, screening fences, etc).
(4) Review
(a) Administrative Home Occupation Review Criteria
Approval of an Administrative Home Occupation Permit shall be based on the following criteria:
(i) The home occupation shall meet all of the general requirements for home occupations in Section 5.3(D)(18)(d);
(ii) The home occupation shall meet all of the general requirements specific to administrative home occupations in Section 5.3(D)(18)(f);
(b) Administrative Home Occupation Review Process
(i) The Community Development Department will review all Administrative Home Occupation Permit applications.
Section 2.3: Common Review Requirements Sec 4.5, Signs Section 5.3(D)(18): Home Occupations
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (L) Administrative Home Occupation Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 53
(ii) Applications determined to conform with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(M)(4)(a) shall be approved by the Community Development Department with any conditions deemed necessary. A copy of the approved permit shall be provided to the applicant which includes all conditions and comments.
(iii) Applications not conforming with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(M)(4)(a) shall be denied by the Community Development Department. A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant which includes all identified reasons for denial.
(5) Reasonable Conditions
In approving an Administrative Home Occupation Permit, the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable conditions and requirements as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with ordinance requirements.
(6) Effect of an Administrative Home Occupation Permit Approval
(a) The issuance of an Administrative Home Occupation Permit shall authorize only the activities and uses approved by the Community Development Department.
(b) An Administrative Home Occupation Permit, including any conditions, shall run with the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership.
(c) The initial Administrative Home Occupation Permit for a property may be issued for a period of one (1) year.
(d) Renewals of existing Administrative Home Occupation Permits may be issued for periods of up to three (3) years at the discretion of the Community Development Department upon consideration of the operation as observed by staff and the level of complaints made about the home occupation.
(e) An applicant shall not have a vested right to a permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. In applying for and accepting a permit, the permit holder agrees that his monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over the life of the permit and that a permit renewal will not be needed to amortize the investment. Each application for the renewal of a permit will be reviewed without taking into consideration that a previous permit has been granted. The previous granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for the renewal of a permit.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (M) Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Permit
Page 54 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(7) Time Limit
(a) Failure to begin the approved home occupation within six months of the date of approval will invalidate the permit.
(b) Upon written request, one extension of six months may be granted by the Community Development Department if the applicant can show good cause.
(8) Amendments
All requested amendments to an Administrative Home Occupation Permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
(9) Appeal
The applicant for an Administrative Home Occupation Permit may appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 2.4(H).
(M) Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Permit
(1) Purpose
This section establishes when a grading, drainage stormwater management, and erosion control permit (“Grading Permit”) is required, how it will be reviewed, information required with the application, and how unauthorized work will be handled. Requiring a Grading Permit enables the City to protect the public by ensuring that erosion does not endanger water resources or unnecessarily require extra maintenance of sewers and ditches and/or the dredging of lakes and ponds. A Grading Permit promotes the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in Monticello.
(2) In General
A Grading Permit shall be required for land-disturbing activity that would require the uncovering or distributing of material in excess of any of the following measurements:
(a) 5000 square feet.
(b) 400 cubic yards undeveloped land, or 40 cubic yards developed land.
(c) Within 200 feet of a waterway or surface water(s). All grading requirements can be found in Section 4.10: Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (M) Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Permit
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 55
(3) Exceptions
(a) No Grading Permit is required for land disturbances under the amounts specified in Section 2.4(M)(2), or for the following activities:
(i) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources.
(ii) General establishment of new construction lawns, or the addition of four (4) or fewer inches of topsoil.
(iii) Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
(b) In the case of grading specific to and in conjunction with a single Building Permit, a separate Grading Permit is not required.
(i) The Building Permit shall be reviewed and serve as the Grading Permit.
(ii) The individual lot permittee shall be required to provide a letter of credit or other security deemed acceptable by the City with the building permit application.
1. The security shall cover City costs for street sweeping, installation, maintenance and repairs to erosion control measures. The bond will be in an amount as specified by the current City ordinance for fee schedule. Said security shall be provided prior to the release of the Grading Permit.
2. The security shall be released after turf is established as specified in the City Design Guidelines and Plan Requirements Manual, and the turf establishment is inspected by the City of Monticello and deemed to be approved.
(4) Application
(a) All applications for a Grading Permit shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
(b) In addition to general review requirements, applications for a Grading Permit shall also include at least the following to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department):
(i) Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm.
(ii) A Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan meeting the requirements of Section 4.10(D). Each application shall
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (M) Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Permit
Page 56 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
include the required number of plans and other required materials as specified by the Community Development Department.
(iii) The application form shall include a statement by the applicant that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the approved Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan.
(iv) The permittee will be required to file with the City of Monticello an irrevocable, automatically renewing letter of credit, or other improvement security in the amount specified by the current City ordinance for fee schedule. This security shall be in addition to the required non-refundable filing fee as specified by City Ordinance, which shall be submitted under separate payment.
1. The security shall cover all costs of engineering and inspection, site improvements, street sweeping, repairs to erosion control measures, and maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the City of Monticello. Said security shall be provided prior to the release of the Grading Permit.
2. Security shall be released after final stabilization is complete, erosion control measures have been removed and their removal area inspected by the City of Monticello and deemed to be approved.
(c) The City of Monticello requires complete application no less than fifteen (15) working days in advance of the desired Grading Permit release date.
(5) Review
(a) Grading Permit Review Criteria
Approval of a Grading Permit shall be based on the following criteria:
(i) Whether the proposed Grading Permit is consistent with all the requirements of Section 4.10 and any other City Code requirements;
(ii) Whether the proposed Grading Permit is in compliance with all engineering standards adopted by the City;
(iii) Whether the proposed Grading Permit is in compliance with any previous approvals for the facility (e.g. grading for additional parking previously approved by a conditional use permit).
(b) Grading Permit Review Process
(i) The Community Development Department shall review all Grading Permit applications.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (M) Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Permit
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 57
(ii) Applications determined to conform with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(M)(5)(a) shall be approved by the Community Development Department with any conditions deemed necessary. A copy of the approved permit shall be provided to the applicant which includes all conditions and comments.
(iii) Applications not conforming with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(M)(5)(a) shall be denied by the Community Development Department. A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant which includes all identified reasons for denial.
(6) Reasonable Conditions
In approving a Grading Permit, the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable conditions and requirements as it deems necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with the Grading Permit review criteria and other city ordinances.
(7) Effect of Grading Permit Approval
The issuance of a Grading Permit shall authorize only the changes approved by the Community Development Department as depicted by the application materials.
(8) Time Limit
(a) Failure to complete the authorized grading within six months of the date of approval will invalidate the permit.
(b) Upon written request, one extension of six months may be granted by the Community Development Department if the applicant can show good cause.
(9) Amendments
All requested amendments to an existing Grading Permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
(10) Unauthorized Work
Work done without the authorization of a permit and/or found to be out of conformance with approved plans shall be immediately halted and subject to the remedies and penalties described in Section 7.6 of this ordinance. Driveways or parking lots being built out of conformance shall be brought into conformance.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (N) Driveway Permits
Page 58 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(11) Appeal
The applicant for a Grading Permit my appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 2.4(H).
(N) Driveway Permits
(1) Purpose
This section establishes when a driveway permit is required, how it will be reviewed, information required with the application, and how unauthorized work will be handled. Requiring a driveway permit enables the City to inspect work done within the right-of-way, protect the public by setting and enforcing construction standards and ensure proper pavement construction.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
A request for a driveway permit shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(3) In General
(a) A driveway permit shall be required for the installation, repair, expansion, reconfiguration or resurfacing of any driveway or parking lot intended for use by more than three vehicles.
(b) A driveway permit shall only be issued after the Community Development Department determines the proposed plan sets adhere to the City’s adopted engineering standards.
(4) Application
(a) All applications for a driveway permit shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
(b) In addition to general review requirements, applications for a driveway permit shall also include at least the following to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department):
(i) A written narrative providing the following information:
1. The legal description, address, and owners name of the premises involved;
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
Appeal Option if Applicant Disagrees with Decision
Section 2.4(H)
Community Development Department Review / DECISION
DRIVEWAY
PERMIT
Complete Application
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (N) Driveway Permits
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 59
2. The date on which the proposed improvement is proposed to be commenced;
3. The name, address, and contact information for the contractor being hired to complete the proposed improvements.
(ii) A site plan (or certified site survey if required by the Community Development Department) at a scale and in quantities deemed necessary by the Community Development Department showing:
1. Lot dimensions;
2. Lot area in square feet;
3. Location of all existing buildings, landscaping, screening and natural features as directed by the Community Development Department (including but not limited to woodlands, wetlands, shorelines, and individual trees which may be impacted by the proposed driveway or parking lot construction);
4. Location of the existing driveway (if applicable), the proposed driveway and the square footage of each;
5. Location of existing public sidewalks and trails;
6. Calculation of the existing and proposed impervious surface coverage on the lot;
7. Identify existing and proposed curb types specifically calling out proposed changes to existing facilities.
(iii) For new construction and expansions, an erosion control plan shall be submitted.
(5) Review
(a) Driveway Permit Review Criteria
Approval of a driveway permit shall be based on the following criteria:
(i) Whether the proposed driveway permit is consistent with all the requirements of this ordinance and any other City Code requirements;
(ii) Whether the proposed driveway permit is in compliance with all engineering standards adopted by the City;
(iii) Whether the proposed driveway permit is in compliance with any previous approvals for the facility (e.g. adding parking as previously approved by a conditional use permit).
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (N) Driveway Permits
Page 60 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Driveway Permit Review Process
(i) The Community Development Department shall review all driveway permit applications.
(ii) Applications determined to conform with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(O)(4)(a) shall be approved by the Community Development Department with any conditions deemed necessary. A copy of the approved permit shall be provided to the applicant which includes all conditions and comments.
(iii) Applications not conforming with the approval criteria outlined in Section 2.4(O)(4)(a) shall be denied by the Community Development Department. A notice of denial shall be provided to the applicant which includes all identified reasons for denial.
(6) Reasonable Conditions
In approving a driveway permit, the Community Development Department may impose such reasonable conditions and requirements as it deems necessary and appropriate to ensure continued compliance with the driveway permit review criteria.
(7) Effect of Driveway Permit Approval
The issuance of a Driveway Permit shall authorize only the changes approved by the Community Development Department as depicted by the application materials.
(8) Time Limit
(a) Failure to complete driveway or parking lot improvements within six months of the date of approval will invalidate the permit.
(b) Upon written request, one extension of six months may be granted by the Community Development Department if the applicant can show good cause.
(9) Amendments
All requested amendments to an existing driveway permit shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 61
(10) Unauthorized Work
Work done without the authorization of a permit and/or found to be out of conformance with approved plans shall be immediately halted and subject to the remedies and penalties described in Section 7.6 of this ordinance. Driveways or parking lots being built out of conformance shall be brought into conformance.
(11) Appeal
The applicant for a Grading Permit my appeal the decision of the Community Development Department to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals per Section 2.4(H).
(O) Planned Unit Developments
(1) Purpose and Intent
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) zoning district is to provide greater flexibility in the development of neighborhoods and non-residential areas in order to maximize public values and achieve more creative development outcomes while remaining economically viable and marketable. This is achieved by undertaking a process that results in a development outcome exceeding that which is typically achievable through the conventional zoning district. The City reserves the right to deny the PUD rezoning and direct the developer to re-apply under the standard applicable zoning district.
(2) Initiation of Proceedings
Applications for a PUD shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(3) Reflection on the Official Zoning Map
(a) PUD provisions provide an optional method of regulating land use which permits flexibility in allowed uses and other regulating provisions. In some circumstances, however, rules and regulations governing the original zoning district, or other zoning regulations found elsewhere in the City’s ordinances, may be appropriate to apply within the PUD. As such, approval of a Planned Unit Development and execution of a PUD agreement shall require the property in question be rezoned to PUD. For each PUD District, a specific ordinance shall be adopted, along with a tracking designation for use on the official zoning map to distinguish it from other PUD districts and identify the adopted ordinance in the City Code. Once a PUD has been granted and is in effect for a parcel, no building permit shall be issued for that parcel which is
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
PUD Final Stage and Final Plat REVIEW
(Staff and Council)
PUD Final Stage and Final Plat APPLICATION
PUD Preliminary Plat & Rezoning REVIEW
(Staff, applicable Commissions & Council)
PUD Development Stage, Prelim Plat & Rezoning APPLICATION
PUD Concept Proposal REVIEW
(Staff, applicable Commissions & Council)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
PUD Concept PROPOSAL
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 62 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
not in conformance with the approved PUD Plan, the current Minnesota State Building Code and all associated documents, and with all other applicable City Code provisions.
(b) All PUD rezonings approved prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall retain their zoning classifications of R-PUD, and shall continue to be governed by the ordinance and resolutions which created these areas.
(c) All PUDs previously granted by Conditional Use Permit shall continue to be regulated under the terms of the CUP.
(4) Permitted Locations for PUD rezoning
A rezoning to PUD may be requested for any area regardless of current zoning.
(5) PUD Qualifications
Rezonings to PUD will be considered only for areas of land in single ownership or control, except in the following circumstances:
(a) Natural features of the land are such that development under standard zoning regulations would not be appropriate in order to conserve such features;
(b) The land is intended to be developed in accordance with a prior PUD adjacent to or across the street from the subject property;
(c) The PUD process is desirable to ensure compatibility and careful consideration of the effect of a development on surrounding land uses.
(d) Multiple party ownership is adequately secured through a corporation, partnership, or other legal entity that will ensure the ability to fulfill all of the obligations of the PUD process, including approvals, development, and securities.
(6) Permitted Uses Within PUDs
Uses within a PUD shall be governed by the ordinance establishing the PUD and by the conditions, if any, imposed by the City in the approval process and PUD documents.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 63
(7) Expectations of a Development Seeking a Rezoning to PUD
Planned Unit Development is designed to allow flexibility from the application of standard zoning regulations to achieve a variety of public values that will be identified for each specific PUD project. The following list represents examples of public values that may be applicable to any individual PUD project, but is not necessarily inclusive, nor are all examples applicable to all projects:
(a) Ensure high quality construction standards and the use of high quality construction materials;
(b) Promote a variety of housing styles which include features such as side or rear loaded garages, front porches, varying roof pitches, and four sided architecture/articulation;
(c) Eliminate repetition of similar housing types by encouraging a housing mixture that diversifies the architectural qualities of a neighborhood;
(d) Promote aesthetically-pleasing design within the neighborhood and appears attractive and inviting from surrounding parcels;
(e) Incorporate extensive landscaping and site amenities in excess of what is required by code;
(f) Provide high-quality park, open space, and trail opportunities that exceed the expectations established in the Comprehensive Plan;
(g) Provide access to a convenient and efficient multi-modal transportation system to service the daily needs of residents at peak and non-peak use levels, with high connectivity to the larger community.
(h) Promote development that is designed to reduce initial infrastructure costs and long-term maintenance and operational costs;
(i) Where applicable, maximize the use of ecologically-based approaches to stormwater management, restore or enhance on-site ecological systems, and protect off-site ecological systems including the application of Low Impact Development (LID) practices;
(j) Facilitate a complementary mix of lifecycle housing;
(k) Preserve and protect important ecological areas identified on the City’s natural resource inventory (NRI);
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 64 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(l) Accommodate higher development intensity in areas where infrastructure and other systems are capable of providing appropriate levels of public services, and require lower intensity in areas where such services are inadequate, or where natural features require protection and/or preservation.
(8) Areas of Flexibility
(a) The City may consider an increase in the density or intensity of the project, along with related reductions in lot width and size if the PUD provides substantially more site amenities and public values, as outlined in Section 2.4(P)(7), than could be achieved in a conventional development for the applicable land use zone.
(b) The City may consider flexibility with regard to land uses, setbacks, lot size, width, and depth, among other zoning standards when reviewing a PUD rezoning request. Specifications and standards for lots shall be at the discretion of City Council, and shall encourage a desirable living or working environment which assists in achieving the goals set out for PUDs.
(c) The City may consider flexibility in the phasing of a PUD development. Changes to the proposed staging or timing of a PUD may be approved by the City Council when necessary or on the showing of good cause by the developer.
(9) PUD Procedure
All requests for rezoning to Planned Unit Development shall follow the steps outlined below.
(a) PUD Concept Proposal
Prior to submitting formal development stage PUD, preliminary plat (as applicable) and rezoning applications for the proposed development, the applicant may, at its option, prepare an informal concept plan and present it to the Planning Commission and City Council at a concurrent work session, as scheduled by the Community Development Department. The purpose of the Concept Proposal is to:
 Provide preliminary feedback on the concept plan in collaboration between the applicant, general public, Planning Commission , and City Council;
 Provide a forum for public comment on the PUD prior to a requirement for extensive engineering and other plans;
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 65
 Provide a forum to identify potential issues and benefits of the proposal which can be addressed at succeeding stages of PUD design and review.
(i) Initiation of Proceedings
A request for a PUD Concept Proposal Review shall be initiated by the property owner and other person or party having an interest in Concept Proposal.
(ii) Proposal Submittal
1. All proposals for a PUD Concept Proposal Review shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
2. In addition to common review requirements, proposals for a PUD Concept Plan Review shall also include at least the information in Section 2.4(P)(9)(b)(iii) below to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department).
(iii) Specific PUD Concept Proposal Submittal Requirements
The following information shall be provided unless waived by staff:
1. A listing of contact information including name(s), address(es) and phone number(s) of: the owner of record, authorized agents or representatives, engineer, surveyor, and any other relevant associates;
2. A listing of the following site data: Address, current zoning, parcel size in acres and square feet and current legal description(s);
3. A narrative explaining the applicant’s proposed objectives for the PUD, and public values that the applicant believes may be achieved by the project;
4. A listing of general information including the number of proposed residential units, commercial and industrial land uses by category of use, public use areas including a description of proposed use, and any other land use proposed as part of the PUD;
5. Calculation of the proposed density of the project and the potential density under standard zoning regulations, including both gross density and net density, accounting for developable and undevelopable land. Undevelopable land shall include all wetlands, floodplains, sensitive ecological areas identified in the Natural Resource Inventory, slopes greater than 18%, poor soils and areas of concentrated woodlands.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 66 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
6. Outline a conceptual development schedule indicating the approximate date when construction of the project, or stages of the same, can be expected to begin and be completed (including the proposed phasing of construction of public improvements and recreational and common space areas).
7. A Concept PUD Proposal illustrating the nature and type of proposed development. At a minimum, the plan should show:
a. Area calculations for gross land area
b. Existing zoning district(s)
c. Layout of proposed lots and proposed uses. Denote outlots planned for public dedication and/or open space (schools, parks, etc.)
d. Area calculations for each parcel
e. General location of wetlands and/or watercourses over the property and within 200 feet of the perimeter of the subdivision parcel
f. Location of existing and proposed streets within and immediately adjacent to the subdivision parcel
g. Proposed sidewalks and trails
h. Proposed parking areas
i. Proposed parks, common areas, and preservation easements (indicate public vs. private if applicable)
j. General location of wooded areas or significant features (environmental, historical, cultural) of the parcel
k. Location of utility systems that will serve the property
l. Other: An applicant may submit any additional information that may explain the proposed PUD.
8. A listing of the areas of flexibility from the standard zoning sought through the use of PUD design.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 67
(iv) PUD Concept Plan Proposal Review
Upon receiving a PUD concept plan proposal, the Community Development Department shall:
1. Schedule a joint meeting of the Planning Commission and City Council and shall provide notice of the meeting to all property owners within 350’ of the property boundary of the proposal. During the concurrent meeting, the Planning Commission and City Council may make comment on the merit, needed changes, and suggested conditions which may assist the proposer in future application for proposed rezoning and PUD development plan.
a. The Planning Commission and City Council may also take comment from the public as part of the joint meeting.
b. The Council and Planning Commission shall make no formal decision as part of the consideration The City Council and Planning Commission’s comments are explicitly not an approval or decision on the project, and are intended to represent preliminary feedback related to this PUD ordinance, the applicable zoning regulations, and the Comprehensive Plan.
(b) PUD Development Stage, Preliminary Plat, and Rezoning
(i) Initiation of Proceedings
Requests for PUD Development Stage, rezoning to PUD and Preliminary Plat shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications. The Development Stage PUD request shall be subject to timelines set by Minn. Stat. Section 15.99. If the applicant has processed an optional Concept Proposal review pursuant to Section 2.4 (D)(9)(a), the Development Stage application shall be submitted within six (6) months of such review. If more than six (6) months have elapsed since the Concept Review, the application must be processed as a new Concept Proposal unless the Community Development Department determines to waive this provision.
(ii) Application
1. All applications for rezoning to PUD and Preliminary Plat shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
2. The application for rezoning to PUD shall be in accordance with Section 2.4(B), Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 68 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
3. The application for Preliminary Plat (as applicable) shall be in accordance with City Code Title 11, Chapter 4, Data Required for Preliminary and Final Plats; and shall include the additional information requirements listed in Section 2.4(P)(9)(c)(iii) below to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department).
4. If the PUD is proposed to develop over a timeframe exceeding two years, a PUD Phasing Plan for the entire project (to be completed in phases) may be submitted. Subsequent PUD Final Plan applications would only grant approval for an individual phase.
(iii) Specific PUD Development Stage, Preliminary Plat and Rezoning Submittal Requirements
An applicant shall provide a separate PUD Development Stage Plan clearly delineating the proposed development and all features not consistent with underlying zoning regulations (e.g. setback deviations). At a minimum, the plan should show:
1. All required information per Section 2.4(P)(9)(b)(iii) of this ordinance.
2. Administrative information (including identification of the drawing as a “PUD Development Stage Plan,” the proposed name of the project, contact information for the developer and individual preparing the plan, signature of the surveyor and civil engineer certifying the document, date of plan preparation or revision, and a graphic scale and true north arrow);
3. Area calculations for gross land area, wetland areas, wetland buffers, right-of-way dedications, conservation areas, and proposed public and private parks;
4. Existing zoning district(s);
5. Layout of proposed lots with future lot and block numbers. The perimeter boundary line of the subdivision should be distinguishable from the other property lines. Denote outlots planned for public dedication and/or open space (schools, parks, etc.);
6. Area calculations for each parcel;
7. Proposed setbacks on each lot (forming the building pad) and calculated buildable area;
8. Proposed gross hardcover allowance per lot (if applicable);
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 69
9. Existing contours at intervals of two feet. Contours must extend a minimum of 200 feet beyond the boundary of the parcel(s) in question;
10. Delineation of wetlands and/or watercourses over the property and within 200 feet of the perimeter of the subdivision parcel;
11. Delineation of the ordinary high water levels of all water bodies;
12. Grading drainage and erosion control plan prepared by a registered professional engineer, providing all information outlined in Monticello Zoning Code, Chapter 4, Section 10(C);
13. Location, width, and names of existing and proposed streets within and immediately adjacent to the subdivision parcel;
14. Easements and rights-of-way within or adjacent to the subdivision parcel(s);
15. The location and orientation of proposed buildings;
16. Colored building elevations which detail the materials being used;
17. Proposed sidewalks and trails;
18. Vehicular circulation system showing location and dimension for all driveways, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, service roads, loading areas, fire lanes, emergency access, if necessary, public and private streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, direction of traffic flow and traffic control devices;
19. Lighting location, style and mounting and light distribution plan.
20. Proposed parks, common areas, and preservation easements (indicate public vs. private if applicable);
21. Landscape plan prepared by a qualified professional providing all information outlined in Monticello Zoning Ordinance Section 4.1(D) including planting counts, sizes and species;
22. Location and detail of signage providing all pertinent information outlined in Monticello Zoning Ordinance Section 2.4(K)(3)(b).
23. Location, access and screening detail of large trash handling and recycling collection areas in compliance with the requirements of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Section 5.3(D)(34).
24. Any other information as directed by the Community Development Department.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 70 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iv) PUD Development Stage, Preliminary Plat and Rezoning to PUD Review
1. The application for rezoning to PUD shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 2.4(B), Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments.
2. The application for Preliminary Plat shall be reviewed in accordance with City Code Title 11, Chapter 3, Section 2, Preliminary Plat Procedure.
3. As part of the review process for both applications, the Community Development Department shall generate an analysis of the proposal against the expectations for PUDs and this ordinance to formulate a recommendation regarding the rezoning to the Planning Commission and City Council.
4. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and consider the application’s consistency with the intent and purpose of the PUD and comprehensive plan goals. The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council on the merit, needed changes, and suggested conditions of the proposed rezoning, preliminary plat and PUD development plan.
5. In approving or denying the PUD Development Stage application and ordinance to rezone the subject property to PUD, the City Council shall make findings on the following:
a. Whether the PUD plan is consistent with the city’s comprehensive plan;
b. Whether the PUD plan is tailored to the specific characteristics of the site and achieves a higher quality of site planning and greater public benefits than would be achieved under conventional provisions of the ordinance;
c. Whether the PUD plan addresses the purpose and intent of the PUD rezoning laid out in Section 2.4(P)(1), and the public values statement established at the beginning of the process;
d. Whether the PUD plan addresses the expectations of a PUD laid out in Section 2.4(P)(7);
e. Whether the PUD plan maintains or improves the efficiency of public streets, utilities, and other public services;
f. Whether the PUD plan results in development compatible with existing adjacent and future guided land uses;
g. Whether the PUD can be accommodated by existing public services, such as parks, police, fire, administration, and utilities,
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 71
or the developer has provided for the growth and extension of such services as a component of the PUD.
h. Whether the PUD is designed to take advantage of, and preserve, the natural features of the subject property, including waterways, forested areas, natural prairie, topography, views, etc.
6. An ordinance rezoning the property shall be prepared by the City, for review at the Development Stage PUD, but adoption of such ordinance shall occur only upon approval of the Final Stage PUD.
(c) PUD Final Plat
(i) Initiation of Proceedings
1. A Final Stage PUD plan and final plat that conforms with the approved Development Stage PUD and preliminary plat and associated PUD rezoning ordinance shall be submitted no later than sixty (60) days following the Development Stage PUD approval for review within the time allotted by Minn. Stat. Section 15.99. Applicants may request an extension for such submittal for a maximum of an additional six (6) months), and shall request waivers for any statutory time limits as necessary. Applications which fail to meet this deadline shall be deemed void and shall require review and re-application according to the Development Stage PUD process of this ordinance.
2. The request for PUD Final Stage and Final Plat shall be initiated by application of the property owner or other person having authority to file an application pursuant to Section 2.3(B), Authority to File Applications.
(ii) Application
1. All applications for PUD Final Stage and Final Plat shall be in accordance with Section 2.3, Common Review Requirements.
2. The application for PUD Final Plat shall be in accordance with City Code Title 11, Chapter 4, Data Required for Preliminary and Final Plats.
3. In addition to general city code requirements, applications for a PUD Final Stage and Final Plat shall also include at least the information in Section 2.4(P)(9)(d)(iii) below to be considered complete (except as exempted by the Community Development Department).
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 72 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iii) Specific PUD Final Stage and Final Plat Submittal Requirements
1. If a PUD Master Plan for the entire project was submitted and approved as part of the PUD Development Stage, an updated Master Plan shall be submitted incorporating all changes required by the PUD Development Stage approval.
2. The PUD Development Stage Plan shall be updated to incorporate all changes required by the PUD, preliminary plat and rezoning approvals. This document must clearly show all deviations from standard zoning being approved as part of the PUD.
3. The City shall prepare, and the applicant shall execute, a developer’s agreement which references all PUD plans, development phasing, required improvements, completion dates for improvements, the required letter of credit, all required development fees, escrows, and warranties, and any other information deemed necessary by the City.
4. The City shall, upon approval of the PUD Final Stage, recording of the Final Plat, and execution of the PUD developer’s agreement, publish the PUD Ordinance specifying land use, densities, performance standards, and ongoing general obligations of occupants of the PUD. Such ordinance shall create a zoning district that is specific to the property for which the PUD was applied, and shall be designated in such a way as to be able to mark the official zoning map to identify the PUD ordinance. The PUD ordinance shall also designate that such property is thereby rezoned to the PUD district as adopted.
5. Up-to-date title evidence for the subject property in a form acceptable to the City shall be provided as part of the application for the PUD Final Plat.
6. Developer shall provide warranty deeds for Property being dedicated to the City for all parks, outlots, etc., free from all liens and encumbrances except as otherwise waived by the City Council.
7. Developer shall provide all easement dedication documents for easements not shown on the final plat including those for trails, ingress/egress, etc., together with all necessary consents to the easement by existing encumbrancers of the property.
(iv) PUD Final Stage and Final Plat Review
The application for PUD Final Stage and Final Plat shall be considered by the City Council at a public meeting, following a review and report by the Community Development Department. Approval of the PUD Final
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 73
Stage and Final Plat shall be by simple majority vote of the City Council, except where State law may specifically require a supermajority.
(v) Final PUD Approval shall occur by adoption of a rezoning ordinance for the subject property specifying the uses, standards, and other requirements of said PUD zoning district. Such ordinance shall include an effective date clause which may delay the effective date of the ordinance until such time as the applicant has met each of the conditions of approval required by the City Council, in addition to other requirements including publication. No approvals are valid, and no permits may be issued, until the ordinance takes effect. If the Final PUD is not approved by the City Council, or the applicant fails to meet the conditions as described, the ordinance shall not take effect, and the subject property shall retain its previous zoning designation.
(10) PUD Amendments
Approved PUD’s may be amended from time to time as a result of unforeseen circumstances, overlooked opportunities, or requests from a developer. At such a time, the applicant shall make an application to the city for a PUD amendment. All such amendments will be processed as one of the following:
(a) Administrative Amendment – The Community Development Department may approve minor changes in the location, placement, and height of buildings if such changes are required by engineering or other circumstances, provided the conform to the review criteria applied by the Planning Commission and City Council, and are consistent with all requirements of the PUD ordinance. Under no circumstances shall an administrative amendment allow additional stories to buildings, additional lots, or changes to designated uses established as part of the PUD. An Administrative Amendment shall be memorialized via letter signed by the Community Development Director and recorded against the PUD property.
(b) PUD Adjustment – an adjustment to a PUD may be made through review and approval by a simple majority vote of the City Council with or without referral to the Planning Commission. For a PUD Adjustment, the applicant shall follow the procedures and requirements of the PUD Final Stage as identified in this Chapter. A PUD Adjustment shall be memorialized with an amendment to the PUD Development Agreement, executed by the City and applicant, and recorded against the PUD property. To qualify for this review, the minor adjustment shall not:
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 74 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) Eliminate, diminish or be disruptive to the preservation and protection of sensitive site features.
(ii) Eliminate, diminish or compromise the high quality of site planning, design, landscaping or building materials.
(iii) Alter significantly the location of buildings, parking areas or roads.
(iv) Increase or decrease the number of residential dwelling units by more than five percent.
(v) Increase the gross floor area of non-residential buildings by more than three percent or increase the gross floor area of any individual building by more than five percent (residential lots not guided for specific structure sizes are excluded from this requirement).
(vi) Increase the number of stories of any building.
(vii) Decrease the amount of open space or alter it in such a way as to change its original design or intended function or use.
(viii) Create non-compliance with any condition attached to the approval of the Final PUD Plan.
(c) PUD Amendment – any change not qualifying for an administrative amendment or a PUD adjustment shall require a PUD amendment. An application to amend a PUD shall be administered in the same manner as that required for an initial PUD beginning at PUD Development Stage and Preliminary Plat.
(11) PUD Cancellation
A PUD shall only be cancelled and revoked upon the City Council adopting an ordinance rescinding the ordinance approving the PUD. Cancellation of a PUD shall include findings that demonstrate that the PUD is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan or other application land use regulations, threatens public safety, health, or welfare, or other applicable findings in accordance with law.
(12) Administration
In general, the following rules shall apply to all PUDs:
(a) Rules and regulations: No requirement outlined in the PUD process shall restrict the City Council from taking action on an application if necessary to meet state mandated time deadlines;
(b) Preconstruction: No building permit shall be granted for any building on land for which a PUD plan is in the process of review, unless the proposed
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 75
building is allowed under the existing zoning and will not impact, influence, or interfere with the proposed PUD plan.
(c) Effect on Conveyed Property: In the event any real property in the approved PUD Agreement is conveyed in total, or in part, the buyers thereof shall be bound by the provisions of the approved Final PUD Plan constituting a part thereof as well as the PUD zoning ordinance; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to create non-conforming lots, building sites, buildings or uses by virtue of any such conveyance of a lot, building site, building or part of the development created pursuant to and in conformance with the approved PUD.
CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION REVIEWS AND PROCEDURES
Section 2.4 Specific Review Procedures & Requirements
Subsection (O) Planned Unit Developments
Page 76 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(this page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.1 General Provisions
Subsection (D) Zoning Classifications for Newly Annexed Property
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 77
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS 3.1 General Provisions
(A) Adoption of Zoning Map
The map entitled City of Monticello Zoning Map, dated 1-24-11, hereinafter referred to as the “zoning map,” and all explanatory matters thereon, are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance. Questions concerning a zoning designation or boundaries of a zoning district shown on the zoning map shall be resolved by referring back to the previously adopted ordinances delimiting the districts and boundaries.
(B) Types of Zoning Districts
Land within the City is generally classified by this ordinance to be within one of a number of base zoning districts. Land within any base zoning district may also be classified into one or more overlay zoning districts, in which case regulations governing development in the overlay district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district, unless expressly stated otherwise.
(C) District Boundaries
(1) The boundaries of the districts are established as shown on the zoning map. Unless otherwise indicated on the zoning map, the district boundaries are parcel lines or the corporate limit lines, as they existed at the time of the enactment of this ordinance.
(2) New base district lines or rezoning lines shall follow parcel lines.
(D) Zoning Classifications for Newly Annexed Property
Any land annexed to the City in the future shall initially be placed in the A-O Agricultural Open District, unless placed in another district by action of the City Council after recommendation of the Planning Commission.
Official Zoning Map 1-24-11
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.2 Districts Established
Subsection (B) Establishment of Overlay Districts
Page 78 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
3.2 Districts Established
(A) Establishment of Base Districts
Table 3-1, Base Zoning Districts, sets out the base residential, business, and industrial zoning districts established by this ordinance.
TABLE 3-1: BASE ZONING DISTRICTS Abbreviation District Name Residential Districts
A-O
Agricultural Open District
R-A
Residential Amenities District
R-1
Single Family Residential District
R-2
Single and Two Family Residential District
T-N
Traditional Neighborhood District
R-3
Medium Density Residential District
R-4
Medium-High Residential District
M-H
Mobile & Manufactured Home Park District Business Districts
B-1
Neighborhood Business District
B-2
Limited Business District
B-3
Highway Business District
B-4
Regional Business District
CCD
Central Community District Industrial Districts
IBC
Industrial and Business Campus District
I-1
Light Industrial District
I-2
Heavy Industrial District
(B) Establishment of Overlay Districts
Table 3-2, Overlay Zoning Districts, sets out the overlay zoning districts established by this ordinance.
TABLE 3-2: OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS Abbreviation District Name
FP
Flood Plain District
W
Wetland District
WS
Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
SH
Shoreland District
FBS
Freeway Bonus Sign District
DW
Drinking Water Supply Management Area District
PB
Performance Based Enhancement District
SU
Special Use Overlay District
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.3 Common District Requirements
Subsection (C) Principal Buildings
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 79
(C) Classification of Districts
Land shall be classified or reclassified into a base or overlay zoning district only in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.4(B), Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments.
(D) Organization of Base Zoning District Regulations
Sections 3.3(A) through 3.3(Q) establish the general purposes of each base zoning district along with the physical standards governing lots and structures within each district. Each of these subsections has a common structure consisting of a purpose statement, applicable size and dimensional standards for lots, photographs showing typical district building forms, an example of the typical lot configuration found in the district, and a hypothetical graphic depicting the districts physical regulations. Uses allowed in each district can be found in Chapter 5. Finishing standards for lots (i.e. landscaping standards, parking requirements, etc) can be found in Chapter 4.
(E) Diagrams and Photographs for Illustrative Purposes Only
The building form photographs, example lot configurations, and hypothetical graphics of physical regulations are for illustrative purposes only, and may not be consistent with all listed requirements. In all cases, the dimensional requirement text of this ordinance shall control. 3.3 Common District Requirements
The following regulations shall apply in all base zoning districts.
(A) Building within Public Easements Prohibited
No building or structure shall be placed within an easement dedicated for a public purpose unless expressly authorized by a variance issued in accordance with Section 2.4(C) or a license agreement issued by the Community Development Department.
(B) Outlots
No building permit or grading permit can be issued for a parcel of land designated in a plat as an outlot unless specifically authorized by the City Council.
(C) Principal Buildings
Except as may be permitted by an approved planned unit development, not more than one (1) principal building shall be located on a lot. Section 2.4(B): Zoning Ordinance Text and Zoning Map Amendments Chapter 5: Use Standards Chapter 4: Finishing Standards
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.3 Common District Requirements
Subsection (D) Common Yard and Height Requirements
Page 80 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(D) Common Yard and Height Requirements
(1) In General
(a) Unless otherwise authorized by variance, administrative adjustment or PUD, no lot, yard, or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such lot, yard, or open space less than the minimum required by this ordinance; and if the existing yard or other open space as existing is less than the minimum required, it shall not be further reduced.
(b) A yard or other open area required about a building shall not be included as part of a yard or other open space for another building.
(2) Allowable Yard Encroachments
(a) The following features may encroach into required yards:
(i) Fences and walls that meet the standards in Section 4.3, may encroach into a required yard, but shall be subject to corner visibility requirements, and shall not be placed within conservation easements unless specifically permitted by the easement.
(ii) Walkways, patios, ramps, stairs, paved areas, and other accessory structures less than 30 inches above grade, and all landscape plantings are exempted from yard requirements except as may be specifically required by this ordinance, but are subject to corner visibility requirements, and shall not be placed within conservation easements unless specifically permitted by the easement.
(iii) In rear and side yards: recreational and laundry drying equipment, arbors and trellises, balconies, decks, and air conditioning subject to the following conditions:
1. Setback requirements of environmental protection districts shall remain applicable.
2. A side yard setback of six (6) feet shall be maintained.
3. A setback of twenty (20’) feet shall be maintained from property lines abutting public streets.
4. A rear yard setback of six (6) feet shall be maintained.
5. No encroachment shall be permitted within an existing or required easement.
(iv) Appurtenances:
1. Appurtenances are permitted to encroach into a required front or rear yard setback up to six feet. This provision does not apply to rear loading units in the T-N zoning district. Section 4.3: Fences & Walls Section 5.3(B): General Standards and Limitations for Accessory Uses & Structures
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.3 Common District Requirements
Subsection (D) Common Yard and Height Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 81
2. Appurtenances are permitted to encroach into a required side yard setback up to three feet. This provision does not apply to units in the T-N zoning district.
3. Railings on landing places or porches extending into a required side yard shall not exceed 3 feet, 6 inches in height.
4. Appurtenances shall not be located within existing or required easements.
(b) Corner Visibility (see Figure 3-1)
(i) Corner lots shall preserve areas necessary for corner visibility by limiting the height of fences, walls, and all other obstructions to a maximum of three feet above grade in the following areas:
1. For lots with an interior corner lot angle of 90 degrees or more at a street or railway corner, the protected corner area is defined by a triangle created by the two corner lot lines and an imaginary line between the corner lot lines at 25 feet from the corner on each property lot line.
2. For lots with an interior angle of less than 90 degrees at a street or railway corner, the protected corner area is defined by a triangle created by the two corner lot lines and drawing an imaginary line between the corner lot lines 25 feet from the corner on each property lot line plus one foot for every ten degrees or fraction thereof less than 90 degrees.
(ii) Corner visibility standards do not apply to United States mailboxes, police and fire alarm boxes, public utility poles, street name markers, official traffic signs and control devices, and fire hydrants.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.3 Common District Requirements
Subsection (D) Common Yard and Height Requirements
Page 82 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Height Requirements
(a) In general
The total height of any structure shall not exceed the maximum height limit established for the applicable zoning district unless expressly stated otherwise in this ordinance.
(b) Exceptions
Height limits shall not apply to chimneys, church spires, belfries, cooling towers, cupolas and domes which do not contain useable space, elevator penthouses, fire escapes or roof access stairways, flag poles, mechanical equipment required to operate and maintain the building, monuments, parapet walls extending not more than three (3) feet above the limiting height of the building, rooftop dish antennas, skylights, water towers, wind electrical generators, telecommunication towers or similar appurtenances, provided:
(i) The appurtenance does not interfere with Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace;
(ii) The appurtenance does not extend more than 25 feet above the maximum permitted building height, except as specifically allowed by this ordinance;
(iii) The appurtenance does not exceed a maximum height of 200 feet above grade;
(iv) The appurtenance is not constructed for the purpose of providing additional floor area in the building; and
(v) The appurtenance complies with the screening requirements for mechanical equipment and appurtenances in this ordinance.
Section 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (B) Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 83
3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
(A) General Purpose
The residential base zoning districts established in this section are intended to provide a variety of housing options in a comfortable, healthy, safe, and pleasant environment in which to live and recreate at a neighborhood level. More specifically, they are intended to:
(1) Promote strong residential neighborhoods with a sense of connection to the community;
(2) Foster citizen involvement in the community, interaction between neighbors and neighborhood oriented support systems;
(3) Provide a range of housing choices and affordability through varying housing densities, types and designs including accessory dwelling units;
(4) Seek quality over quantity in new residential growth;
(5) Maintain a connection to the natural environment by incorporation of natural characteristics into the development setting;
(B) Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts
(1) Zero Side Lot Line Development
Residential unit lots containing duplexes or townhouses may be subdivided along the common wall in a “zero lot line” arrangement, provided:
(a) The combined area of the base lot and individual unit lots contains the required amount of lot area per unit as prescribed elsewhere in this Ordinance;
(b) Unit lots shall meet all required setbacks from the boundaries of the base lot;
(c) Any shared wall facing on a zero side lot line is a structural wall capable of providing protection from fire, noise and visual encroachment.
(2) Condominiums
Residential lots of non-single family structures may be divided for the purpose of condominium ownership provided that:
(a) The principal structure containing the housing units shall meet the setback distances of the applicable zoning district.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (B) Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts
Page 84 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Each condominium unit shall have the minimum lot area for the type of housing unit and usable open space as specified in the area and building size regulations of this ordinance.
(c) Condominiums shall be designed to meet the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code.
(3) Multi-Story Buildings
Applications for a conditional use permit to exceed the maximum heights allowed in Section 3.4 shall be subject to the general CUP review criteria listed in Section 2.4(D)(4)(a) as well as the following:
(a) The building shall not cast additional shadow on adjacent residential structures between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. “Additional shadow” shall be defined as any additional shading of a residential structure over and above that which could exist if a proposed building met the maximum height requirement of the underlying zoning district and was sited in a location conforming to all setback requirements.
City Code Title 4, Ch 1: International Building Code CUP Review Criteria: Section 2.4(D)(4)(a)
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) A-O: Agricultural Open Space District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 85
(C) A-O: Agricultural Open Space District Section 3.4 (C) A-O Agricultural Open Space District
The purpose of the "A-O" agricultural-open space district is to provide suitable areas of the City for the retention and utilization of open space and/or agricultural uses, prevent scattered non-farm uses from developing improperly, and to secure economy in government expenditures for public utilities and service.
Maximum Density = 0.5 dwelling units per gross acre.
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = Two (2) acres
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 200 ft.
Typical A-O Building Types
Typical A-O Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) A-O: Agricultural Open Space District
Page 86 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-3: A-O DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Minimum Floor Area (sq ft) Minimum Building Width (ft) Minimum Roof Pitch & Soffit (vertical rise/ horizontal run) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear Principal Structures
50
30
30
50
NA
1000
20
NA Accessory Structures
[1]
6
30
6
15
NA
NA
NA
[1]: Accessory structures shall not be located beyond the front building line established by the principal structure.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) R-A: Residential Amenities District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 87
(D) R-A: Residential Amenities District Section 3.4 (D) R-A Residential Amenities District
The purpose of the "R-A" residence district is to provide move up housing in the form of low density, single family, detached residential dwelling units and directly related complementary uses in areas of high natural residential amenities including such conditions as woodlands, wetlands, and significant views.
Maximum Density through PUD or Performance Standards = 10,890 sq. ft. per unit (4.0 units per gross acre)
Base Density = 16,000 sq ft per unit (2.7 units per gross acre)
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 14,000 sq ft.
 Average = 16,000 sq ft (at least 40% of lots created through subdivision shall exceed 15,000 sq ft in size)
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 90 ft.
 Average = 100 ft. (at least 40% of lots created through subdivision shall exceed 100 ft in width)
Typical R-A Building Types
Typical R-A Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) R-A: Residential Amenities District
Page 88 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-4: R-A DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Minimum Floor Areas (sq ft) Minimum Building Width (ft) Minimum Roof Pitch & Soffit (vertical rise/ horizontal run) Front Interior Side [1] Street Side Rear Single Family Building
35
10
20
30
[2]
2.5 stories
35 feet
Minimum foundation sizes by home type [3]
2000 finishable [4]
24
6” / 12”
no minimum soffit
[1]: For interior lots in R-1 and R-A districts, attached accessory structures may be allowed to meet a 6’ setback, provided that the sum of both side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 20 feet.
[2]: The required rear yard shall consist of a space at least 30-feet in depth across the entire width of the lot that is exclusive of wetlands, ponds, or slopes greater than 12 percent.
[3]: 2400 square foot gross floor area excluding a basement or cellar for two story homes and a 1600 square foot foundation for multi-level, rambler and split entry homes.
[4]: Finishable square footage is exclusive of attached accessory space. Accessory Structures
 An attached garage shall be included with all principal residential structures in the R-A district.
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures.
 The minimum floor area for all attached accessory structures shall be 700 sq. ft.
 No portion of any garage space may be more than five feet closer to the street than the front building line of the principal use (including porch).
 See footnote [1] above as related to setbacks for attached accessory structures on interior lots. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.4(B), Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) R-1: Single Family Residence District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 89
(E) R-1: Single Family Residence District Section 3.4 (E) R-1 Single Family Residence District
The purpose of the "R-1" single family district is to provide for low density, single family, detached residential dwelling units and directly related complementary uses.
Maximum Density through PUD or Performance Standards = 8,712 sq. ft. per unit (5.0 units per gross acre)
Base Density = 14,000 sq ft per unit (3.1 units per gross acre)
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 10,000 sq ft.
 Average = 12,000 sq ft (at least 40% of lots created through subdivision shall exceed 12,000 sq ft in size)
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 70 ft.
 Average = 80 ft. (at least 40% of lots created through subdivision shall exceed 80 ft in width)
Typical R-1 Building Types
Typical R-1 Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) R-1: Single Family Residence District
Page 90 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-5: R-1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Minimum Floor Areas (sq ft) Minimum Building Width (ft) Minimum Roof Pitch & Soffit (vertical rise/ horizontal run) Front Interior Side [1] Street Side Rear [3] Single Family Building
30
10
[2]
20
30
2.5 stories
35 feet
1,050 foundation/
2,000 finishable [4]
24
5” / 12”
no minimum soffit
[1]: For interior lots in R-1 and R-A districts, an attached accessory structure may be allowed to meet a 6’ setback, provided that the sum of both side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 20 feet..
[2]: Interior side yard setbacks for single family homes on lots of record with a lot width 66 feet or less in the Original Plat of Monticello and Lower Monticello shall be at least six (6) feet.
[3]: The required rear yard shall consist of a space at least 30-feet in depth across the entire width of the lot that is exclusive of wetlands, ponds, or slopes greater than 12 percent.
[4]: Finishable square footage is exclusive of attached accessory space. Accessory Structures
 An attached garage shall be included with all principal residential structures in the R-1 district.
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures.
 The minimum floor area for all attached accessory structures shall be 550 sq. ft.
 See footnote [1] above as related to setbacks for attached accessory structures on interior lots. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.4(B), Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) R-2: Single and Two Family Residence District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 91
Typical R-2 Lot Configuration
(F) R-2: Single and Two Family Residence District Section 3.4 (F) R-2 Single and Two-Family Residence District
The purpose of the "R-2" single and two-family residential district is to provide for low to moderate density one and two unit dwellings and directly related complementary uses.
Maximum Density through PUD or Performance Standards = 5,445 sq. ft. per unit (8.0 units per gross acre)
Base Density
Unit Type
Minimum Lot Area/Unit
Base Density
Single Family
10,000 square feet
4.3 units/acre
Duplex/Two-Family
7,000 square feet
6.2 units/acre
Townhome *
7,000 square feet
6.2 units/acre
Multi-Family
(3-4 units) *
10,000 sq ft for 1st unit + 4,000 sq ft for each additional unit
5.9 – 6.7 units/acre
* By Conditional Use Permit Only
Minimum Lot Width
R-2 District
Original Plat
Lot Width
80 feet
66 feet
Typical R-2 Building Types
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) R-2: Single and Two Family Residence District
Page 92 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-6: R-2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Minimum Floor Areas (sq ft) [3] Minimum Finished Floor Areas (sq ft) [3] Minimum Building Width (ft) Minimum Roof Pitch & Soffit (vertical rise/ horizontal run) Front [1] Interior Side Street Side Rear Single Family
30
10
[2]
20
30
2.5 stories
35 feet
1,050 foundation
1,800 finishable [3]
Minimum finished square footage must be equivalent to the principal use unit foundation size
24
5” / 12”
No minimum soffit Duplex
30
10
[2]
20
30
2.5 stories
35 feet
1,050 foundation
1,400 finishable
24 Townhouse Multi Family Building
30
10
20
30
2.5 stories
35 feet
24
[1]: For the Original Plat of Monticello and Lower Monticello, where adjacent structures (excluding accessory buildings within same block) have front yard setbacks different from those required, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the adjacent structures. If there is only one (1) adjacent structure, the front yard minimum setback shall be the average of the required setback and the setback of the adjacent structure.
[2]: Interior side yard setbacks for single family homes on lots of record with a lot width 66 feet or less in the Original Plat of Monticello and Lower Monticello shall be at least six (6) feet.
[3]: Finishable and finished square footage is exclusive of attached garage space Accessory Structures
 An attached garage shall be included with all principal residential structures in the R-2 district.
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures.
 The minimum floor area for all attached garages shall be 450 sq. ft.
 No portion of any attached garage may be more than 10 feet closer to the street that the principal structure.
 Except for single family buildings, any driveway leading directly to an attached garage may not exceed 18’ in width at the front yard property line Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.4(B), Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) T-N: Traditional Neighborhood Residence District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 93
(G) T-N: Traditional Neighborhood Residence District Section 3.4 (G) T-N Traditional Neighborhood Residence District
The purpose of the "T-N" traditional neighborhood residential district is to provide for medium density, single family, detached residential dwelling units and directly related complementary uses.
Maximum Density through PUD or Performance Standards = 5445 sq. ft. per unit (8.0 units per gross acre)
Base Density = 10,000 sq ft per unit (4.4 units per gross acre)
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 7,500 sq ft.
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 45 ft.
 Maximum at the street = 65 ft.
Typical T-N Building Types
Typical T-N Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) T-N: Traditional Neighborhood Residence District
Page 94 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-7: T-N DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Minimum Floor Areas (sq ft) Minimum Building Width (ft) Minimum Roof Pitch & Soffit (vertical rise/ horizontal run) Front [1] Interior Side Street Side Rear Single Family Front Load
25
6
25
20
2.5 stories
35 feet
1,050 foundation
2000 finishable /
[2]
24
5” / 12”
No minimum soffit Single Family Rear Load
15
6
15
25
[1]: The maximum front yard shall be 30 feet for front load homes and 25 feet for rear load homes.
[2]: Finishable square footage is exclusive of attached accessory space. Accessory Structures
 An attached garage shall be included with all principal residential structures in the T-N district.
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures.
 The minimum floor area for all attached accessory structures shall be 480 sq. ft.
 For front-loaded attached accessory structures, no portion of any garage space may be more than five feet closer to the street than the front building line of the principal use (including porch).
 No private driveway leading to an accessory structure may exceed 18’ in width at the front yard property line. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.4(B), Standards Applicable to All Residential Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
Rear Load Example
Front Load Example
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (H) R-3: Medium Density Residence District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 95
(H) R-3: Medium Density Residence District Section 3.4 (H) R-3 Medium Density Residence District
The purpose of the “R-3” medium density residential district is to provide for medium density housing in multiple family structures ranging up to and including twelve (12) units and directly related, complementary uses.
Maximum Density through Planned Unit Development (Townhouse) = 6,223 sq ft per unit (7 units per gross acre)
Maximum Density through Planned Unit Development (Multi-family) = 3,630 sq ft per unit (12 units per gross acre)
Maximum Density through Performance Overlay Standards = 3,630 sq. ft. per unit (12.0 units per gross acre)
Base Density
 Townhouse = 10,980 sq. ft. per unit
(4 units per gross acre)
 Multi-Family = 5,124 sq. ft. per unit
(8.5 units per gross acre)
Base Lot Area
 Minimum Townhouse
20,000 sq ft.
 Minimum Multi-Family
30,000 sq ft
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 80 ft.
Typical R-3 Building Types
Typical R-3 Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (H) R-3: Medium Density Residence District
Page 96 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-8: R-3 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS R-3 District Townhouse (4 – 10 units / building) R-3 District Multi-Family (6 – 12 units / building) Base Lot Area
20,000 sf
30,000 sf Gross Density
3-7 du/acre
8-12 du/acre Max Density w/o PUD
4.0 du/acre
8.5 du/acre Net lot area per du
4,500 sf/du, maximum
3,500 sf/du, maximum Front setback
30 feet
40 feet Corner side setback
25 feet
30 feet Interior side setback
20 feet
20 feet Rear setback to building
30 feet
40 feet Clear open space setback from ROW
25 feet
30 feet Clear open space setback from Property Line
10 feet
30 feet Buffer Req. to Single Family
B buffer
B buffer Common open space per du
NA
500 sf/du Landscaping
16 ACI/acre +2 shrubs per 10 feet bldg. perimeter
16 ACI/acre +2 shrubs per 10 feet bldg. perimeter Parking requirements
2.5 spaces/du, with 2 enclosed
2.5 spaces/du, with 2 enclosed Architecture
20% street min frontage covered with enhanced materials
20% street min frontage covered with enhanced materials Roofs
5:12 pitch or roofline or building line articulation, including flat and/or varied rooflines, parapets, canopies or other similar features which increase architectural interest and variability.
5:12 pitch or roofline or building line articulation, including flat and/or varied rooflines, parapets, canopies or other similar features which increase architectural interest and variability. Unit square feet
1,000 sf finished floor area per unit, minimum
1,000 sf finished floor area per unit, minimum Garages
Attached
Enclosed, may be detached Garage Setback
30 feet from ROW (35 feet from curb of private street)
May not access street directly – must be served by interior driveway Garage Doors
Maximum 16 feet width facing street – no smooth panel doors
No smooth panel doors – detached buildings must match principal building materials and include architectural fenestration on sides facing residentially zoned property
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (H) R-3: Medium Density Residence District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 97
Table 3-8 (continued) PUD Options for Multi-Family Buildings Townhouse (4 – 10 units / building) Multi-Family (6 – 12 units / building) Landscaping
Special landscape features including water features, recreational structures, patios, etc.
Increased landscape quantities and/or Sizes beyond code minimums; Special landscape features including water features, recreational structures, patios, etc. Open Space
--
Increased open space areas per unit beyond code minimums of 10% or more Parking
--
All required garage parking attached to principal building Building Materials
Increased use of stone, brick beyond front, or on other exterior walls
Increased use of stone, brick beyond front, or on other exterior walls Architecture
Extensive use of ornamental features, building and/or roofline articulation, fenestration and building wall undulation atypical of other buildings in similar zoning districts
Extensive use of ornamental features, building and/or roofline articulation, fenestration and building wall undulation atypical of other buildings in similar zoning districts Site Work
Use of decorative paving materials in parking, sidewalks, etc.; Extensive use of ornamental site lighting or similar features.
Use of decorative paving materials in parking, sidewalks, etc.;
Extensive use of ornamental site lighting or similar features. Housing for Seniors restricted to 55 years of age or more
Accommodations to design and density through PUD process only
Accommodations to design and density through PUD process only
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (H) R-3: Medium Density Residence District
Page 98 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(this page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) R-4: Medium-High Density Residence District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 99
(I) R-4: Medium-High Density Residence District Section 3.4 (I) R-4 Medium-High Density Residence District
The purpose of the “R-4”, medium-high density residential district is to provide for medium to high density housing in multiple family structures of 13 or more units per building, and at densities of between 10 and 25 units per acre. The district is intended to establish higher density residential opportunities in areas appropriate for such housing, to be determined by the City on a case by case basis. The City of Monticello shall zone land to the R-4 District only when, in its sole discretion, all aspects of the property support the potential uses of the R-4 district, including location, private and public services, and compatibility with existing and future land uses in the area. In making a determination as to the suitability of a site for R-4 rezoning, the City will prioritize the following site and area factors:
Replacement Land Uses. R-4 zoning fits the following zoning categories and circumstances:
 Land already zoned for R-3
 Land currently zoned for commercial uses, but which would not be considered "prime" commercial (the City would like to protect "prime" commercial areas that show the most promise for that use in the future).
Proximity to Other Residential Neighborhoods.
 R-4 zoning may be allowed in proximity to other medium to high density residential areas, however the nature and concentration of existing multi-family structures shall be carefully considered to avoid an over concentration of these uses.
 R-4 zoning may be allowed in proximity to lower residential uses, if it is determined that the high density site can address the site and area factors provided here.
Architectural Compatibility and Building Massing
 In the vicinity of lower density residential areas, R-4 District buildings need to be lower profile with regards to size and mass, or need to be screened or buffered by distance and natural features.
Requirement for Adequate Public Facilities. High density residential development shall be located to provide for the following essential services and amenities:
 Access to public parks, pathways, and open space, without overburdening them. R-4 development may be required to provide additional facilities to meet the City's open space planning policies.
 Connection to public utilities.
 Access to major streets, or at the very minimum, avoidance of traffic generation that would utilize local streets in lower density residential areas.
 Proximity to commercial and/or medical services.
This district is intended to provide exclusively multiple family housing as defined in this ordinance, as opposed to lower density housing types such as townhouses, two-family homes, or single family homes.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) R-4: Medium-High Density Residence District
Page 100 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Minimum and Maximum Density:
10 – 25 dwelling units per acre
Maximum Base Density:
1,750 sq. ft. per unit (25 units per acre)
Maximum Density through Planned Unit Development:
1,750 sq. ft. per unit (25 units per acre)
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 30,000 square feet
TABLE 3-9: R-4 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS R-4 District Multi-Family (13+ units / building) Base Lot size
30,000 sf Gross Density
10-25 du/acre Max Density w/o PUD
NA Net lot area per du
Max 1,750 sf/du Front setback
100 feet Corner side setback
40 feet Interior side setback
30 feet Rear setback to building
40 feet Clear open space setback from ROW
60 feet Clear open space setback from Property Line
40 feet – no more than 50% of any yard facing a street covered with parking/drive aisles Buffer Req. to Single Family
C buffer Common open space per du
500 sf/du Landscaping
2 ACI/ 2,500 sf open space + 4 shrubs /10 feet bldg. perimeter Parking requirements
2.25 spaces/du, with max 1.1 space/du uncovered Architecture
20% street min frontage covered with enhanced materials, horizontal siding of steel or cement-board only (no vinyl or aluminum) Roofs
5:12 pitch, plus roof ridge line articulation of 3 feet min. or roofline or building line articulation, including flat and/or varied rooflines, parapets, canopies or other similar features which increase architectural interest and variability. Unit square feet
900 sf finished floor area per unit, minimum Garages
Attached or Underground
Detached accessory garages allowed only after base requirements are met Garage Setback
May not access street directly – must be served by interior driveway Garage Doors
Must include glass and decorative panels if visible from public street or adjoining residentially zoned property
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) R-4: Medium-High Density Residence District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 101
Table 3-9 (continued) PUD Options for Multi-Family Buildings Landscaping
Increased landscape quantities and/or sizes beyond code minimums; Special landscape features including water features, recreational structures, patios, etc. Open Space
Increased open space areas per unit beyond code minimums of 10% or more Parking
All required garage parking underground Building Materials
Increased use of stone, brick beyond front, or on other exterior walls Architecture
Extensive use of ornamental features, building and/or roofline articulation, fenestration and building wall undulation atypical of other buildings in similar zoning districts Site Work
Use of decorative paving materials in parking, sidewalks, etc.;
Extensive use of ornamental site lighting or similar features. Housing for Seniors restricted to 55 years of age or more
Accommodations to design and density through PUD process only
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) R-4: Medium-High Density Residence District
Page 102 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(this page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (J) M-H: Manufactured Home Park District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 103
(J) M-H: Manufactured Home Park District Section 3.4 (J) M-H Mobile and Manufactured Home Park District
The purpose of the “M-H” manufactured home park district is to provide for manufactured home users and directly related uses.
Maximum Density through PUD or Performance Standards = 3350 sq. ft. per unit (13.0 units per gross acre)
Base Density = 4,000 sq ft per unit (10.9 units per gross acre)
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 5 acres
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 200 ft.
Typical M-H Building Types
Typical M-H Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.4 Residential Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (J) M-H: Manufactured Home Park District
Page 104 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-10: M-H DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Minimum Floor Areas (sq ft) Minimum Building Width (ft) Minimum Roof Pitch & Soffit (vertical rise/ horizontal run) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear Manufactured Home Building
See Section 5.2(C)(4) for all regulations governing manufactured home parks Detached Accessory Structures
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (B) Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 105
3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
(A) General Purpose
The business base zoning districts established in this section are intended to:
(1) Provide appropriately located lands for the full range of business uses needed by the City’s residents, businesses, and workers, consistent with the comprehensive plan;
(2) Strengthen the City’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the City;
(3) Attract new investment in desired locations;
(4) Create suitable environments for various types of business uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible uses;
(5) Create suitable environments for various types of mixed use development, where business, office, retail, and residential uses are designed and integrated in compatible ways;
(6) Establish a sense of place along the City’s commercial corridors, with attractive shop fronts and streetscapes;
(7) Minimize the impact of business development on residential districts and uses.
(B) Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts
(1) Condominiums
(a) Industrial structures may be divided for the purpose of condominium ownership.
(b) Condominiums shall be designed to meet the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code.
(2) Multi-Story Buildings
Applications for a conditional use permit to exceed the maximum heights allowed in Section 3.5 shall be subject to the general CUP review criteria listed in Section 2.4(D)(4)(a) as well as the following:
City Code Title 4, Ch 1: International Building Code CUP Review Criteria: Section 2.4(D)(4)(a)
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (B) Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts
Page 106 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) The building shall be at least 200 feet from any parcel that is zoned residential and used or subdivided for residential use, or has an occupied institutional building including but not limited to schools, places of public assembly, and community centers.
(c) The building shall not cast a shadow on residential structures between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Neighborhood Business District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 107
(C) Neighborhood Business District Section 3.5 (C) B-1 Neighborhood Business District
The purpose of the “B-1” neighborhood business district is to provide for the establishment of local centers for convenient, limited office, retail, or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. These centers are to provide services and goods only for the surrounding neighborhoods and are not intended to draw customers from the entire community.
Maximum Residential Density through PUD or Performance Standards = 5445 sq. ft. per unit (8.0 units per gross acre)
Base Residential Density = 8,000 sq. ft. per unit (5.5 units per gross acre)
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 8,000 sq ft.
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 80 ft.
Typical B-1 Building Types
Typical B-1 Lot
Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Neighborhood Business District
Page 108 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-11: B-1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Max Impervious (% of gross lot area) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear All Uses
30
15
20
20
2 stories
30 feet
[1]
(Reserved)
(Reserved)
[1]: Multi-story buildings may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to section 2.4(D) contingent upon strict adherence to fire safety code provisions as specified by the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code. Accessory Structures
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.5(B), Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
 Section 4.5, Signs
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) B-2: Limited Business District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 109
(D) B-2: Limited Business District Section 3.5 (D) B-2 Limited Business District
The purpose of the “B-2” limited business district is to provide for low intensity retail or service outlets which deal directly with the customer for whom the goods or services are furnished. The uses allowed in this district are to provide goods and services on a limited community market scale and located in areas which are well served by collector or arterial street facilities at the edge of residential districts.
Maximum Residential Density = Ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre.
Base Lot Area
 No minimum
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 100 ft.
Typical B-2 Building Types
Typical B-2 Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) B-2: Limited Business District
Page 110 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-12: B-2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Max Impervious (% of gross lot area) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear All Uses
30
10
20
20
2 stories
30 feet [1]
(Reserved)
(Reserved)
[1]: Multi-story buildings may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to Section 2.4(D) contingent upon strict adherence to fire safety code provisions as specified by the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code. Accessory Structures
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.5(B), Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
 Section 4.5, Signs
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) B-3: Highway Business District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 111
(E) B-3: Highway Business District Section 3.5 (E) B-3 Highway Business District
The purpose of the “B-3” (highway business) district is to provide for limited commercial and service activities and provide for and limit the establishment of motor vehicle oriented or dependent commercial and service activities.
Base Lot Area
 No minimum
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 100 ft.
Typical B-3 Building Types
Typical B-3 Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) B-3: Highway Business District
Page 112 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-13: B-3 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Max Impervious (% of gross lot area) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear All Uses
30
10
20
30
2 stories
30 feet
[1]
(Reserved)
(Reserved)
[1]: Multi-story buildings may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to Section 2.4(D) contingent upon strict adherence to fire safety code provisions as specified by the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code. Accessory Structures
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.5(B), Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
 Section 4.5, Signs
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Regional Business District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 113
(F) Regional Business District Section 3.5 (F) B-4 Regional Business District
The purpose of the “B-4” regional business district is to provide for the establishment of commercial and service activities which draw from and serve customers from the entire community or region.
Base Lot Area
 No minimum
Base Lot Width
 No Minimum
Typical B-4 Building Types
Typical B-4 Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Regional Business District
Page 114 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-14: B-4 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) Max Height (stories / feet) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Max Impervious (% of gross lot area) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear All Uses
0
0
0
0
2 stories
30 feet
[1]
(Reserved)
(Reserved)
[1]: Multi-story buildings may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to Section 2.4(D) contingent upon strict adherence to fire safety code provisions as specified by the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code. Accessory Structures
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.5(B), Standards Applicable to All Business Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
 Section 4.5, Signs
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 115
(G) Central Community District Section 3.5 (G) CCD Central Community District
The purpose of the “CCD”, Central Community District, is to provide for a wide variety of land uses, transportation options, and public activities in the downtown Monticello area, and particularly to implement the goals, objectives, and specific directives of the Comprehensive Plan, and in particular, the 2017 Downtown Monticello “Small Area Plan” Comprehensive Plan Amendment and its design and performance standards.
All proposed development or redevelopment in the CCD shall be subject to the requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and other standards identified in the Small Area Plan report. It is not the intent of this chapter to abrogate any general Zoning Ordinance requirements in the CCD, and all such requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance apply fully within the CCD unless addressed separately by a more detailed CCD zoning regulation.
Projects that benefit from public investments and/or subsidies will have a greater burden to provide higher levels of both private and public amenities.
Sub-Districts. The CCD is hereby divided into five subdistricts, four of which comprise the study area of the Small Area Plan and are known as: (1) Riverfront, (2) Broadway, (3) Walnut and Cedar Streets, and (4) Pine Street. A fifth “sub-district” shall be any area within the CCD that is not identified as being within one of the four named sub-districts. The CCD regulations shall apply uniformly across all sub-districts unless specific sub-district
Typical CCD Building Types
Typical CCD Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
Page 116 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
requirements apply. The City Council shall, in accordance with the process providing for zoning map amendments in the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, adopt a zoning map for the CCD area identifying the subdistrict boundaries.
Base Lot Area
 No minimum
Base Lot Width
 No minimum
1. PROCESS REQUIREMENTS:
a. New development or redevelopment projects within the Central Community District shall require a site plan review by the Planning Commission.
b. At the proposer’s option, or as required by this ordinance, any proposed project may combine the required site plan review as a part of a concept plan review before a joint meeting of the Planning Commission and City Council.
c. Existing buildings shall be subject to the permitted and conditional use allowances of this ordinance.
d. Projects which do not meet the requirements of this ordinance may utilize the Planned Unit Development (PUD) process.
2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
a. Character Areas. The Central Community District shall be further regulated by four character sub-areas: Pine Street, Broadway, Walnut/Cedar and Riverfront and shown in the Official Zoning Map.
b. Projects across Character Area boundaries. By conditional use permit, uses and standards may extend across Character area boundaries (but not into other zoning districts) a maximum distance of up to one-half block for project purposes, provided the majority of the project square footage lies within the permitted character-area, and the intent and character of the downtown plan is maintained.
Where projects extend across character area boundaries, projects must show compatibility to both character area standards relating to adjoining districts and uses.
c. Private joint-parking use. All non-residential parking areas shall be designed to accommodate cross-access and joint use throughout the CCD zoning district to minimize the need for parking infrastructure.
d. Accessory Service/Appurtenance Uses. Building mechanical, waste-handling, and delivery service areas shall not face the public street or public spaces (with the exception of public parking lots), and shall be screened from view of adjoining property with materials equivalent to those of the principal building.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 117
e. Buildings adjacent to single family. Building side walls adjacent to single family residentially zoned properties, or directly across a public street from such properties, shall have side wall heights of no greater than the horizontal distance to the nearest single-family structure. Buildings abutting single family residentially zoned properties shall have roofs sloping toward the abutting single family use, or shall employ at least one of the transitional features in Section 4.7 of this ordinance.
f. Building materials. Building materials for all uses shall be predominantly glass, brick, natural or cultured stone, or equivalent masonry material. Materials for lapped siding, board-and-batten, or shake exteriors shall be composite, maintenance free materials, and shall be limited in overall exterior use to:
o Residential structures, no more than 30 percent of building exterior.
o Commercial and other structures, no more than 15 percent of building exterior may be comprised of architectural metal, which shall be integrated into the building design.
o Mixed use buildings shall comply with the commercial building requirements.
3. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
a. Character Area Standards
i. Broadway
 All buildings should have a storefront or entrance on Broadway.
 Buildings shall be oriented toward the front of the lot, with a maximum 10’ setback. Setbacks may be increased to accommodate outdoor seating or activity spaces approved by Planning Commission during site plan review. Such spaces shall be improved with enhanced paving and landscaping materials and other elements.
 Storefronts facing any public street shall consist of a minimum of 50% window/door transparency on ground floor.
 Buildings shall be between 2-4 stories, additional stories may be authorized by conditional use permit. Single-story buildings may be approved through site plan review by the Planning Commission and City Council where multiple stories are impractical for the specific use. In such cases, the building architecture should incorporate a façade that mimics multiple stories through additional window openings or similar features.
 Buildings shall have a maximum width of 60 feet, or shall be articulated by setback, materials or window treatments roofline variation, or other design methods to reflect the appearance of separate buildings, in approximately 30-60’ increments.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
Page 118 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
 Ground floor commercial buildings which front on public streets or open space shall not be entirely comprised of office uses, but shall include other retail, hospitality or entertainment uses.
 Sidewalks and/or pathway connections shall be provided for all development projects.
ii. Walnut/Cedar
 Features such as upper balconies, dormers, courtyards, porches and dooryards shall be incorporated for residential uses.
 Buildings shall be between 2- 4 stories; additional stories may be authorized by conditional use permit. Single-story buildings may be approved through site plan review by the Planning Commission and the City Council where multiple stories are impractical for the specific use. In such cases, the building architecture should incorporate a façade that mimics multiple stories through additional window openings or similar features.
 Buildings shall be oriented toward Walnut and Cedar Street and toward front corners where applicable.
iii. Pine Street
 Buildings shall be between 2-4 stories; additional stories may be authorized by conditional use permit. Single-story buildings may be approved through site plan review by the Planning Commission and the City Council where multiple stories are impractical for the specific use. In such cases, the building architecture should incorporate a façade that mimics multiple stories through additional window openings or similar features.
 Buildings shall be oriented to Pine Street with secondary entrances located on side or interior facades. Corner properties shall have dual orientation.
b. Use Type Standards
i. Residential
 Single/Two Family: Where permitted, the requirements of the R-2 District will apply.
 Townhouse
o Permitted where the subject property has no direct frontage on Broadway or Walnut/Cedar.
o Must preserve open space to coordinate with public spaces.
o Building heights up to 25 feet or 2 stories above grade.
o Setbacks – 15 feet from abutting single family, minimum of 8 feet from public street. Interior side setbacks may be zero.
o Variable roofline and front building walls.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 119
o Classic row-house; living space to front; no garage-front design.
o All parking in attached garages.
o Parking ratio of 2.0 spaces per du, off-street.
 Multi 4-12 du
o Only allowed where the subject property has no frontage on Broadway, Walnut/Cedar.
o Must preserve open space to coordinate with public spaces.
o Building heights up to 35 feet or 3 stories above grade.
o Setbacks – 15 feet from abutting single family, minimum of 8 feet from public street. Interior side setbacks may be zero.
o Variable roofline and front building walls.
o Garage entrances may not face a public street.
o Garages which face a single family residential zoning district must screen the garage entrance from the eye-level view of the abutting property.
o All parking in attached garages within building footprint (no surface parking).
o Parking ratio of 1.57 spaces per du, off-street, or a minimum of no less than one space per bedroom, off-street, whichever is greater. As part of site plan review, the Planning Commission may impose a different (higher or lower) standard where the nature of the use supports such standard.
 Multi 13+ du
o Only allowed where the subject property has no frontage on Broadway, Walnut/Cedar.
o Must preserve open space to coordinate with public spaces.
o Building heights up to 50 feet or 4 stories above grade.
o Setbacks – 15 feet from abutting single family, minimum of 8 feet from public street. Interior side setbacks may be zero.
o Variable roofline and front building walls.
o Garage entrances may not face a public street.
o Garages which face a single family residential zoning district must screen the garage entrance from the eye-level view of the abutting property.
o All parking in attached garages within building footprint (no surface parking).
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
Page 120 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
o Parking ratio of 1.57 spaces per dwelling unit including adjacent on-street parking, or a minimum of no less than one space per bedroom, off-street, whichever is greater. As part of site plan review, the Planning Commission may impose a different (higher or lower) standard where the nature of the use supports such standard.
o Multiple family housing limited to seniors may reduce parking supply to .5 spaces per dwelling unit, off-street. As part of site plan review, the Planning Commission may impose a different (higher or lower) standard where the nature of the type of senior living use supports such standard.
 Ground Floor Residential Units
o When allowed, subject to:
o Common areas, lobbies, etc. (if any) should be oriented toward street.
o Street levels should include additional window and doorway glass exposure toward streets.
o Residential units on upper, non-ground floors of buildings in the Riverfront Character Area are permitted as a part of mixed-use buildings.
ii. Commercial and Mixed-Use, generally
 Uses adjacent to single-family residential zoned properties which include dining/drinking service spaces shall have l outdoor areas facing public open space use areas.
 Building heights of up to 50 feet or four stories shall be permitted.
 Buildings heights exceeding 50 feet or four stories may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit.
 Residential units in mixed-use commercial buildings shall include balcony spaces.
 Building setbacks shall be 15 feet from abutting single family homes, minimum 8 feet from public streets. Interior side setbacks may be zero.
c. Landscaping
Site improvements in the CCD shall include landscaping consistent with the requirements of the zoning ordinance, Section 4.1 – Landscaping and Screening.
Pedestrian, plaza/patio, and bicycle spaces on the property shall integrate alternative pavement materials, designs, or features consistent with the surrounding streetscape.
d. Parking
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 121
Off-street parking areas shall be developed and constructed according to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, Section 4.8. Parking supply shall be as identified in this chapter, or where not specified herein, as in the ordinance Section 4.8 – Off-Street Parking.
A commercial use which propose to vary from the requirements of this section by deferring its required off-street supply and contributing to the public parking fund shall be accompanied by a Parking Study, subject to review and approval by Community Development staff, which illustrates an adequate amount of available unused public parking within 400 feet of the establishment’s primary entrance. “Adequate amount” shall be established by the City on a case-by-case basis in review of the applicant’s individualized parking study, but shall include the following elements, as a minimum: (1) an examination of the public parking supply commonly available for use by the proposed business during its peak usage hours; (2) the likely demand placed on said supply by the proposed business based on contemporary resources for parking utilization; and (3) an estimate of competing demand on said supply.
An existing business, as of the date of this ordinance, which has a parking supply which is substandard according to zoning ordinance Section 4.8- Off-Street Parking, shall be considered a legal non-conformity. The business may expand or change to another business that increases the parking supply deficiency only by participating in the parking fund, according to the requirements of this Section and Section 4.8 (E)(4)(c) for such deficiency.
e. Other Performance Standards
 All other performance standards as identified in Chapter 4 of the zoning ordinance shall apply, unless otherwise addressed in this section.
 Maximum Residential Density = 25.0 dwelling units per gross acre.
 Building Height  Minimum Height = 18 feet  Maximum Height = 60 feet
o Buildings may exceed 50 feet in height by conditional use permit, with enhanced site improvements, architecture, and building materials.
 Lot Coverage, Buildings
o Minimum Building Lot Coverage = 20 percent
o Maximum Building Lot Coverage = 90 percent
 Floor Area Ratio = Maximum Floor Area Ratio – None
 Accessory Structures
o Trash handling equipment shall be located within buildings wherever practical. If located in a structure attached to, or detached from, the principal building, such structure shall screen the trash handling equipment from the view of all neighboring property and public rights-of-way, and shall be constructed of materials which comprise the principal building. Gates and/or doors shall be constructed of permanent opaque materials, matching the principal building in color, and shall be kept closed
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
Page 122 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
at all times other than when being used for access. Roofs for such structures are encouraged, but not required when the screening wall of the enclosure is at least eight (8) feet in height.
o Any other accessory structures allowed in the CCD (see Table 5-4 – Accessory Uses by District) shall meet all requirements of the CCD district applicable to principal buildings.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.5 Business Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) Central Community District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 123
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (B) Standards Applicable to All Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Page 124 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
(A) General Purpose
The industrial base zoning districts established in this section are intended to provide locations for the retention, expansion and creation of businesses that provide jobs for Monticello residents and expansion and diversification of the property tax base. More specifically, these districts are intended to:
(1) Provide locations for industrial development in the areas of manufacturing, processing, warehousing, distribution and related businesses consistent with the comprehensive plan;
(2) Allow non-industrial support businesses in industrial areas;
(3) Strengthen the City’s economic base, and provide employment opportunities close to home for residents of the City;
(4) Attract new investment in desired locations;
(5) Create suitable environments for industrial uses, and protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible uses;
(6) Minimize the impact of industrial development on residential districts and uses.
(B) Standards Applicable to All Industrial Base Zoning Districts
(1) Condominiums
(a) Industrial structures may be divided for the purpose of condominium ownership.
(b) Condominiums shall be designed to meet the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code.
(2) Multi-Story Buildings
Applications for a conditional use permit to exceed the maximum heights allowed in Section 3.6 shall be subject to the general CUP review criteria listed in Section 2.4(D)(4)(a) as well as the following:
(a) The building shall be at least 200 feet from any parcel that is zoned residential and used or subdivided for residential use, or has an occupied institutional building including but not limited to schools, places of public assembly, and community centers.
(b) The building shall not cast a shadow on residential structures between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. City Code Title 4, Ch 1: International Building Code CUP Review Criteria: Section 2.4(D)(4)(a)
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Industrial and Business Campus District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 125
(C) Industrial and Business Campus District Section 3.6 (C) IBC Industrial and Business Campus District
The purpose of the “IBC” industrial business campus district is to provide for the establishment of limited light industrial business offices, limited light manufacturing, wholesale showrooms and related uses in an environment which provides a high level of amenities, including landscaping, preservation of natural features, architectural controls, and other features.
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 8,000 sq ft.
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 100 ft.
Typical IBC Building Types
Typical IBC Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Industrial and Business Campus District
Page 126 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-16: IBC DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) [1] Max Height (stories / feet) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Max Impervious (% of gross lot area) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear All Uses
50
30
50
40
2 stories
30 feet
[2]
(Reserved)
(Reserved)
[1]: When any yard abuts a zoning district other than I-1 or I-2, the setbacks for the abutting yard must be 50 feet.
[2]: Multi-story buildings may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to Section 2.4(D) contingent upon strict adherence to fire safety code provisions as specified by the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code. Accessory Structures
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures. Additional Regulations
 In the IBC district, every effort shall be made to preserve natural ponding areas and features of the land to create passive open space. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.6(B), Standards Applicable to All Industrial Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
 Section 4.5, Signs
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) I-1: Light Industrial District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 127
(D) I-1: Light Industrial District Section 3.6 (D) I-1 Light Industrial District
The purpose of the "I-1," light industrial, district is to provide for the establishment of warehousing and light industrial development.
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 20,000 square feet
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 100 feet
Typical I-1 Building Types
Typical I-1 Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) I-1: Light Industrial District
Page 128 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-17: I-1 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) [1] Max Height (stories / feet) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Max Impervious (% of gross lot area) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear All Uses
30
15
30
15
2 stories
30 feet [2]
(Reserved)
(Reserved)
[1]: When any yard abuts a zoning district other than I-1 or I-2, the setbacks for the abutting yard must be 50 feet.
[2]: Multi-story buildings may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to Section 2.4(D) contingent upon strict adherence to fire safety code provisions as specified by the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code. Accessory Structures
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.6(B), Standards Applicable to All Industrial Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
 Section 4.5, Signs
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) I-2: Heavy Industrial District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 129
(E) I-2: Heavy Industrial District Section 3.6 (E) I-2 Heavy Industrial District
The purpose of the "I-2," heavy industrial, district is to provide for the establishment of heavy industrial and manufacturing development and use which because of the nature of the product or character of activity requires isolation from residential or commercial use.
Base Lot Area
 Minimum = 30,000 square feet
Base Lot Width
 Minimum = 100 feet
Typical I-2 Building Types
Typical I-2 Lot Configuration
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.6 Industrial Base Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) I-2: Heavy Industrial District
Page 130 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-18: I-2 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS REQUIRED YARDS (in feet) [1] Max Height (stories / feet) Max Floor Area Ratio (FAR) Max Impervious (% of gross lot area) Front Interior Side Street Side Rear All Uses
30
15
30
15
2 stories
30 feet [2]
(Reserved)
(Reserved)
[1]: When any yard abuts a zoning district other than I-1 or I-2, the setbacks for the abutting yard must be 50 feet.
[2]: Multi-story buildings may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to Section 2.4(D) contingent upon strict adherence to fire safety code provisions as specified by the International Building Code as adopted in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the Monticello City Code. Accessory Structures
 See Section 5.3(B) for all general standards and limitations on accessory structures. Other Regulations to Consult (not all inclusive)
 Section 3.3, Common District Requirements
 Section 3.6(B), Standards Applicable to All Industrial Base Zoning Districts
 Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening Standards
 Section 4.5, Signs
 Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking
 Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading
 Section 4.11, Building Materials
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 131
3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
(A) General Purpose
Overlay zoning districts are superimposed over portions of one or more base zoning districts in order to introduce additional zoning requirements necessary to address a specific issue.
(B) Relationship to Base Zoning Districts
(1) Regulations governing development in an overlay zoning district shall apply in addition to the regulations governing development in the underlying base zoning district unless expressly stated otherwise in these regulations.
(2) Conflicts between overlay district standards and other standards in this ordinance shall be resolved as outlined in Section 1.7(C).
(C) Floodplain District
(A) Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact and Purpose
(1) Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the State of Minnesota has, in Minnesota Statutes Chapter 103F and Chapter 462 delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the City Council of Monticello, Minnesota, does ordain as follows.
(2) Purpose
(a) This ordinance regulates development in the flood hazard areas of the city of Monticello. These flood hazard areas are subject to periodic inundation, which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base. It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing these losses and disruptions.
(b) National Flood Insurance Program Compliance. This ordinance is adopted to comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 Code of Federal Regulations Parts 59 -78, as amended, so as to maintain the community’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program. Section 1.7(C): Conflicts Between Standards in this Ordinance
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 132 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) This ordinance is also intended to preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development.
(B) General Provisions
(1) Lands to Which Ordinance Applies
This ordinance applies to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Monticello within the boundaries of the Floodway and Flood Fringe Districts. The boundaries of the zoning districts are determined by scaling distances on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, or as modified in accordance with 3.7(B)(1)(b) below.
(a) The Floodway, Flood Fringe and General Floodplain Districts are overlay districts that are superimposed on all existing zoning districts. The standards imposed in the overlay districts are in addition to any other requirements in this ordinance. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive standards will apply.
(b) Where a conflict exists between the floodplain limits illustrated on the official floodplain maps and actual field conditions, the flood elevations shall be the governing factor in locating the regulatory floodplain limits.
(c) Persons contesting the location of the district boundaries will be given a reasonable opportunity to present their case to the Planning Commission and to submit technical evidence.
(2) Incorporation of Maps by Reference
The following maps together with all attached material are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of the Official Zoning Map and this ordinance.
 Currently effective Flood Insurance Study:
o City of Monticello, Minnesota, dated May 1979
o Wright County Minnesota unincorporated areas, dated 8/18/1992
 Currently effective Flood Insurance Rate Map panels enumerated below:
o City of Monticello, Panel 2705410005B, effective 11/1/1979
o Wright County, Minnesota Panel 2705340018C, effective 8/18/1992
o Wright County, Minnesota Panel 2705340015B, effective 8/4/1988
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 133
 Currently effective Flood Boundary and Floodway Map panels enumerated below:
o City of Monticello, Panel 2705410001B, effective 11/1/1979
o City of Monticello, Panel 2705410002B, effective 11/1/1979
o City of Monticello, Panel 2705410003B, effective 11/1/1979
 Preliminary Flood Insurance Study:
o Wright County Minnesota and Incorporated Areas, dated 6/22/2011
 Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map panels enumerated below:
o Wright County, Minnesota Panel 27171C0155D, dated 6/22/2011
o Wright County, Minnesota Panel 27171C0160D, dated 6/22/2011
o Wright County, Minnesota Panel 27171C0165D, dated 6/22/2011
o Wright County, Minnesota Panel 27171C0170D, dated 6/22/2011
o Wright County, Minnesota Panel 27171C0190D, dated 6/22/2011
For any instance where the effective and preliminary maps conflict, the more restrictive map shall apply. These materials are on file in the City Clerk’s Office, City of Monticello City Hall.
(3) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or other private agreements. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
(4) Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance does not create liability on the part of Monticello or its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(5) Severability
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of law, the remainder of this ordinance shall not be affected and shall remain in full force.
(6) Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance must be interpreted according to common usage and so as to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 134 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) Accessory Use or Structure
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure.
(b) Base Flood
The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
(c) Base Flood Elevation
The elevation of the “regional flood.” The term “base flood elevation” is used is used in the flood insurance survey.
(d) Basement
Any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
(e) Conditional Use
A specific type of structure or land use listed in the official control that may be allowed but only after an in-depth review procedure and with appropriate conditions or restrictions as provided in the official zoning controls or building codes and upon a finding that:
(i) Certain conditions as detailed in the zoning ordinance exist.
(ii) The structure and/or land use conform to the comprehensive land use plan if one exists and are compatible with the existing neighborhood.
(f) Critical Facilities
Facilities necessary to a community’s public health and safety, those that store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, and those that house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical facilities include hospitals, correctional facilities, schools, daycare facilities, nursing homes, fire and police stations, wastewater treatment facilities, public electric utilities, water plants, fuel storage facilities, and waste handling and storage facilities.
(g) Development
Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 135
(h) Equal Degree of Encroachment
A method of determining the location of floodway boundaries so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate share of flood flows.
(i) Farm Fence
A fence as defined by Minn. Statutes Section 344.02, Subd. 1(a)-(d). An open type fence of posts and wire is not considered to be a structure under this ordinance. Fences that have the potential to obstruct flood flows, such as chain link fences and rigid walls, are regulated as structures under this ordinance.
(j) Flood
A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
(k) Flood Frequency
The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
(l) Flood Fringe
The portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (one percent annual chance flood) located outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term “floodway fringe” used in the Flood Insurance Study for Wright County, Minnesota.
(m) Flood Insurance Rate Map
An official map on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
(n) Flood Prone Area
Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
(o) Floodplain
The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
(p) Floodproofing
A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 136 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(q) Floodway
The bed of a wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
(r) Lowest Floor
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 60.3.
(s) Manufactured Home
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include the term “recreational vehicle.”
(t) New Construction
Structures, including additions and improvements, and placement of manufactured homes, for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance.
(u) Obstruction
Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory floodplain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
(v) One Hundred Year Floodplain
Lands inundated by the “Regional Flood” (see definition).
(w) Principal Use or Structure
All uses or structures that are not accessory uses or structures.
(x) Reach
A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area,
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 137
the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
(y) Recreational Vehicle
A vehicle that is built on a single chassis, is 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck, and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term recreational vehicle is synonymous with the term “travel trailer/travel vehicle.”
(z) Regional Flood
A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 1% chance or 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in a flood insurance study.
(aa) Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation (RFPE)
An elevation not less than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the floodplain that result from designation of a floodway.
(bb) Repetitive Loss
Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(cc) Special Flood Hazard Area
A term used for flood insurance purposes synonymous with “One Hundred Year Floodplain.”
(dd) Start of Construction
Includes substantial improvement, and means the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement that occurred before the permit’s expiration date. The actual start is either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 138 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(ee) Structure
Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground or on-site utilities, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, detached garages, cabins, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles not meeting the exemption criteria specified in Section 3.7(J)(2)(b) of this ordinance and other similar items.
(ff) Substantial Damage
Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure where the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
(gg) Substantial Improvement
Within any consecutive 365-day period, any reconstruction, rehabilitation (including normal maintenance and repair), repair after damage, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(i) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(ii) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” For the purpose of this ordinance, “historic structure” is as defined in 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 59.1.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 139
(7) Annexations
The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into Section 3.7(B)(2) above may include floodplain areas that lie outside of the corporate boundaries of the City of Monticello at the time of adoption of this ordinance. If any of these floodplain land areas are annexed into the city of Monticello after the date of adoption of this ordinance, the newly annexed floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
(8) Detachments
The Flood Insurance Rate Map panels adopted by reference into 3.7(B)(2) above will include floodplain areas that lie inside the corporate boundaries of municipalities at the time of adoption of this ordinance. If any of these floodplain land areas are detached from a municipality and come under the jurisdiction of Monticello after the date of adoption of this ordinance, the newly detached floodplain lands will be subject to the provisions of this ordinance immediately upon the date of detachment.
(C) Establishment of Floodplain Districts
(1) Districts
(a) Floodway District - The Floodway District includes those areas within Zones AE, A2, A7 delineated within floodway areas as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps adopted in Section 3.7(B)(2).
(b) Flood Fringe District - The Flood Fringe District includes areas within Zones AE, A2, A7 on the Flood Insurance Rate Map and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps adopted in Section 3.7(B)(2),but located outside of the floodway.
(c) Reserved for General Floodplain District
(2) Applicability
Where Floodway and Flood Fringe districts are delineated on the floodplain maps, the standards in Sections 3.7(E) or 3.7(F) will apply, depending on the location of a property.
(D) Requirements for All Floodplain Districts
(1) Permit Required
(a) A permit must be obtained from the Zoning Administrator to verify a development meets the standards outlined in this ordinance prior to conducting the following activities:
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 140 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) The erection, addition, modification, rehabilitation, or alteration of any building, structure, or portion thereof. Normal maintenance and repair also requires a permit if such work, separately or in conjunction with other planned work, constitutes a substantial improvement as defined in this ordinance.
(ii) The construction of a dam, on-site septic system, or fence, although a permit is not required for a farm fence as defined in this ordinance.
(iii) The use or change of use of a building, structure, or land.
(iv) The change or extension of a nonconforming use.
(v) The repair of a structure that has been damaged by flood, fire, tornado, or any other source.
(vi) The placement of fill, excavation of materials, or the storage of materials or equipment within the floodplain.
(vii) Relocation or alteration of a watercourse (including new or replacement culverts and bridges), unless a public waters work permit has been applied for.
(viii) Any other type of “development” as defined in this ordinance.
(2) Building Sites
(a) If a proposed building site is in a flood prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements (including the placement of manufactured homes) must be:
(i) Designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(ii) Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
(iii) Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; and
(iv) Constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(3) Flood Capacity
In no cases shall floodplain development adversely affect the efficiency or unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries to the main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 141
(4) Other
(a) The storage or processing of materials that are, in time of flooding, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal, or plant life is prohibited.
(b) Critical Facilities, as defined in Section 3.7(B)(6)(f), are prohibited in all floodplain districts.
(E) Floodway District (FW)
(1) Permitted Uses
The following uses, subject to the standards set forth in Section 3.7(E)(2), are permitted uses if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district:
(a) General farming, pasture, grazing, farm fences, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting.
(b) Industrial-commercial loading areas, parking areas, and airport landing strips.
(c) Open space uses, including but not limited to private and public golf courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, hunting and fishing areas, and single or multiple purpose recreational trails.
(d) Residential yards, lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
(e) Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines and pipelines, provided that the Department of Natural Resources’ Area Hydrologist is notified at least ten days prior to issuance of any permit.
(2) Standards for Floodway Permitted Uses
(a) The use must have a low flood damage potential.
(b) The use must not obstruct flood flows or cause any increase in flood elevations and must not involve structures, obstructions, or storage of materials or equipment.
(c) Any facility that will be used by employees or the general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 142 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Conditional Uses
The following uses may be allowed as conditional uses following the standards and procedures set forth in Section 3.7(K)(4) of this ordinance and further subject to the standards set forth in Section 3.7(E)(4), if otherwise allowed in the underlying zoning district or any applicable overlay district.
(a) Structures accessory to the uses listed in 3.7(E)(1)(a)-(c) above and the uses listed in 3.7(E)(3)(b)-(c) below
(b) Extraction, fill and storage of soil, sand, gravel, and other materials.
(c) Marinas, boat rentals, permanent docks, piers, wharves, and water control structures.
(d) Storage yards for equipment, machinery, or materials.
(e) Construction of fences that obstruct flood flows. Farm fences, as defined in section 3.7(B)(6)(i), are permitted uses.
(f) Travel-ready recreational vehicles meeting the exception standards in Section 3.7(J)(2)(b).
(g) Levees or dikes intended to protect agricultural crops for a frequency flood event equal to or less than the 10-year frequency flood event.
(4) Standards for Floodway Conditional Uses
(a) All Uses
A conditional use must not cause any increase in the regional flood elevations or cause an increase in flood damages in the reach or reaches affected.
(b) Fill; Storage of Materials and Equipment
(i) Fill, dredge spoil, and other similar materials deposited or stored in the floodplain must be protected from erosion by vegetative cover, mulching, riprap or other acceptable method. Permanent sand and gravel operations and similar uses must be covered by a long-term site development plan.
(ii) Temporary placement of fill, other materials, or equipment which would cause an increase to the stage of the 1% percent chance or regional flood may only be allowed if the City of Monticello has approved a plan that assures removal of the materials from the floodway based upon the flood warning time available.
(c) Accessory Structures
Accessory structures, as identified in Section 3.7(E)(3)(a), may be permitted, provided that:
(i) Structures are not intended for human habitation;
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 143
(ii) Structures will have a low flood damage potential;
(iii) Structures will be constructed and placed so as to offer a minimal obstruction to the flow of flood waters;
(iv) Service utilities, such as electrical and heating equipment, within these structures must be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or properly floodproofed;
(v) Structures must be elevated on fill or structurally dry floodproofed in accordance with the FP1 or FP2 floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code. All floodproofed structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls.
(vi) As an alternative, an accessory structure may be internally/wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code, provided the accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
1. To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
2. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
(d) Structural works for flood control that will change the course, current or cross section of protected wetlands or public waters are subject to the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245.
(e) A levee, dike or floodwall constructed in the floodway must not cause an increase to the 1% chance or regional flood. The technical analysis must assume equal conveyance or storage loss on both sides of a stream.
(f) Floodway developments must not adversely affect the hydraulic capacity of the channel and adjoining floodplain of any tributary watercourse or drainage system.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 144 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(F) Flood Fringe District (FF)
(1) Permitted Uses
Permitted uses are those uses of land or structures allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) that comply with the standards in Sections 3.7(F)(2). If no pre-existing, underlying zoning districts exist, then any residential or nonresidential structure or use of a structure or land is a permitted use provided it does not constitute a public nuisance.
(2) Standards for Flood Fringe Permitted Uses
(a) All structures, including accessory structures, must be elevated on fill so that the lowest floor, as defined, is at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The finished fill elevation for structures must be no lower than one foot below the regulatory flood protection elevation and the fill must extend at the same elevation at least 15 feet beyond the outside limits of the structure.
(b) Accessory Structures
As an alternative to the fill requirements of section 3.7(F)(2)(a), structures accessory to the uses identified in Section 3.7(F)(1) may be permitted to be internally/wet floodproofed to the FP3 or FP4 floodproofing classifications in the State Building Code, provided that:
(i) The accessory structure constitutes a minimal investment, does not exceed 576 square feet in size, and is only used for parking and storage.
(ii) All portions of floodproofed accessory structures below the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation must be: (i) adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement and designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls, (ii) be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and (iii) must have all service utilities be water-tight or elevated to above the regulatory flood protection elevation
(iii) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following criteria:
1. To allow for the equalization of hydrostatic pressure, there must be a minimum of two “automatic” openings in the outside walls of the structure, with a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; and
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 145
2. There must be openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings must be no higher than one foot above the lowest adjacent grade to the structure. Using human intervention to open a garage door prior to flooding will not satisfy this requirement for automatic openings.
(c) The cumulative placement of fill or similar material on a parcel must not exceed 1,000 cubic yards, unless the fill is specifically intended to elevate a structure in accordance with Section 3.7(F)(2)(a) of this ordinance, or if allowed as a conditional use under Section 3.7(F)(3)(c) below.
(d) The storage of any materials or equipment must be elevated on fill to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(e) All service utilities, including ductwork, must be elevated or water-tight to prevent infiltration of floodwaters.
(f) All fill must be properly compacted and the slopes must be properly protected by the use of riprap, vegetative cover or other acceptable method.
(g) All new principal structures must have vehicular access at or above an elevation not more than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, or must have a flood warning /emergency evacuation plan acceptable to the City of Monticello.
(h) Accessory uses such as yards, railroad tracks, and parking lots may be at an elevation lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation. However, any facilities used by employees or the general public must be designed with a flood warning system that provides adequate time for evacuation if the area is inundated to a depth and velocity such that the depth (in feet) multiplied by the velocity (in feet per second) would exceed a product of four upon occurrence of the regional (1% chance) flood.
(i) Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles must meet the standards of Section 3.7(J) of this ordinance.
(3) Conditional Uses
The following uses and activities may also be allowed as conditional uses as a principal or accessory use only if allowed in the underlying zoning district(s) or any applicable overlay district, following the procedures in Section 3.7(K) of this ordinance.
(a) Storage of any material or equipment below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 146 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) The cumulative placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill when the fill is not being used to elevate a structure in accordance with Section 3.7(F)(2)(a) of this ordinance.
(c) The use of methods to elevate structures above the regulatory flood protection elevation, including stilts, pilings, parallel walls, or above-grade, enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages, shall meet the standards in Section 3.7(F)(4)(f).
(4) Standards for Flood Fringe Conditional Uses:
(a) The standards listed in Sections 3.7(F)(2)(d) through 3.7(F)(2)(h) apply to all conditional uses.
(b) Residential basements, as defined by Section 3.7(B)(6)(d) of this ordinance, are not allowed below the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(c) All areas of nonresidential structures, including basements, to be placed below the regulatory flood protection elevation must be structurally dry floodproofed, meeting the FP1 or FP2 floodproofing classification in the State Building Code, which requires making the structure watertight with the walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(d) The placement of more than 1,000 cubic yards of fill or other similar material on a parcel (other than for the purpose of elevating a structure to the regulatory flood protection elevation) must comply with an approved erosion/sedimentation control plan.
(i) The plan must clearly specify methods to be used to stabilize the fill on site for a flood event at a minimum of the regional (1% chance) flood event.
(ii) The plan must be prepared and certified by a registered professional engineer or other qualified individual acceptable to the City of Monticello.
(iii) The plan may incorporate alternative procedures for removal of the material from the floodplain if adequate flood warning time exists.
(e) Storage of materials and equipment below the regulatory flood protection elevation must comply with an approved emergency plan providing for removal of such materials within the time available after a flood warning.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 147
(f) Alternative elevation methods other than the use of fill may be utilized to elevate a structure's lowest floor above the regulatory flood protection elevation. The base or floor of an enclosed area shall be considered above-grade and not a structure’s basement or lowest floor if: 1) the enclosed area is above-grade on at least one side of the structure; 2) it is designed to internally flood and is constructed with flood resistant materials; and 3) it is used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The above-noted alternative elevation methods are subject to the following additional standards:
(i) Design and Certification - The structure’s design and as-built condition must be certified by a registered professional engineer as being in compliance with the general design standards of the State Building Code and, specifically, that all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities must be at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or be designed to prevent flood water from entering or accumulating within these components during times of flooding. Structure shall be subject to a nonconversion agreement with upon the issuance of any permit.
(ii) Above-grade, fully enclosed areas such as crawl spaces or tuck under garages must be designed to internally flood and the design plans must stipulate:
1. The minimum area of openings in the walls where internal flooding is to be used as a floodproofing technique. There shall be a minimum of two openings on at least two sides of the structure and the bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. The automatic openings shall have a minimum net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding unless a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that a smaller net area would suffice. The automatic openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters without any form of human intervention; and
2. That the enclosed area will be designed of flood resistant materials in accordance with the FP3 or FP4 classifications in the State Building Code and shall be used solely for building access, parking of vehicles or storage.
(G) Reserved for General Floodplain District
(H) Subdivision Standards
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 148 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(1) Subdivisions
No land may be subdivided which is unsuitable for reasons of flooding or inadequate drainage, water supply or sewage treatment facilities. Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are considered subdivisions under this ordinance.
(a) All lots within the floodplain districts must be able to contain a building site outside of the Floodway District at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
(b) All subdivisions must have road access both to the subdivision and to the individual building sites no lower than two feet below the regulatory flood protection elevation, unless a flood warning emergency plan for the safe evacuation of all vehicles and people during the regional (1% chance) flood has been approved by the City of Monticello. The plan must be prepared by a registered engineer or other qualified individual, and must demonstrate that adequate time and personnel exist to carry out the evacuation.
(c) For all subdivisions in the floodplain, the Floodway and Flood Fringe District boundaries, the regulatory flood protection elevation and the required elevation of all access roads must be clearly labeled on all required subdivision drawings and platting documents.
(d) Subdivision proposals must be reviewed to assure that:
(i) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood prone area,
(ii) All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and
(iii) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure of flood hazard.
(I) Public Utilities, Railroads, Roads, and Bridges
(1) Public Utilities
All public utilities and facilities such as gas, electrical, sewer, and water supply systems to be located in the floodplain must be flood proofed in accordance with the State Building Code or elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 149
(2) Public Transportation Facilities
Railroad tracks, roads, and bridges to be located within the floodplain must comply with Sections 3.7(D) and 3.7(E) of this ordinance. These transportation facilities must be elevated to the regulatory flood protection elevation where failure or interruption of these facilities would result in danger to the public health or safety or where such facilities are essential to the orderly functioning of the area. Minor or auxiliary roads or railroads may be constructed at a lower elevation where failure or interruption of transportation services would not endanger the public health or safety.
(3) On-site Water Supply and Sewage Treatment Systems
Where public utilities are not provided: 1) On-site water supply systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules Chapter 4725.4350, as amended; and 2) New or replacement on-site sewage treatment systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, they must not be subject to impairment or contamination during times of flooding, and are subject to the provisions in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.2270, as amended.
(J) Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles
(1) Manufactured Homes
New manufactured home parks and expansions to existing manufactured home parks are prohibited in any floodplain district. For existing manufactured home parks or lots of record, the following requirements apply:
(a) Placement or replacement of manufactured home units is prohibited in the Floodway District.
(b) Placement or replacement of manufactured home units in the Flood Fringe District is subject to the requirements of Section 3.7(F) of this ordinance and the following standards.
(i) New and replacement manufactured homes must be elevated in compliance with Section 3.7(E) of this ordinance and must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system that resists flotation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state or local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 150 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(ii) New or replacement manufactured homes in existing manufactured home parks must meet the vehicular access requirements for subdivisions in Section 3.7(H)(1)(b) of this ordinance.
(2) Recreational Vehicles
New recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds and expansions to existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds are prohibited in any floodplain district. Placement of recreational vehicles in existing recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds in the floodplain must meet the requirements below.
(a) Recreational vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this ordinance if they are placed in any of the following areas and meet the criteria listed in Section 3.7(J)(2)(b):
(i) Individual lots or parcels of record
(ii) Existing commercial recreational vehicle parks or campgrounds.
(iii) Existing condominium-type associations.
(b) Criteria for Exempt Recreational Vehicles:
(i) The vehicle must have a current license required for highway use.
(ii) The vehicle must be highway ready, meaning on wheels or the internal jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities commonly used in campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks.
(iii) No permanent structural type additions may be attached to the vehicle.
(iv) Accessory structures may be permitted in the Flood Fringe District, provided that they constitute a minimal investment, do not hinder the removal of the vehicle should flooding occur, and meet the standards outlined in Sections 3.7(D)(2) and 3.7(F)(2)(b).
(K) Administration
(1) Duties
A Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City of Monticello must administer and enforce this ordinance.
(2) Permit Application Requirements:
(a) Application for Permit. Permit applications must be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. The permit application must include the following as applicable:
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 151
(i) A site plan showing all pertinent dimensions, existing or proposed buildings, structures, and significant natural features having an influence on the permit.
(ii) Location of fill or storage of materials in relation to the stream channel.
(iii) Copies of any required municipal, county, state or federal permits or approvals.
(iv) Other relevant information requested by the Zoning Administrator as necessary to properly evaluate the permit application.
(b) Certification
The applicant is required to submit certification by a registered professional engineer, registered architect, or registered land surveyor that the finished fill and building elevations were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Floodproofing measures must be certified by a registered professional engineer or registered architect. Accessory structures designed in accordance with Section 3.7(F)(2)(b) of this ordinance are exempt from certification, provided sufficient documentation is provided.
(c) Certificate of Zoning Compliance for a New, Altered, or Nonconforming Use
No building, land or structure may be occupied or used in any manner until a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the Zoning Administrator stating that the use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance.
(d) Construction and Use as Provided on Applications
Permits, conditional use permits or certificates of Zoning Compliance issued on the basis of approved plans and applications authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any use arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance.
(e) Record of First Floor Elevation
The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new structures and alterations or additions to existing structures in the floodplain. The Zoning Administrator must also maintain a record of the elevation to which structures and alterations or additions to structures are floodproofed.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 152 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(f) Notifications for Watercourse Alterations
Before authorizing any alteration or relocation of a river or stream, the Zoning Administrator must notify adjacent communities. If the applicant has applied for a permit to work in public waters pursuant to Minnesota Statutes, Section 103G.245, this will suffice as adequate notice. A copy of the notification must also be submitted to the Chicago Regional Office of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(g) Notification to FEMA When Physical Changes Increase or Decrease Base Flood Elevations
As soon as is practicable, but not later than six months after the date such supporting information becomes available, the Zoning Administrator must notify the Chicago Regional Office of FEMA of the changes by submitting a copy of the relevant technical or scientific data.
(3) Variances
(a) Variance Applications
An application for a variance to the provisions of this ordinance will be processed and reviewed in accordance with applicable State Statutes and Chapter 2 of the zoning ordinance.
(b) Adherence to State Floodplain Management Standards
A variance must not allow a use that is not allowed in that district, permit a lower degree of flood protection than the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, or permit standards lower than those required by state law.
(c) Additional Variance Criteria
The following additional variance criteria of the Federal Emergency Management Agency must be satisfied:
(i) Variances must not be issued by a community within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(ii) Variances may only be issued by a community upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 153
(iii) Variances may only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(d) Flood Insurance Notice
The Zoning Administrator must notify the applicant for a variance that: 1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage; and 2) Such construction below the base or regional flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification must be maintained with a record of all variance actions.
(e) General Considerations
The community may consider the following factors in granting variances and imposing conditions on variances and conditional uses in floodplains:
(i) The potential danger of life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments;
(ii) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others;
(iii) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems, if any, and the ability of these systems to minimize the potential for disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions;
(iv) The susceptibility of any proposed use and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(v) The importance of the services to be provided by the proposed use to the community;
(vi) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location;
(vii) The availability of viable alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding;
(viii) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;
(ix) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan and flood plain management program for the area;
(x) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(xi) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 154 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(f) Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) The Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City of Monticello must submit hearing notices for proposed variances to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(g) Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR
A copy of all decisions granting variances must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(h) Record-Keeping
The Zoning Administrator must maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and must report such variances in an annual or biennial report to the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program, when requested by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(4) Conditional Uses:
(a) Administrative Review
An application for a conditional use permit under the provisions of this ordinance will be processed and reviewed in accordance with Chapter 2 of the zoning ordinance.
(b) Factors Used in Decision-Making
In passing upon conditional use applications, the City of Monticello must consider all relevant factors specified in other sections of this ordinance, and those factors identified in Section 3.7(K)(3)(e) of this ordinance.
(c) Conditions Attached to Conditional Use Permits
The City of Monticello may attach such conditions to the granting of conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i) Modification of waste treatment and water supply facilities.
(ii) Limitations on period of use, occupancy, and operation.
(iii) Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
(iv) Requirements for construction of channel modifications, compensatory storage, dikes, levees, and other protective measures.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 155
(v) Floodproofing measures, in accordance with the State Building Code and this ordinance. The applicant must submit a plan or document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the particular area.
(d) Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
The Zoning Administrator or other official designated by the City of Monticello must submit hearing notices for proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(e) Submittal of Hearing Notices to the Department of Natural Resources (DNR)
The City of Monticello must submit hearing notices for proposed conditional uses to the DNR sufficiently in advance to provide at least ten days’ notice of the hearing. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(f) Submittal of Final Decisions to the DNR
A copy of all decisions granting conditional uses must be forwarded to the DNR within ten days of such action. The notice may be sent by electronic mail or U.S. Mail to the respective DNR area hydrologist.
(L) Nonconformities
(1) Continuance of Nonconformities
A use, structure, or occupancy of land which was lawful before the passage or amendment of this ordinance but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance may be continued subject to the following conditions. Historic structures, as defined in Section 3.7(B)(6) of this ordinance, are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.7(L)(1)(a) – 3.7(L)(1)(f) of this ordinance.
(a) A nonconforming use, structure, or occupancy must not be expanded, changed, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases its flood damage potential or degree of obstruction to flood flows except as provided in 3.7(L)(1)(b) below. Expansion or enlargement of uses, structures or occupancies within the Floodway District is prohibited.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
Page 156 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Any addition or structural alteration to a nonconforming structure or nonconforming use that would result in increasing its flood damage potential must be protected to the regulatory flood protection elevation in accordance with any of the elevation on fill or floodproofing techniques (i.e., FP1 thru FP4 floodproofing classifications) allowable in the State Building Code, except as further restricted in 3.7(L)(1)(d) below.
(c) If any nonconforming use, or any use of a nonconforming structure, is discontinued for more than one year, any future use of the premises must conform to this ordinance.
(d) If any structure experiences a substantial improvement as defined in this ordinance, then the entire structure must meet the standards of Section 3.7(E) or 3.7(F) of this ordinance for new structures, depending upon whether the structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe District, respectively. If the current proposal, including maintenance and repair during the previous 365 days, plus the costs of any previous alterations and additions since the first Flood Insurance Rate Map exceeds 50 percent of the market value of any nonconforming structure, the entire structure must meet the standards of Section 3.7(E) or 3.7(F) of this ordinance.
(e) If any nonconformity is substantially damaged, as defined in this ordinance, it may not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. The applicable provisions for establishing new uses or new structures in Sections 3.7(E) or 3.7(F) will apply depending upon whether the use or structure is in the Floodway or Flood Fringe, respectively.
(f) If any nonconforming use or structure experiences a repetitive loss, as defined in Section 3.7(B)(6)(bb) of this ordinance, it must not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
(M) Violations and Penalties
(1) Violation Constitutes a Misdemeanor
Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses) constitute a misdemeanor and will be punishable as defined by law.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (C) Floodplain District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 157
(2) Other Lawful Action
Nothing in this ordinance restricts the City of Monticello from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. If the responsible party does not appropriately respond to the Zoning Administrator within the specified period of time, each additional day that lapses will constitute an additional violation of this ordinance and will be prosecuted accordingly.
(3) Enforcement
Violations of the provisions of this ordinance will be investigated and resolved in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7 of the zoning ordinance. In responding to a suspected ordinance violation, the Zoning Administrator and City of Monticello may utilize the full array of enforcement actions available to it including but not limited to prosecution and fines, injunctions, after-the-fact permits, orders for corrective measures or a request to the National Flood Insurance Program for denial of flood insurance availability to the guilty party. The City of Monticello must act in good faith to enforce these official controls and to correct ordinance violations to the extent possible so as not to jeopardize its eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(N) Amendments
(1) Floodplain Designation – Restrictions on Removal
The floodplain designation on the Official Zoning Map must not be removed from floodplain areas unless it can be shown that the designation is in error or that the area has been filled to or above the elevation of the regulatory flood protection elevation and is contiguous to lands outside the floodplain. Special exceptions to this rule may be permitted by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) if the Commissioner determines that, through other measures, lands are adequately protected for the intended use.
(2) Amendments Require DNR Approval
All amendments to this ordinance must be submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) prior to adoption. The Commissioner must approve the amendment prior to community approval.
(3) Map Revisions Require Ordinance Amendments
The floodplain district regulations must be amended to incorporate any revisions by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to the floodplain maps adopted in Section 3.7(B)(2) of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
Page 158 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(D) Wetland District
(1) Findings, Intent and Incorporation by Reference
(a) The City has determined that wetlands serve to maintain water quality by filtering water that is discharged into ground water aquifers and by retaining inorganic sediments, toxicants, and nutrients. They also retain and reduce the discharge of phosphorus and transform nutrients from their inorganic to organic forms, thereby, protecting streams and water bodies from eutrophication and contamination. Wetlands also store runoff and reduce the velocity of and magnitude of flood peaks. In addition, some wetlands receive the upward discharge of ground water. These wetlands tend to support more stable biological communities since their water temperatures and water levels tend to be more stable.
(b) Wetland vegetation also reduces the energy of waves, currents, and other erosive forces and serves to prevent the erosion of shoreline areas. In addition, aquatic vegetation provides food, shelter, and special habitat for wildlife. All of these wetland characteristics provide valuable recreation and education resources.
(c) The City has also found that wetlands vary significantly in the degree that they have been altered. Wetlands within the City exhibit great variations in their floral variety, quality of wildlife and fishery habitat, degree of fluctuation in response to storms, the extent to which their shorelines have been altered or eroded, and their relative value in protecting water quality. Therefore, the City has determined that it is necessary and beneficial to classify wetlands based upon their functions and values. The City has also found that it is in the best interest of the general health and welfare of the City to achieve no net loss of wetlands within the community.
(d) The City recognizes that a substantial amount of wetland degradation results from sedimentation and nutrient loading related to construction projects. Therefore, the City finds it necessary to require extraordinary measures to prevent such construction related degradation.
(e) In addition to having regulations that affect the physical impacts within wetland areas the City also finds that it is necessary to regulate the use of lands surrounding wetlands. Wetland buffer strips (as defined in Section 8.4 of this ordinance), are necessary and beneficial to maintaining the health of wetlands. These strips of land surrounding wetlands protect their shorelines from erosion, while serving to filter sediment, chemicals and other nutrients
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 159
before storm water discharges into the wetland. Buffer strips are also beneficial in providing habitat for wildlife.
(f) This section hereby incorporates by reference the Wetlands Conservation Act of 1991 [Minn. Stat, 103G,221 et seq. (herein after referred to as the WCA)] and any future amendments adopted by the legislature. Any activities exempted from the provisions of the WCA are also exempted from the requirements of this section, insofar as they relate to the WCA. All wetlands, as defined in Section 8.4 of this ordinance, including those governed by the Department of Natural Resources, are covered by the other provisions of this ordinance. Also, there are circumstances under which the strict enforcement of these regulations may be unreasonable and in circumstances that meet the criteria established in Section 2.4(C) of this ordinance, departures from the strict application of these standards may be permitted.
(g) It is the intent of Section 3.7(D) to avoid the alteration and destruction of wetlands. When wetlands are altered or destroyed, mitigation must be provided to recreate the functions and values of the lost wetland.
(2) Purpose and Implementation
(a) Through the adoption and enforcement of this section, the City shall promote the general health, safety, and welfare of its residents by both conserving and protecting wetlands and requiring sound management practices and mitigation as provided for in the WCA when development occurs in the vicinity of wetlands. Through the implementation of this section, the City seeks to accomplish the following purposes:
(i) To satisfy the requirements of the WCA as it may be amended and, thereby achieve no net loss of wetlands within the City;
(ii) To balance the needs to preserve and protect natural resources and systems with both the rights of private property owners and the need to support the efficient use of developable land within the City;
(iii) To preserve the natural character of the landscape through the maintenance of wetland ecosystems;
(iv) To promote water quality by maintaining the ability of wetlands to recharge ground water and receive the discharge of ground water, to retain sediment and toxicants and filter and strip nutrients from surface water runoff before it discharges into community lakes and streams, thus avoiding the contamination and eutrophication of these water features; and
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
Page 160 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(v) To provide wildlife habitat and thereby support the maintenance of variety of both plant and animal species within the City.
(b) To accomplish these purposes, the City will:
(i) Maintain an inventory of all wetlands within the City;
(ii) Maintain a system of classification for wetlands within the City and classify the City's wetlands based upon their relative values related to floral variety, wildlife habitat, water quality protection, fishery habitat, flood storage, shoreline protection, and aesthetic, recreational and education benefits.
(iii) Prepare and maintain a comprehensive set of official maps identifying the location and classification of all wetlands within the City.
(iv) Establish wetland regulations that are coordinated with flood plain and shoreland protection regulations.
(v) Require sound management practices to protect, conserve, maintain, enhance, and improve the quality of wetlands within the community.
(vi) Enforce standards for the alteration of wetlands when alteration is allowed, including standards and procedures for the mitigation of the loss of wetland areas and their functions and values, when alteration or destruction occurs.
(vii) Obtain protective easements over or acquire fee title to wetlands as appropriate.
(viii) Develop and maintain a program to educate the public about the numerous benefits and features that wetlands provide and the adverse effects of improperly managed urban development on wetlands.
(3) General Provisions
(a) Identification and Delineation of Wetlands.
(i) This section shall apply to all land containing wetlands and land within the setback and buffer areas required by this section. Wetlands shall be subject to the requirements established herein, as well as restrictions and requirements established by other applicable Federal, State, and City ordinances and regulations. These wetland protection regulations shall not be construed to allow anything otherwise prohibited in the zoning district where the wetland area is located.
(ii) A wetland is land that meets the definition of "wetlands" as set forth in Section 8.4 of this ordinance. Wetlands shall be determined according to the United States Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual (January 1987) and regional supplements if available. Wetlands have
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 161
been or will be identified and the wetland classification as established by the officially adopted City maps shall be prima facie evidence of the location and classification of a wetland. The official maps shall be developed and maintained by the Community Development Department and are open to inspection by the public. The presence or absence of a wetland on the official maps does not represent a definitive determination as to whether a wetland covered by this section is or is not present. Wetlands that are identified during site specific delineation activities but do not appear on the official wetland maps are still subject to the provisions of the section. It will be the responsibility of an applicant to delineate the exact wetland boundary or to determine that no wetland exists on a subject property. All delineations must be reviewed and approved by the City. If an applicant questions whether a wetland exists or disputes its classification, the applicant shall have the burden to supply detailed information for review supporting the applicant's assertion, including but not limited to, topographic, hydrologic, floristic and soil data deemed necessary by the City to determine the jurisdictional status of the wetland, its exact boundary and its classification. Wetland delineations supplied by applicants shall be certified by a qualified wetland delineator. Wetland delineators must satisfy any certification requirements that may be established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Minnesota Board of Water and Soil Resources.
(iii) Only that portion of a property within the boundaries of a wetland shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
(iv) This section establishes four wetland classifications as defined in Section 8.4 of this ordinance: Exceptional Quality, High Quality, Medium Quality, and Low Quality.
(4) General Standards
The following standards apply to all lands containing or abutting a wetland:
(a) Septic and soil absorption systems must be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the City approved boundary of the wetland.
(b) The lowest ground floor elevation of a structure shall be two (2) feet above the 100-Year flood elevation, three (3) feet above the Ordinary High Water Mark, or three (3) feet above the highest known water level, whichever is greater, of public waters regulated by Section 3.7(E) and Section 3.7(F) of this ordinance, whichever is greater.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
Page 162 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Structures intended to provide access across a wetland shall be prohibited unless a permit is obtained in conformance with State Regulations.
(d) The MPCA's Best Management Practices and Minnesota Storm Water Manual, as applicable, shall be followed to avoid erosion and sedimentation during the construction process.
(e) City inspection schedules and fines for erosion control will double on projects abutting wetlands.
(f) Before the City issues a building permit for a lot with a required wetland buffer, the lot owner shall:
(i) Record a notice of the wetland buffer requirement against the title to the lot with the office of the Wright County Recorder or Registrar of Titles, and
(ii) Install the wetland monumentation required by Section 3.7(D)(6).
(g) In cases where a site is not subject to the wetland buffer strips and setbacks required by Section 3.7(D)(5), buildings, swimming pools, patios, decks, drive aisles, and parking lots shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from a wetland edge.
(5) Wetland Buffer Strips and Setbacks
(a) For lots of record created after effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4, a buffer strip shall be maintained abutting all wetlands. The setback and buffer provisions of Section 3.7(D) shall not apply to lots of record created before the effective date of this ordinance. The City does however; strongly encourage the use of a wetland buffer and setback on all lots in the City.
(b) Wetland buffer strips and structure setbacks shall apply to all parcels of land whether or not the wetland is on the same parcel as a proposed development.
(c) Buffer strip vegetation shall be established and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Section. Buffer strips shall be identified within each lot by permanent monumentation approved by the City.
(d) For roadways that must be aligned either adjacent to or across wetlands and are subject to WCA replacement requirements, additional wetland filling to create a buffer strip shall not be required. Trails that are intended to serve an interpretive function may also be exempted from the buffer requirement. All
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 163
other roadways and trails shall meet the buffer standards established in subsection (h) below.
(e) If the area of the buffer has a preconstruction slope of twelve (12) percent or greater, the buffer shall be at the applicable maximum width for the wetland classification. The use of a meandering buffer strip to maintain a natural appearance is encouraged but not required in areas of flat topography.
(f) The required structure setback shall apply to all structures, except that such structure setback shall not apply to roadways and trails and their related retaining walls and fences.
(g) Wetland buffer strips not required by this section may be voluntarily created in conformance with the requirements of this section concurrent with approval of a site plan, or in the absence of a site plan, upon approval of an administrative permit.
(h) Pursuant to the regulations of this section, the following dimensional requirements shall apply for wetland buffers and setbacks:
TABLE 3-19: WETLAND BUFFER AND SETBACKS FOR EXISTING WETLANDS, IMPACTED WETLANDS, AND MITIGATED WETLANDS Exceptional High Medium Low
Wetland Buffer Width (Minimum):
50’
40’
10’
10’
Wetland Buffer Width (Maximum): [1]
100’
60’
50’
50’
Wetland Buffer Average Width:
75’
50’
30’
25’
Structure Setback (from Buffer): [2]
15’
15’
15’
15’
Total (Average):
90’
65’
45’
40’
[1]: Buffer widths in excess of the listed maximums shall not be used in calculating the average buffer width.
[2]: These setbacks shall take precedence over other setbacks required in this ordinance.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
Page 164 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Figure 3-4: Example of Buffer and Setback
Applied to a High Quality Wetland
(6) Monument Required
A permanent wetland buffer monument shall be installed and maintained at each lot line where it crosses a wetland buffer, and where needed to indicate the contour of the buffer, with a maximum spacing of two hundred (200) feet of wetland edge.
(7) Buffer Strip Vegetation Performance Standards
(a) Where acceptable natural vegetation exists in buffer strip areas, such vegetation shall be retained. A buffer strip has acceptable natural vegetation if it:
(i) has a continuous, dense layer of perennial grasses that have been uncultivated or unbroken for at least five (5) consecutive years, or
(ii) has an overstory of trees or shrubs with at least eighty (80) percent canopy closure that have been uncultivated or unbroken for at least five (5) consecutive years, or
(iii) contains a mixture of the plant communities described in (i) and (ii) above, that have been uncultivated or unbroken for at least five (5) consecutive years.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 165
(b) Notwithstanding the performance standards outlined in subdivision (7)(a) above, the City may determine existing buffer vegetation to be unacceptable if:
(i) it is composed of undesirable plant species (including but not limited to reed canary grass, common buckthorn, purple loosestrife, leafy spurge or noxious weeds), or
(ii) it is lacking a layer of organic thatch or duff, or
(iii) has topography that tends to channelize the flow of surface runoff, or
(iv) for some other reason it is unlikely to retain nutrients and sediment.
(c) Where buffer areas, or a portion thereof, are not vegetated or have been cultivated or otherwise disturbed within five (5) years of the permit application, such areas shall be re-planted and maintained according to each of the following standards:
(i) The soil in wetland buffer strips shall be amended, as necessary, to ensure that the soil has an organic content of not less than ten (10) percent and not more than thirty five (35) percent.
(ii) Buffer zones shall be planted with a Board of Water and Soil Resources (BWSR) approved seed mix containing one hundred (100) percent perennial native plant species, except for a one-time planting of an annual nurse or cover crop such as oats or rye.
(iii) The seed mix to be used shall consist of at least twelve (12) pounds pure live seed (PLS) per acre of native prairie grass seed and five (5) pounds PLS per acre of native forbs. Native prairie grass and native forb mixes shall contain no fewer than four (4) and five (5) species, respectively.
(iv) The annual nurse or cover crop shall be applied at a rate of twenty (20) pounds per acre.
(v) Native shrubs may be substituted for forbs. Such shrubs may be bare root seedlings and shall be planted at a rate of sixty (60) plants per acre. Shrubs shall be distributed so as to provide a natural appearance and shall not be planted in rows.
(vi) Any ground cover or shrub plantings installed in buffer areas are independent of landscaping requirements set forth elsewhere in the City code and City policy.
(vii) Native prairie grasses and forbs shall be planted by a qualified contractor using a drill designed for native prairie grass seedings, such as a Truax or Nesbitt Native Grass Drill or a John Deere 1550 Power-Till Seeder.
(viii) No fertilizer shall be used in establishing new buffer zones, except on highly disturbed sites when deemed necessary to establish acceptable
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (D) Wetland District
Page 166 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
buffer vegetation and then limited to amounts indicated by an accredited soil testing laboratory.
(ix) All seeded areas shall have a two-inch thick application of compost (Mn/DOT Grade 1 Section 3890) or be mulched immediately with clean straw at a rate of one and one-half (1.5) tons per acre. Mulch shall be anchored with a disk or tackifier.
(x) Buffer zones (both natural and created), shall be protected by silt fence during construction and the fence shall remain in place until the area crop is established.
(xi) Applicants may obtain from the City a set of standard seeding and planting specifications for buffer zones which meet all the City requirements.
(d) During the first five (5) years after initial planting, the developer shall submit to the City an annual report documenting the progress for establishment of the buffer. The report shall include a map of the buffer location, a description of compliance with the performance standards, a description of activities completed within the past year, a description of activities planned for the upcoming year, a map of plant communities within the buffer boundary including square footage estimates of the areas of native plantings and invasive or non-native vegetation, and other information as may be requested by the City of Monticello. Until such time as the buffer is accepted by the City, the developer shall be required to replant any buffer vegetation that does not survive. After the City has accepted the buffer, if the condition of the buffer area changes through natural processes not caused by the property owner, the owner shall not be required to re-establish the buffer area to meet the standards established in this subdivision.
(8) Encroachment in Required Setback and Buffer Areas
(a) Patios and decks may encroach up to a maximum of six (6) feet into required structure setback areas. Porches may not encroach into required structure setback areas. Any fence or retaining wall located within the required structure setback area shall be designed and constructed so as to not obstruct the flow of storm water.
(b) Water quality ponds may encroach into required wetland buffer areas, provided that the amount of buffer encroached upon does not exceed 50 percent of the total area required for such ponding, and provided that the amount of buffer encroached upon does not exceed 50 percent of the total area
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 167
required for buffering. These limitations may be exceeded where two-cell water quality ponding is utilized.
(c) Wetlands and required wetland buffer areas must be kept free of all structures and features, including fences and play equipment.
(d) Wetlands and required wetland buffer areas shall not be used for outside storage of household or personal items, lawn equipment, furniture, firewood, parts, yard waste, and the like.
(9) Variances
(a) Requests for variances shall be made in accordance with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 2.4(C) of this ordinance.
(b) Variances shall only be granted when the standards and criteria set forth in Section 2.4(C) of this ordinance have been met. Variances shall not be granted which would circumvent the intent and purposes of Section 3.7(D).
(E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
(1) Purpose
The purpose of this district is to protect and preserve the scenic, recreational, natural and historical values of the Mississippi River in the city by carefully controlling development of this river corridor consistent with the state Wild and Scenic River Act (Minn. Stats. § 103F.301 et seq.) and Minn. Rules 6105.0010 to 6105.0070; 6105.0150 to 6105.0250; and as applicable, the provision of 6120.2600 to 6120.3900.
(2) Designation of District
In order to preserve and protect the Mississippi River and its adjacent land which possess scenic, recreational, natural and historical values, the Mississippi River in the city has been given a recreational river classification, and lands adjacent to the river are hereby designated by land use districts, the boundaries of which are based upon the Mississippi River Management Plan, Minn. Rules 6105.0800--6105.0960. The provisions of Section 3.7(E) shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of Monticello that are denoted on the official zoning map as being within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River overlay district. In case of conflict between the map and the property descriptions and boundaries in Minn. Rules 6105.0910 and 6105.0950, the latter shall prevail. Section 2.4(C): Variances
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
Page 168 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) District Application
The regulations and requirements imposed by the WSRR overlay district shall be in addition to those established for the base zoning districts which jointly apply. Under the joint application of standards, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. Any person contemplating development in the WSRR overlay district should review the base district requirements with the Community Development Department to determine which regulations will apply.
(4) Substandard Lots
Any lot of record filed in the office of the county recorder on or before July 1, 2000, which does not meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter may be allowed as a building site subject to the following:
(a) Such use is permitted in the land use district.
(b) The lot was in separate ownership on the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
(c) All sewage disposal and sewage setback requirements of the shoreland overlay district are met.
(d) The lot is at least 10,000 square feet in area.
(e) If in a group of two or more contiguous lots under a single ownership, any individual lot does not meet the lot width requirements of the local regulation, such individual lot cannot be considered as a separate parcel of land for purposes of sale or development, but must be combined with adjacent lots under the same ownership so that the combination of lots will equal one or more parcels of land, each meeting lot width requirements.
(5) Substandard Uses
Any uses in existence on a lot of record filed in the office of the county recorder on or before July 1, 2000, which are permitted uses in accordance with Chapter 5, but do not meet minimum setbacks or other dimensional requirements of the ordinance are to be considered as substandard uses. All substandard uses, except for substandard signs, shall be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
(a) Any structural alteration or addition to a substandard use which will increase the substandard dimension(s) shall not be allowed.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 169
(b) Substandard signs shall be gradually amortized over a period of time not to exceed five years once amortization has been initiated by the City.
(6) Allowable Uses
The allowable uses in the WSRR overlay district shall be as allowed in Chapter 5 for the underlying zoning classification provided the uses are in conformance with the criteria for Urban River Class Standards in Minn. Rules 6120.3000, 6120.3100 and 6120.3200; and with the criteria for Recreational Rivers in 6105.0100 subpart 3.
(7) Conditional Uses
(a) Conditional uses allowable within the WSRR overlay district shall be reviewed under the provisions outlined in Section 2.4(D), and interim use permits for uses or structures within WSRR overlay district shall be reviewed under the provisions outlined in Section 2.4(E).
(b) Any structure(s) associated with a conditional use which are proposed to be located upon steep slopes greater than 12 percent shall adhere to the following conditions:
(i) The structure, in a manner judged acceptable by the city, shall be screened from view of the river and adjacent shorelands as much as possible assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
(ii) An adequate conforming sanitary sewer and water system can be established on the site.
(iii) All provisions of Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control are adhered to as part of the conditional use permit.
(8) Recreational river land use subdistricts – standards, lot dimensions, setbacks, and impervious surface requirements
(a) Areas covered
The following areas of the city are covered by this division: all areas of the wild and scenic recreational river district within the city.
(b) Standards for lots
Lots within the WSRR overlay district shall conform to the standards in Table 3-20. Where these standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
Page 170 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-20: WILD & SCENIC LOT REQUIREMENTS RIVER TYPE Lot Size Lot Width [1]
Wild
6 acres
300 feet
Scenic
4 acres
250 feet
Recreational
2 acres
200 feet
[1]: Lot width shall be met at both the OHW and at the required setback from the OHW in accordance with Section 8.2(B)(1)(i).
(c) Standards for principal structures
Principal structures within the WSRR overlay district shall conform to the standards in Table 3-21. Where these standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail. TABLE 3-21: WILD & SCENIC PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE SETBACKS
Front yard setback and setback from rights-of-way or roadway easements (setbacks must be met from all roads when a lot is bounded by two or more roadways)
- Arterial Road
30 feet
- Collector Road
30 feet
- Local Road
30 feet
- Landlocked Parcel
30 feet Unsewered Sewered
Side yard setbacks
30 feet
10 feet
Rear yard setbacks
50 feet
30 feet
Setback from the OHW of the Mississippi River
150 feet
100 feet
Setback from a bluff line
75 feet
75 feet
Sewer setback from the OWH
75 feet
75 feet
(d) Accessory structure setbacks
Accessory structures within the WSRR overlay district shall conform to the standards in Table 3-22. Where these standards conflict with the standards of the base zoning districts, the more restrictive standard shall prevail.
TABLE 3-22: WILD & SCENIC ACCESSORY STRUCTURE SETBACKS Unsewered Sewered
Setback from the OHW of the Mississippi River
75 feet
50 feet
Setback from a bluff line
30 feet
30 feet
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 171
(e) Impervious surface requirements
(i) Impervious surfaces on lots within the WSRR overlay district shall adhere to the following standards:
1. Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25 percent of the lot area.
2. When constructed facilities are used for storm water management, they must be designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.
3. New constructed storm water outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
(ii) The provisions of subdivision (i) above may be varied without a variance if all of the following criteria and standards are met:
1. All structures and impervious surfaces are located on slopes less than 12 percent. The physical alteration of slopes shall not be permitted for the purpose of overcoming this limitation.
2. The site development is designed, implemented, and maintained using the most applicable combination of comprehensive practices that prevent flooding, pollutant, erosion and sedimentation problems consistent with Protecting Water Quality in Urban Areas: Best Management Practices for Minnesota, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, October 1989, or as amended, which is incorporated by reference, available at the state law library and not subject to frequent change.
3. A site development, maintenance, and inspection plan incorporating the comprehensive practices of this section is submitted and approved by the city prior to the issuance of an impervious surfacing permit and the plan is implemented.
4. The city may impose additional conditions determined necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
(9) Building Height
The following minimum requirements shall be observed in the WSRR overlay district:
(a) The maximum height of principal structures shall not exceed 35 feet, except that the maximum height for principal structures shall not exceed 25 feet when such structure is subject to the requirements of the Shoreland Overlay District, in which case the requirements of the Shoreland District shall apply.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
Page 172 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed 25 feet.
(10) Additional structure and use standards
(a) Placement of structures
Structures shall not be located on slopes greater than 12 percent except by conditional use permit as provided for in subsection 3.7(E)(7).
(b) Maximum density
The maximum density in the WSRR overlay district shall not exceed one dwelling unit per lot.
(c) Multiple unit dwelling structures
Multiple family dwelling units shall meet the following additional standards:
(i) Each building must be set back at least 200 feet from the ordinary high water level;
(ii) Each building must have common sewage treatment and water systems in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building; and
(iii) Watercraft docking facilities for each lot must be centralized in one location and serve all dwelling units in the building (i.e. only one docking facility per lot).
(d) Stormwater management
Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this ordinance, the following general and specific standards shall apply:
(i) General standards
1. When possible, existing natural drainageways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces shall be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.
2. Development shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.
3. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference shall
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 173
be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and manmade materials and facilities.
(ii) Specific Standards
1. When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation shall be provided by a qualified individual that they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.
2. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters shall provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
(e) Special Provisions for Commercial, Industrial, Public/Semipublic, Agricultural, and Forestry
(i) Standards for commercial, industrial, public, and semipublic uses
1. Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs for access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Subject to other more restrictive limitations which may be imposed by this chapter, those uses with water-oriented needs shall meet the following standards:
a. In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this chapter, the uses shall be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;
b. Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
c. Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards:
i. No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the county sheriff.
ii. Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They shall only
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
Page 174 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs shall not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, shall not be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and shall not exceed 32 square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights shall be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and
iii. Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights.
2. Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
(ii) Agriculture use standards
1. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (resource management systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the natural resources conservation service, as provided by a qualified individual or agency.
a. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.
b. The bluff impact zone is equal to the bluff and land located within 20 feet from a bluff line.
2. Animal feedlots shall meet the requirements of this chapter, as well as the following standards:
a. New feedlots shall not be located in the WSRR overlay district; and
b. Modifications or expansions to existing feedlots that are located within 300 feet of the ordinary high water level or within the bluff impact zone are allowed if they do not further encroach into the
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 175
existing ordinary high water level setback or encroach on bluff impact zones.
3. Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within the WSRR overlay district shall be done in such a way as to minimize impact on the shore impact zone or public water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
(iii) Forest management standard
1. The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Nonpoint Source Pollution Assessment--Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management--Best Management Practices in Minnesota.
2. Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within the WSRR overlay district shall be done in such a way as to minimize impact on the shore impact zone or public water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
(iv) Extractive use standards
1. Site development and restoration plan. An extractive use site development and restoration plan shall be developed, approved, and followed over the course of operation of the site. The plan shall address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and shall clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.
2. Setbacks for processing machinery. Processing machinery shall be located consistent with setback standards for structures from the ordinary high water level and from blufflines.
(11) Vegetative Cutting
Selective cutting of trees in excess of four inches in diameter at four feet height within the WSRR overlay district and within 100 feet of the ordinary high water level and 20 feet landward of the bluffline shall be subject to the following:
(a) Clearcutting, except for any authorized public services such as roads and essential services, shall not be permitted. Clearcutting for essential services, such as telephone lines, substations, and related structures, shall require a special permit issued by the City Council in accordance with 2.4(N) of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
Page 176 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Cutting is spaced in several cutting operations and a continuous tree cover is maintained, uninterrupted by large openings. In cases where the existing tree cover has been interrupted by large openings in the past, selective cutting may be performed so as to maintain a continuous tree cover in the remaining wooded areas.
(c) The above cutting provisions shall not be deemed to prevent:
(i) The removal of diseased or insect-infested trees, or of rotten or damaged trees that present safety hazards.
(ii) Pruning understory vegetation, shrubs, plants, bushes, or grasses, or harvesting crops, or cutting suppressed trees or trees less than four inches in diameter at four-foot height.
(d) Except in cases where vegetative cutting has been approved as part of a subdivision or other development, any person proposing vegetative cutting shall apply to the city for a vegetative cutting permit. Application forms for the permit shall be provided by the Community Development Department and require the following information:
(i) Name and address of applicant.
(ii) The name and address of the owner of the land.
(iii) The address and legal description of the land involved.
(iv) The purpose of the vegetative cutting.
(v) A description of the type and amount of vegetation to be cut.
(vi) The highway, street, or streets, or other public ways in the city upon and along which any material is to be hauled or carried.
(vii) An estimate of the time required to complete the vegetative cutting.
(viii) A site plan showing the proposed cutting area.
(ix) A plan or statement demonstrating that the activity will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare.
(x) A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions prescribed by the city.
(12) Clearcutting Restrictions
Clearcutting within the WSRR overlay district shall be subject to the following standards and criteria:
(a) Clearcutting shall not be used as a cutting method where soil, slope, or other watershed conditions are fragile and subject to injury.
(b) Clearcutting shall be conducted only where clearcut blocks, patches, or strips are, in all cases, shaped and blended with the natural terrain.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 177
(c) The size of clearcut blocks, patches, or strips shall be kept at the minimum necessary.
(d) Where feasible, all clearcuts shall be conducted between September 15 and May 15. If natural regeneration will not result in adequate vegetative cover, areas in which clearcutting is conducted shall be replanted to prevent erosion and to maintain the aesthetic quality of the area. Where feasible, replanting shall be performed in the same spring or the following spring.
(e) Except in cases where clearcutting has been approved as part of a subdivision or other development, any person proposing clearcutting shall apply to the city for a clearcutting permit. Application forms for the permit shall be provided by the Community Development Department and require the following information:
(i) Name and address of applicant.
(ii) The name and address of the owner of the land.
(iii) The address and legal description of the land involved.
(iv) The purpose of the clearcutting.
(v) A description of the type and amount of clearcutting to be conducted.
(vi) The highway, street, or streets, or other public ways in the city upon and along which any material is to be hauled or carried.
(vii) An estimate of the time required to complete the vegetative cutting.
(viii) A site plan showing the proposed cutting area.
(ix) A plan or statement demonstrating that the activity will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare.
(x) A statement that the applicant will comply with all conditions prescribed by the city.
(13) Grading and Filling
Any grading and filling conducted within the WSRR overlay district shall require a permit and shall comply with the following:
(a) The provisions of 2.4(N) of this ordinance are satisfactorily met.
(b) Grading and filling of the natural topography which is not accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be allowed.
(c) Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall not be conducted without a grading and filling permit from the zoning authority.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
Page 178 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(d) Grading and filling of the natural topography which is accessory to a permitted or conditional use shall be performed in a manner which minimizes earth moving, erosion, tree clearing and the destruction of natural amenities.
(e) Grading and filling of the natural topography shall also meet the following standards:
(i) The smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for as short a time as feasible.
(ii) Temporary ground cover such as mulch is used and permanent ground cover such as sod is planted.
(iii) Methods to prevent erosion and to trap sediment are employed.
(f) Excavation of material from, or filling in the river, or construction of any permanent structures or navigational obstructions therein is prohibited, unless authorized by a permit from the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Minn. Stats. § 103G.245.
(g) Draining or filling of wetlands as defined by this chapter shall be expressly prohibited.
(14) Utility Transmission Lines
All utility transmission crossings of land within the WSRR overlay district shall require a conditional use permit. The construction of such transmission services shall be subject to the standards and criteria of Minn. Rules 6105.0170 and 6105.0180.
(15) Public Roads
In addition to such permits as may be required by Minn. Stats. § 103G.245, a conditional use permit shall be required for any construction or reconstruction of new public roads within the WSRR overlay district. Such construction or reconstruction shall be subject to the standards and criteria of Minn. Rules 6105.0190 and 6105.0200. A conditional use permit shall not be required for marginal access streets which are intended to serve primarily as an access to abutting properties.
(16) Land Suitability
No land shall be subdivided which is determined by the city or the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources to be unsuitable by reason of flooding, inadequate drainage, soil and rock formation with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, unfavorable topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities or any other feature likely to be harmful
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 179
to the health, safety, or welfare of the future residents of the proposed subdivision or the city.
(17) Nonconforming Use
All uses in existence prior to July 1, 2000, which are lawfully permitted uses within the wild and scenic recreational river district, but do not meet the minimum lot area, setbacks or other dimensional requirements of this chapter shall be allowed to continue subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
(a) Any structural alteration or addition to a nonconforming use which will increase the substandard dimensions shall not be allowed.
(b) Substandard signs shall be gradually eliminated over a period of time not to exceed five years from the date of enactment or amendment of this division.
(18) Sewage Treatment
(a) Public System Required
Publicly-owned sewer systems must be used.
(b) Nonconforming Sewage Treatment Systems
A nonconforming sewage treatment system not meeting the requirements of applicable rules of the state Department of Health, the state pollution control agency, specifically Minn Rules ch. 7080, for individual sewage treatment systems, and any other applicable local government standards shall be brought into conformity or discontinued within five years of the date of enactment of the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District Ordinance from which this division is derived.
(19) Water Supply
Any public or private supply of water for domestic purposes must meet or exceed standards for water quality of the state Department of Health and the state pollution control agency and administrative procedures of this chapter. Private wells must be located, maintained, and sealed in accordance with or in a more thorough manner than the water well construction code of the state Department of Health.
(20) Plats
Copies of all plats within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources within ten days of approval by the City. Approval of a plat which is inconsistent with
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
Page 180 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
this division is permissible only if the detrimental impact of the inconsistency is more than overcome by other protective characteristics.
(21) Planned Unit Development
A planned unit development may be allowed per the requirements of section 2.4(P) only when the proposed development provides a better means of preserving agricultural land, open space, woods, scenic views, wetlands, and other features of the natural environment than traditional subdivision development. Planned Unit Developments shall be reviewed under the provisions outlined in Section 2.4(P) of this ordinance, with the following additional criteria:
(a) Preliminary plans are approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources prior to their enactment by the City Council.
(b) A publicly-owned sewer systems is used.
(c) Open space is permanently preserved. This may be accomplished through the use of restrictive deed covenants, public dedications, granting of scenic easements, or other equally effective and permanent methods.
(d) There is not more than one centralized boat launching facility for each cluster of homes.
(e) The only uses that shall be allowed within the development are those allowed under section 2.4(P) and the underlying zoning district.
(f) Under the joint application of standards, the more restrictive provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(22) Variances
(a) Variances shall be reviewed under the provisions outlined in Section 2.4(C) with the following additional variance criteria:
(i) Granting of the variance is not contrary to the purpose and intent of this section and is consistent with Minn. Rules 6105.0010--6105.0250 and 6105.0800--6105.0960.
(ii) Granting of the variance will not allow any use which is neither a permitted or conditional use in the land use district in which the subject property is located.
(b) Exception: Where a setback pattern from the ordinary high water level has already been established on both sides of a proposed building site, the setback
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 181
of the proposed structure may be allowed to conform to that pattern. This provision shall apply only to lots which do not meet the applicable minimum lot width requirement.
(c) Appeals from variance decisions on shoreland issues may be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.4(H) and also Minnesota Statutes.
(23) Notice to the DNR of Proposed Actions within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District
(a) Notification of Proposals
(i) For properties within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District, the Community Development Department shall notify the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources of any application for a variance, ordinance amendment (including proposed changes to district lines), conditional use permits, PUDs, or plats inconsistent with the ordinance.
(ii) Notifications for ordinance changes and PUDs shall consist of a copy of the proposed ordinance amendment(s), a copy of the proposed PUD, and all other application materials as may be needed by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or the commissioner’s designated representative to fully understand the proposal.
(iii) Notifications for variances, plats or CUPs may consist simply of the notice of the applicable public hearing, or if a public hearing is not required, a copy of application materials as may be needed by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources to fully understand the proposal.
(iv) Notification shall be sent so as to be received by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources at least 30 days prior to the planned hearing or meeting to consider the requested action.
(b) Notification of final decision
The Community Development Department shall notify the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources of the City’s final decision on the proposed action within ten (10) days of the decision.
(c) Effective date of decision
(i) Decisions on variances, plats or CUPs become effective upon completion of the applicable review process at the City level.
(ii) Decisions on PUDs and ordinance amendments within or affecting the Wild and Scenic Recreational River District become effective upon the happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 182 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
1. The final decision taken by the city has previously received certification of approval from the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
2. The city receives certification of approval from the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources after its final decision.
3. Thirty days have elapsed from the day the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources received notice of the final decision, and the city has received from the Commissioner neither certification of approval nor notice of non-approval.
4. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources certifies his approval within 30 days after conducting a public hearing.
(d) Hearing after non-approval
In case the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources gives notice of a PUD or proposed ordinance amendment, either the applicant or Community Development Department may, within 30 days of said notice, file with the Commissioner a demand for a hearing. If the demand for a hearing is not made within 30 days, the notice of non-approval becomes final.
(i) The hearing shall be held within 60 days of the demand and after at least two weeks' published notice.
(ii) The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 103G.311, subds. 2, 6 and 7.
(iii) The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources shall either certify his approval or disapproval of the proposed action within 30 days of the hearing.
(F) Shoreland District
(1) Statutory Authorization and Policy
(a) STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION: This shoreland ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 103F, Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, and the planning and zoning enabling legislation in Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 462.
(b) POLICY: The uncontrolled use of shorelands of the City of Monticello, Minnesota affects the public health, safety, and general welfare not only by contributing to pollution of public waters, but also by impairing the local tax base. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for the wise subdivision, use and development of shorelands of public waters. The legislature of Minnesota has delegated
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 183
responsibility to local governments of the state to regulate the subdivision, use and development of the shorelands of public waters and thus preserve and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve the economic and natural environmental values of shorelands, and provide for the wise use of waters and related land resources. This responsibility is hereby recognized by the City of Monticello.
(2) General Provisions
(a) Jurisdiction
(i) The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to the shorelands of the public water bodies as classified in Section 3.7(F)(4) of this ordinance.
(ii) Shoreland shall include all land within 1,000 feet of the Ordinary High Water Level (OHWL) of a lake and 300 feet of a river and its designated floodplain as depicted on the City of Monticello’s Official Zoning Map.
(iii) Pursuant to Minnesota Regulations, Parts 6120.2500 - 6120.3900, no lake, pond, or flowage less than 10 acres in size in municipalities or 25 acres in size in unincorporated areas need be regulated in a local government’s shoreland regulations. A body of water created by a private user where there was no previous shoreland may, at the discretion of the governing body, be exempt from this ordinance.
(b) Compliance
The use of any shoreland of public waters; the size and shape of lots; the use, size, type and location of structures on lots; the installation and maintenance of water supply and waste treatment systems, the grading and filling of any shoreland area; the cutting of shoreland vegetation; and the subdivision of land shall be in full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
(c) Enforcement
The Community Development Department is responsible for the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Any violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of permits, variances or conditional uses) shall be subject to the remedies and penalties outlined in Section 7.6 of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 184 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(d) Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this overlay district shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the City and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by State Statutes.
(e) Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this ordinance to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail.
(3) Administration
(a) Permits Required
(i) A permit is required for the construction of buildings or building additions (including but not limited to related activities such as construction of decks or signs), the installation and/or alteration of sewage treatment systems, and all grading and filling activities as required by this ordinance. Application for a permit shall be made to the Community Development Department pursuant to the applicable regulations in Chapter 2 of this ordinance. The application shall include the necessary information so that the Community Development Department can determine the site’s suitability for the intended use and that a compliant sewage treatment system will be provided.
(ii) A permit authorizing an addition to an existing structure shall stipulate that an identified nonconforming sewage treatment system shall be reconstructed or replaced in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Determination of Zoning Compliance
The Community Development Department, in reviewing a required permit, shall make a determination as to whether the proposal is compliant with all provisions of Section 3.7(F) Shoreland District. Any use, arrangement, or construction not authorized by permit shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and shall be punishable as provided in Section 7.6 of this ordinance.
(c) Variances
(i) Variances shall be reviewed under the provisions outlined in Section 2.4(C) with the following additional requirements: Chapter 2 Application Reviews & Procedures Section 7.6 Remedies and Penalties
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 185
1. No variance shall circumvent the general purposes and intent of the shoreland overlay district.
2. No variance may be granted that would allow any use that is prohibited in the zoning district in which the subject property is located.
3. The variance application must clearly demonstrate whether a conforming sewage treatment system is present for the intended use of the property. The variance, if issued, must require reconstruction of a nonconforming sewage treatment system.
(ii) A copy of the notice for the public hearing(s) to consider a variance must be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or the commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings.
(iii) A copy of all decisions granting variances to shoreland regulations shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
(iv) Appeals from variance decisions on shoreland issues may be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.4(H) and also Minnesota Statutes.
(d) Conditional Uses
Conditional uses allowable within shoreland areas shall be reviewed under the provisions outlined in Section 2.4(D), and interim use permits for uses or structures within shoreland areas shall be reviewed under the provisions outlined in Section 2.4(E), with the following additional requirements:
(i) Evaluation Criteria
A thorough evaluation of the waterbody and the topographic, vegetation, and soils conditions on the site must be made to ensure:
1. The prevention of soil erosion or other possible pollution of public waters, both during and after construction;
2. The visibility of structures and other facilities as viewed from public waters is limited assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
3. The site is adequate for water supply and on-site sewage treatment; and
4. The types, uses, and numbers of watercraft that the project will generate are compatible in relation to the suitability of public waters to safely accommodate these watercraft.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 186 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(ii) Conditions attached to conditional use permits
The Community Development Department, upon consideration of the criteria listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, shall attach such conditions to the issuance of the conditional use permits as it deems necessary to fulfill the purposes of this ordinance. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Increased setbacks from the ordinary high water level;
2. Limitations on the natural vegetation to be removed or the requirement that additional vegetation be planted; and
3. Special provisions for the location, design, and use of structures, sewage treatment systems, watercraft launching and docking areas, and vehicle parking areas.
(iii) Notification Procedures
1. A copy of the notice for the public hearing(s) to consider a conditional use permit must be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or the commissioner's designated representative and postmarked at least ten days before the hearings.
2. A copy of all decisions granting a conditional use permit subject to shoreland regulations shall be forwarded by mail to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources within ten (10) days of such action.
(e) Proposed Shoreland District Amendments and PUDs
(i) Notification Required
The Community Development Department shall submit to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (or the commissioner's designated representative), a copy of any application for a zoning amendment to Section 3.7(F), or an application for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) within the shoreland district for certification. The materials shall be sent so as to be received by the Commissioner at least 30 days prior to such hearing or meeting to consider such action. The notice of application shall include a copy of the proposed ordinances or amendment, or a copy of the proposed Planned Unit Development along with a description of the request.
(ii) Notification of final decision
The Community Development Department shall notify the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources of its final decision on the proposed action within ten days of the decision.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 187
(iii) Effective date of decision
The ordinance amendment or PUD becomes effective upon the happening of any of the following events, whichever first occurs:
1. The final decision taken by the city has previously received certification of approval from the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources.
2. The city receives certification of approval from the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources after its final decision.
3. Thirty days have elapsed from the day the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources received notice of the final decision, and the city has received from the Commissioner neither certification of approval nor notice of non-approval.
4. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources certifies his approval within 30 days after conducting a public hearing.
(iv) Hearing after non-approval
In case the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources gives notice of non-approval of an ordinance amendment or PUD, either the applicant or Community Development Department may, within 30 days of said notice, file with the Commissioner a demand for a hearing. If the demand for a hearing is not made within 30 days, the notice of non-approval becomes final.
1. The hearing shall be held within 60 days of the demand and after at least two weeks' published notice.
2. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Minn. Stats. § 103G.311, subds. 2, 6 and 7.
3. The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources shall either certify his approval or disapproval of the proposed action within 30 days of the hearing.
(4) Shoreland Classification System and Land Use Districts
(a) Shoreland Classification System
The public waters of the City of Monticello have been classified below consistent with the criteria found in Minnesota Regulations, Part 6120.3300, and the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Wright County, Minnesota. The Mississippi River is regulated by Section 3.7(E) Wild and Scenic Recreational River District.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 188 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) The shoreland area for the water bodies listed in subsections (ii) and (iii) below shall be as defined in this ordinance and as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
(ii) Lakes
1. Natural Environment Lakes
a. Mud Lake (DNR ID: 86-68 P)
2. Recreational Development Lakes – RESERVED
3. General Development Lakes
a. Pelican Lake (DNR ID: 86-31 P)
b. Long Lake (DNR ID: 86-69 P)
c. Slough Lake (DNR ID: 86-78 P)
(iii) Rivers and Streams
1. Remote Rivers – RESERVED
2. Forested Rivers – RESERVED
3. Transition Rivers – RESERVED
4. Agricultural Rivers – RESERVED
5. Tributary streams
a. Otter Creek
All protected watercourses in the City of Monticello shown on the Protected Waters Inventory Map for Wright County, a copy of which is hereby adopted by reference, that are not given a classification in Items 1 through 6 above shall be considered “Tributary streams.”
(b) Land Use District Descriptions
(i) Criteria For Designation
The land use districts in subsection (ii) below and the delineation of a land use district’s boundaries on the Official Zoning Map, must be consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the comprehensive land use plan.
(ii) Land Use in Shoreland Areas
Land uses on parcels within the shoreland district shall be regulated by the underlying zoning district or by Table 3-23 below, whichever is more restrictive.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 189
TABLE 3-23: SHORELAND USES BY LAKE CLASSIFICATION (A) Lake Classes in SPECIAL PROTECTION Districts (within the Wild and Scenic Recreational River Overlay District) Uses General Development Recreational Development Natural Environment
Forest management
P
P
P
Sensitive resource management
P
P
P
Agricultural: cropland and pasture
P
P
P
Agricultural feedlots
C
C
C
Parks and historic sites
C
C
C
Extractive use
C
C
C
Single residential
C
C
C
Mining of metallic minerals and peat
P
P
P (B) Lake Classes in LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL Districts (within the A-O, R-A, R-1, R-2 or T-N Districts) Uses General Development Recreational Development Natural Environment
Single Residential
P
P
P
Semipublic
C
C
C
Parks and historic sites
C
C
C
Extractive use
C
C
C
Duplex, triplex, quad residential
P
P
C
Forest management
P
P
P
Mining of metallic minerals and peat
P
P
P (C) Lake Classes in HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL Districts (within the R-3 or M-H Districts) Uses General Development Recreational Development Natural Environment
Residential Planned Unit Developments (PUDs)
C
C
C
Single Residential
P
P
P
Surface Water oriented commercial (as accessory to a residential PUD)
C
C
C
Semipublic
C
C
C
Parks and historic sites
C
C
C
Duplex, triplex, quad residential
P
P
P
Forest management
P
P
P (D) Lake Classes in WATER ORIENTED COMMERCIAL Districts (within a Business District AND includes a proposed water oriented use) Uses General Development Recreational Development Natural Environment
Surface Water oriented commercial
P
P
C
Commercial Planned Unit Development
C
C
C
Public, Semipublic
C
C
C
Parks and historic sites
C
C
C
Forest management
P
P
P
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 190 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-23 (cont.) (E) Lake Classes in GENERAL USE Districts (within a business or industrial district) Uses General Development Recreational Development Natural Environment
Commercial
P
P
C
Commercial Planned Unit Development
C
C
C
Industrial
C
C
N
Public, Semipublic
P
P
C
Extractive Use
C
C
C
Parks and historic sites
C
C
C
Forest management
P
P
P
Mining of metallic minerals and peat
P
P
P (P) = Permitted Use, (C) = Conditional Use, and (N) = Prohibited Use
(5) Shoreland Development Standards
(a) In General
(i) Except as may be specifically provided, no new lot shall be created—by plat or by metes and bounds description—which does not meet the minimum dimensional requirements outlined in Section 3.7(F)(5).
(ii) No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished so that the yards or other open spaces are smaller than prescribed herein, nor shall the number of dwelling units be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations in this Ordinance.
(iii) The area of any lot shall not be reduced below the minimum standards specified herein.
(b) Lot Standards
Tables 3-23, 3-24, and 3-25 list the lot standards for lands within the shoreland district.
(i) Structure setbacks shall be measured from the Ordinary High Water mark (OHW) or the highest known water level;
(ii) Lot widths shall be met at both the OHW and at the required structural setback from the OHW.
(iii) Lot area shall be calculated based on land area above the OHW.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 191
TABLE 3-24: SHORELAND LOT STANDARDS FOR SEWERED LAKES (A) Residential Lot Area (square feet) Lake Class LAKESHORE NON-LAKESHORE Single Duplex Triplex Quad Single Duplex Triplex Quad
Natural Environment
40,000
70,000
100,000
130,000
20,000
35,000
52,000
65,000
Recreational Development
20,000
35,000
50,000
65,000
15,000
26,000
38,000
49,000
General Development
15,000
26,000
38,000
49,000
10,000
17,500
25,000
32,500 (B) Residential Lot Width Lake Class LAKESHORE NON-LAKESHORE Single Duplex Triplex Quad Single Duplex Triplex Quad
Natural Environment
125
225
325
425
125
220
315
410
Recreational Development
75
135
195
255
75
135
190
245
General Development
75
135
195
255
75
135
190
245 (C) Setbacks (feet) Lake Class LAKESHORE LOTS (distances in feet) Structure Setback from OHW Shore Impact Zone from OHW
Natural Environment
150
75
Recreational Development
75
37.5
General Development
50
25
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 192 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-25: SHORELAND LOT STANDARDS FOR UNSEWERED LAKES (A) Residential Lot Area (square feet) Lake Class LAKESHORE NON-LAKESHORE Single Duplex Triplex Quad Single Duplex Triplex Quad
Natural Environment
80,000
120,000
160,000
200,000
80,000
160,000
240,000
320,000
Recreational Development
40,000
80,000
120,000
160,000
40,000
80,000
120,000
160,000
General Development
20,000
40,000
60,000
80,000
40,000
80,000
120,000
160,000 (B) Residential Lot Width Lake Class LAKESHORE NON-LAKESHORE Single Duplex Triplex Quad Single Duplex Triplex Quad
Natural Environment
200
300
400
500
200
400
600
800
Recreational Development
150
225
300
375
150
265
375
490
General Development
100
180
260
340
150
265
375
490 (C) Setbacks (feet) Lake Class LAKESHORE LOTS (distances in feet) Structure Setback from OHW Shore Impact Zone from OHW On-site Sewage Setback from OHW
Natural Environment
150
75
150
Recreational Development
100
50
75
General Development
75
37.5
50
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 193
TABLE 3-26: SHORELAND LOT STANDARDS FOR RIVERS River Class Residential Lot Width (ft) Structure Setback Shore Impact Zone Sewage Setback Single Duplex Triplex Quad
Remote
300
450
600
750
200
100
150
Forested
200
300
400
500
150
75
100
Transition
250
375
500
625
150
75
100
Agricultural
150
225
300
375
50/100*
25/50*
75
Urban & Tributary
75/100*
115/150*
150/200*
190/250*
50/100*
25/50*
75 * sewered / unsewered
(c) Non-residential District Lot Standards
(i) Minimum lot standards for non-residential zoned properties shall be as dictated by the requirements for the underlying zoning district classification.
(ii) All structures and septic systems within non-residential districts shall comply with the structural setback standards for such features as listed in Tables 3-24, 3-25 and 3-26.
(d) Bluff Impact Zones
Structures or facilities, except stairways and landings, must not be placed within bluff impact zones.
(e) Height of Structures
(i) No structures, except for churches and non-residential agricultural structures, shall exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
(ii) Detached accessory structures shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.
(f) Uses Without Water-Oriented Needs
Uses without water-oriented needs are encouraged to locate on lots or parcels without public water frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public water frontage, must either be setback double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 194 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(6) Zoning and Water Supply / Sanitary Provisions
(a) Design Criteria for Structures in the Shoreland District
(i) High Water Elevations
Structures must be placed in accordance with any floodplain regulations applicable to the site. Where these controls do not exist, the elevation to which the lowest floor, including basement, is placed or flood-proofed must be determined as follows:
1. For lakes, by placing the lowest floor at a level at least three feet above the highest known water level, or three feet above the ordinary high water level, whichever is higher;
2. For rivers and streams, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the flood of record, if data are available. If data are not available, by placing the lowest floor at least three feet above the ordinary high water level, or by conducting a technical evaluation to determine effects of proposed construction upon flood stages and flood flows and to establish a flood protection elevation. Under all three approaches, technical evaluations must be done by a qualified engineer or hydrologist consistent with parts 6120.5000 to 6120.6200 governing the management of flood plain areas. If more than one approach is used, the highest flood protection elevation determined must be used for placing structures and other facilities; and
3. Water-oriented accessory structures may have the lowest floor placed lower than the elevation determined in this item if the structure is constructed of flood-resistant materials to the elevation, electrical and mechanical equipment is placed above the elevation and, if long duration flooding is anticipated, the structure is built to withstand ice action and wind-driven waves and debris, or incorporation of flood openings.
(ii) Water-oriented Accessory Structures
Each lot may have one water-oriented accessory structure not meeting the normal structure setback of this ordinance if this water-oriented accessory structure complies with the following provisions:
1. The structure or facility must not exceed ten feet in height, exclusive of safety rails, and cannot occupy an area greater than 250 square feet. Detached decks must not exceed eight feet above grade at any point;
2. The setback of the structure or facility from the ordinary high water level must be at least ten feet;
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 195
3. The structure or facility must be treated to reduce visibility as viewed from public waters and adjacent shorelands by vegetation, topography, increased setbacks or color, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions;
4. The roof may be used as a deck with safety rails, but must not be enclosed or used as a storage area;
5. The structure or facility must not be designed or used for human habitation and must not contain water supply or sewage treatment facilities; and
6. As an alternative for general development and recreational development waterbodies, water-oriented accessory structures used solely for watercraft storage, and including storage of related boating and water-oriented sporting equipment, may occupy an area up to 400 square feet provided the maximum width of the structure is 20 feet as measured parallel to the configuration of the shoreline.
(iii) Stairways, Lifts, and Landings
Stairways and lifts are the preferred alternative to major topographic alterations for achieving access up and down bluffs and steep slopes to shore areas. Stairways and lifts must meet the following design requirements:
1. Stairways and lifts must not exceed four feet in width;
2. Landings for stairways and lifts must not exceed 32 square feet in area.
3. Canopies or roofs are not allowed on stairways, lifts, or landings;
4. Stairways, lifts, and landings shall be constructed above the ground on posts or pilings, and be designed and built in a manner that ensures control of soil erosion in conformance with the requirements of Section 2.4(N);
5. Stairways, lifts, and landings must be located in the most visually inconspicuous portions of lots, as viewed from the surface of the public water assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, whenever practical; and
6. Facilities such as ramps, lifts, or mobility paths for physically handicapped persons are also allowed for achieving access to shore areas, provided that the dimensional and performance standards of sub-items (1) to (5) are complied with in addition to the requirements of Minnesota Regulations, Chapter 1341.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 196 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iv) Significant Historic Sites
No structure may be placed on a significant historic site in a manner that is inconsistent with State Historic Preservation Office regulations.
(v) Steep Slopes
The Community Development Department must evaluate possible soil erosion impacts and development visibility from public waters before issuing a permit for construction of sewage treatment systems, roads, driveways, structures, or other improvements on steep slopes. When determined necessary, conditions must be attached to issued permits to prevent erosion and to preserve existing vegetation screening of structures, vehicles, and other facilities as viewed from the surface of public waters, assuming summer, leaf-on vegetation.
(b) Shoreland Alterations
Alterations of vegetation and topography will be regulated to prevent erosion into public waters, fix nutrients, preserve shoreland aesthetics, preserve historic values, prevent bank slumping, and protect fish and wildlife habitat.
(i) Vegetation Alterations
1. Vegetation alteration necessary for the construction of structures and sewage treatment systems and the construction of roads and parking areas are exempt from the vegetation alteration standards that follow.
2. Removal or alteration of vegetation, except for agricultural and forest management uses as regulated in Section 3.7(F)(6)(e)(ii) and 3.7(F)(6)(e)(iii), respectfully, is allowed subject to the following standards:
a. Intensive vegetation clearing within the shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes is not allowed. Intensive vegetation clearing for forest land conversion to another use outside of these areas is allowable as a conditional use if an erosion control and sedimentation plan is developed and approved by the soil and water conservation district in which the property is located.
b. In shore and bluff impact zones and on steep slopes, limited clearing of trees and shrubs and cutting, pruning, and trimming of trees is allowed to provide a view to the water from the principal dwelling site and to accommodate the placement of stairways and landings, picnic areas, access paths, beach and SHPO Preservation Legislation
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 197
watercraft access areas, and permitted water-oriented accessory structures or facilities, provided that:
i. The screening of structures, vehicles, or other facilities as viewed from the water, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions, is not substantially reduced;
ii. Along rivers, existing shading of water surfaces is preserved; and
iii. The above provisions are not applicable to the removal of trees, limbs, or branches that are dead, diseased, or pose safety hazards.
(ii) Topographic Alterations/Grading and Filling
1. Grading and filling and excavations necessary for the construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways under validly issued construction permits for these facilities do not require the issuance of a separate grading and filling permit. However, the grading and filling standards in this Section must be incorporated into the issuance of permits for construction of structures, sewage treatment systems, and driveways.
2. Public roads and parking areas are regulated by Section 3.7(F)(6)(c) of this ordinance.
3. Notwithstanding sub-items 1. and 2. above, a grading and filling permit will be required for:
a. The movement of more than ten (10) cubic yards of material on steep slopes or within shore or bluff impact zones; and
b. The movement of more than 50 cubic yards of material outside of steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones.
4. The following considerations and conditions must be adhered to during the issuance of construction permits, grading and filling permits, conditional use permits, variances and subdivision approvals:
a. Grading or filling in any type 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 wetland must be evaluated to determine how extensively the proposed activity would affect the following functional qualities of the wetland:
i. Sediment and pollutant trapping and retention;
ii. Storage of surface runoff to prevent or reduce flood damage;
iii. Fish and wildlife habitat;
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 198 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
iv. Recreational use;
v. Shoreline or bank stabilization; and
vi. Noteworthiness, including special qualities such as historic significance, critical habitat for endangered plants and animals, or others.
This evaluation must also include a determination of whether the wetland alteration being proposed requires permits, reviews, or approvals by other local, state, or federal agencies such as a watershed district, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The applicant will be so advised.
b. Alterations must be designed and conducted in a manner that ensures only the smallest amount of bare ground is exposed for the shortest time possible;
c. Mulches or similar materials must be used for temporary bare soil coverage, and a permanent vegetation cover must be established as soon as possible;
d. Methods to minimize soil erosion and to trap sediments before they reach any surface water feature must be used;
e. Altered areas must be stabilized to acceptable erosion control standards consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts and the United States Soil Conservation Service;
f. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in a manner that creates an unstable slope;
g. Plans to place fill or excavated material on steep slopes must be reviewed by a qualified Engineer for continued slope stability and must not create finished slopes of 30 percent or greater;
h. Fill or excavated material must not be placed in bluff impact zones;
i. Any alterations below the ordinary high water level of public waters must first be authorized by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources under Minnesota Statutes, section 103G;
j. Alterations of topography must only be allowed if they are accessory to permitted or conditional uses and do not adversely affect adjacent or nearby properties; and
k. Placement of natural rock riprap, including associated grading of the shoreline and placement of a filter blanket, is permitted if
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 199
the finished slope does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, the landward extent of the riprap is within ten feet of the ordinary high water level, and the height of the riprap above the ordinary high water level does not exceed three feet.
(c) Placement and Design of Roads, Driveways, and Parking Areas
(i) Public and private roads and parking areas must be designed to take advantage of natural vegetation and topography to achieve maximum screening from view from public waters. Documentation must be provided by a qualified Engineer that all roads and parking areas are designed and constructed to minimize and control erosion to public waters consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation district, or other applicable technical materials.
(ii) Roads, driveways, and parking areas must meet structure setbacks and must not be placed within bluff and shore impact zones, when other reasonable and feasible placement alternatives exist. If no alternatives exist, they may be placed within these areas, and must be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
(iii) Public and private watercraft access ramps, approach roads, and access-related parking areas may be placed within shore impact zones provided the vegetative screening and erosion control conditions of this subpart are met. For private facilities, the grading and filling provisions of Section 3.7(F)(6)(b)(ii) of this ordinance must be met.
(d) Stormwater Management
The following general and specific standards shall apply:
(i) General Standards
1. When possible, existing natural drainage ways, wetlands, and vegetated soil surfaces must be used to convey, store, filter, and retain stormwater runoff before discharge to public waters.
2. Development must be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize the extent of disturbed areas, runoff velocities, erosion potential, and reduce and delay runoff volumes. Disturbed areas must be stabilized and protected as soon as possible and facilities or methods used to retain sediment on the site.
3. Stormwater shall not be directed to wetlands without sufficient pre-treatment as approved by the City.
4. When development density, topographic features, and soil and vegetation conditions are not sufficient to adequately handle stormwater runoff using natural features and vegetation, various
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 200 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
types of constructed facilities such as diversions, settling basins, skimming devices, dikes, waterways, and ponds may be used. Preference must be given to designs using surface drainage, vegetation, and infiltration rather than buried pipes and man-made materials and facilities.
(ii) Specific Standards
1. Impervious surface coverage of lots must not exceed 25 percent of the lot area.
2. When constructed facilities are used for stormwater management, documentation must be provided by a qualified Engineer that they are designed and installed consistent with the field office technical guide of the local soil and water conservation districts.
3. New constructed stormwater outfalls to public waters must provide for filtering or settling of suspended solids and skimming of surface debris before discharge.
(e) Special Provisions for Commercial, Industrial, Public/Semipublic, Agricultural, Forestry and Extractive Uses and Mining of Metallic Minerals and Peat
(i) Standards for Commercial, Industrial, Public, and Semipublic Uses
1. Surface water-oriented commercial uses and industrial, public, or semipublic uses with similar needs to have access to and use of public waters may be located on parcels or lots with frontage on public waters. Those uses with water-oriented needs must meet the following standards:
a. In addition to meeting impervious coverage limits, setbacks, and other zoning standards in this ordinance, the uses must be designed to incorporate topographic and vegetative screening of parking areas and structures;
b. Uses that require short-term watercraft mooring for patrons must centralize these facilities and design them to avoid obstructions of navigation and to be the minimum size necessary to meet the need; and
c. Uses that depend on patrons arriving by watercraft may use signs and lighting to convey needed information to the public, subject to the following general standards:
i. No advertising signs or supporting facilities for signs may be placed in or upon public waters. Signs conveying information or safety messages may be placed in or on
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 201
public waters by a public authority or under a permit issued by the county sheriff;
ii. Signs may be placed, when necessary, within the shore impact zone if they are designed and sized to be the minimum necessary to convey needed information. They must only convey the location and name of the establishment and the general types of goods or services available. The signs must not contain other detailed information such as product brands and prices, must not be located higher than ten feet above the ground, and must not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. If illuminated by artificial lights, the lights must be shielded or directed to prevent illumination out across public waters; and
iii. Other outside lighting may be located within the shore impact zone or over public waters if it is used primarily to illuminate potential safety hazards and is shielded or otherwise directed to prevent direct illumination out across public waters. This does not preclude use of navigational lights.
2. Uses without water-oriented needs must be located on lots or parcels without public waters frontage, or, if located on lots or parcels with public waters frontage, must either be set back double the normal ordinary high water level setback or be substantially screened from view from the water by vegetation or topography, assuming summer, leaf-on conditions.
(ii) Agriculture Use Standards
1. General cultivation farming, grazing, nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting are permitted uses if steep slopes and shore and bluff impact zones are maintained in permanent vegetation or operated under an approved conservation plan (Resource Management Systems) consistent with the field office technical guides of the local soil and water conservation districts or the United States Soil Conservation Service. The shore impact zone for parcels with permitted agricultural land uses is equal to a line parallel to and 50 feet from the ordinary high water level.
2. Animal feedlots are prohibited.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 202 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iii) Forest Management Standards
The harvesting of timber and associated reforestation or conversion of forested use to a non-forested use must be conducted consistent with the following standards:
1. Timber harvesting and associated reforestation must be conducted consistent with the provisions of the Minnesota Non-point Source Pollution Assessment-Forestry and the provisions of Water Quality in Forest Management "Best Management Practices in Minnesota."
2. Forest land conversion to another use shall require issuance of a conditional use permit subject to Section 2.4(D) and adherence to the following standards:
a. Shore and bluff impact zones must not be intensively cleared of vegetation; and
b. An erosion and sediment control plan is developed and approved by the local soil and water conservation district before issuance of a conditional use permit for the conversion.
c. Use of fertilizer, pesticides, or animal wastes within shorelands must be done in such a way as to minimize impact on the shore impact zone or public water by proper application or use of earth or vegetation.
(iv) Extractive Use Standards
1. Site Development and Restoration Plan. An extractive use site development and restoration plan must be developed, approved, and followed over the course of operation of the site. The plan must address dust, noise, possible pollutant discharges, hours and duration of operation, and anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations. It must also identify actions to be taken during operation to mitigate adverse environmental impacts, particularly erosion, and must clearly explain how the site will be rehabilitated after extractive activities end.
2. Setbacks for Processing Machinery. Processing machinery must be located consistent with setback standards for structures from ordinary high water levels of public waters and from bluffs.
(v) Mining of Metallic Minerals and Peat
Mining of metallic minerals and peat, as defined in Minnesota Statutes, sections 93.44 to 93.51, shall be a permitted use provided the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, sections 93.44 to 93.51, are satisfied.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 203
(f) Water Supply and Sewage Treatment
(i) Water Supply
Water shall be supplied through the City of Monticello municipal water system.
(ii) Sewage Treatment
Any premises used for human occupancy must be provided with an adequate method of sewage treatment, as follows:
1. Publicly-owned sewer systems shall be used for any new development.
2. Nonconforming sewage treatment systems shall be regulated and upgraded in accordance with the provisions Section 3.7(F)(7) below.
(7) Nonconformities
All legally established nonconformities as of the date of this ordinance may continue, but they will be managed according to applicable state statutes and the provisions of Chapter 6 of this ordinance for the subjects of alterations and additions, repair after damage, discontinuance of use, and intensification of use; except that the following standards will also apply in shoreland areas:
(a) Construction on nonconforming lots of record
(i) Lots of record in the office of the county recorder on the date of enactment of local shoreland controls that do not meet the requirements of Section 3.7(F)(5)(b) may be allowed as building sites without variances from lot size requirements provided the use is permitted in the zoning district, the lot has been in separate ownership from abutting lands at all times since it became substandard, was created compliant with official controls in effect at the time, and sewage treatment and setback requirements of this ordinance are met.
(ii) A variance from setback requirements must be obtained before any use, sewage treatment system, or building permit is issued for a lot. In evaluating the variance, the board of adjustment shall consider sewage treatment and water supply capabilities or constraints of the lot and shall deny the variance if adequate facilities cannot be provided.
(iii) If, in a group of two or more contiguous lots under the same ownership, any individual lot does not meet the requirements of Section 3.7(F)(5)(b), the lot must not be considered as a separate parcel of land for the purposes of sale or development. The lot must be combined with the one or more contiguous lots so they equal one or more parcels of
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
Page 204 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
land, each meeting the requirements of Section 3.7(F)(5)(b) as much as possible.
(b) Additions/expansions to nonconforming structures
(i) All additions or expansions to the outside dimensions of an existing nonconforming structure must meet the setback, height, and other requirements of Section 3.7(F). Any deviation from these requirements must be authorized by a variance pursuant to Section 3.7(F)(3)(c).
(ii) Deck additions may be allowed without a variance to a structure not meeting the required setback from the ordinary high water level if all of the following criteria and standards are met:
1. The structure existed on the date the structure setbacks were established;
2. A thorough evaluation of the property and structure reveals no reasonable location for a deck meeting or exceeding the existing ordinary high water level setback of the structure;
3. The deck encroachment toward the ordinary high water level does not exceed 15 percent of the existing setback of the structure from the ordinary high water level or does not encroach closer than 30 feet, whichever is more restrictive; and
4. The deck is constructed primarily of wood, and is not roofed or screened.
(8) Special Provisions for Subdivision and Platting in Shoreland Districts
(a) Land suitability
Each lot created through subdivision, including planned unit developments authorized under Section 2.4(P) of this ordinance, must be suitable in its natural state for the proposed use with minimal alteration. Suitability analysis by the local unit of government shall consider susceptibility to flooding, existence of wetlands, soil and rock formations with severe limitations for development, severe erosion potential, steep topography, inadequate water supply or sewage treatment capabilities, near-shore aquatic conditions unsuitable for water-based recreation, important fish and wildlife habitat, presence of significant historic sites, or any other feature of the natural land likely to be harmful to the health, safety, or welfare of future residents of the proposed subdivision or of the community.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (F) Shoreland District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 205
(b) Consistency with other controls
Subdivisions must conform to all official controls of this community. A subdivision will not be approved where a later variance from one or more standards in official controls would be needed to use the lots for their intended purpose. Each lot shall meet the minimum lot size and dimensional requirements of Section 3.7(F)(5), including at least a minimum contiguous lawn area, that is free of limiting factors sufficient for the construction of two standard soil treatment systems. Lots that would require use of holding tanks must not be approved.
(c) Information requirements.
Sufficient information must be submitted by the applicant for the community to make a determination of land suitability. The information shall include at least the following:
(i) Topographic contours at ten-foot intervals or less from United States Geological Survey maps or more accurate sources, showing limiting site characteristics;
(ii) The surface water features required in Minnesota Statutes, section 505.02, subdivision 1, to be shown on plats, obtained from United States Geological Survey quadrangle topographic maps or more accurate sources;
(iii) Adequate soils information from field investigations such as soil borings, percolation tests, or other methods to determine suitability for building and on-site sewage treatment capabilities for every lot;
(iv) Information regarding adequacy of domestic water supply; extent of anticipated vegetation and topographic alterations; near-shore aquatic conditions, including depths, types of bottom sediments, and aquatic vegetation; and proposed methods for controlling stormwater runoff and erosion, both during and after construction activities;
(v) Location of 100-year flood plain areas and floodway districts from existing adopted maps or data; and
(vi) A line or contour representing the ordinary high water level, the “toe” and the “top” of bluffs, and the minimum building setback distances from the top of the bluff and the lake or stream.
(d) Dedications
When a land or easement dedication is a condition of subdivision approval, the approval must provide easements over natural drainage or ponding areas for management of stormwater and significant wetlands.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (G) FBS: Freeway Bonus Sign District
Page 206 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(e) Platting
All subdivisions that create five or more lots or parcels that are 2-1/2 acres or less in size shall be processed as a plat in accordance with Minnesota Statutes, Chapter 505. No permit for construction of buildings shall be issued for lots created after these official controls were enacted unless the lot was approved as part of a formal subdivision.
(f) Controlled Access or Recreational Lots
Lots intended as controlled accesses to public waters or for recreational use areas for use by non-riparian lots within a subdivision must meet or exceed the sizing criteria in Section 3.7(F)(5)(b) of this ordinance.
(G) FBS: Freeway Bonus Sign District
(1) Purpose
The City of Monticello recognizes the need for special sign allowances along the I-94 corridor to allow for effective communication to interstate travelers.
(2) District Application
The provisions of Section 3.7(G) shall apply to all business and industrial lands within the jurisdiction of Monticello that are denoted on the official zoning map as being within the freeway bonus sign overlay district.
(3) Special Freeway Sign Allowance
(a) In the Freeway Bonus Sign District, the area of a freestanding sign may not exceed two hundred (200) square feet each side with a maximum height of thirty two (32) feet.
(b) Double frontage lots within the Freeway Bonus Sign District shall be allowed to have up to two (2) free-standing signs subject to the following conditions:
(i) At least one of the two free-standing signs shall be a monument sign which does not exceed fourteen (14) feet in height nor an overall size of 100 square feet.
(ii) The above size and height limitations for the second free-standing sign shall apply even if both signs are monument signs.
(iii) The overall sign area maximum for the property as outlined in Section 4.5 of this ordinance shall still be met. Official Freeway Bonus Sign District Map Section 4.5(J): Sign Specific District Regulations
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 207
(4) LED Illumination
In the Freeway Bonus Sign District, unshielded LED (Light Emitting Diode) illumination may be used pursuant to the regulations found in Section 4.5(H)(7).
(H) DW: Drinking Water Supply Management Area
RESERVED
(I) Performance Based Enhancement District
(1) Purpose
The purpose of the Performance Based Enhancement Overlay District is to provide for by-right development flexibility and enhancement in exchange for meeting special design controls and/or protecting sensitive natural features. The district is intended to create a reasonable balance between the interests of a property owner seeking more development options on a property and the interests of the surrounding property owners in the following ways:
(a) By encouraging a more creative approach in commercial and housing developments that will result in quality living environments through innovative design and aesthetic controls;
(b) By permitting a combination of housing types and styles, including single family, two-family, and multiple family dwellings, with the exception of manufactured homes;
(c) By allowing flexibility in design by permitting cluster developments and a variety of architectural styles and treatments;
(d) By allowing flexibility in setback and height restrictions;
(e) By providing an efficient use of land resulting in more cost efficient installation of utilities, streets, and other facilities;
(f) By encouraging the preservation of common open space, recreational facilities, natural features such as woodland, wetland, and flood plain;
(g) By contributing to the tax base of the community without making undue demands on the community services;
(h) By providing the means for greater flexibility in environmental design than is provided under the strict application of the Monticello zoning ordinance and Section 4.5(H)(7): Illuminated Signs
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
Page 208 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
subdivision ordinance while at the same time preserving general welfare of the City of Monticello and its inhabitants.
(2) District Application
The provisions of Section 3.7(I) shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of Monticello that are denoted on the official zoning map as being within the performance based enhancement overlay district.
(3) Relation to Underlying Zoning District
The performance based enhancement district provides different opportunities based on the underlying zoning district as follows:
(a) R-1 and R-2 Base Zoning Districts
Properties with a base zoning district classification of R-1 or R-2 within the performance based enhancement district can provide a harmonious mixture of different residential land use types to best utilize the development potential of the land given the natural environment and existing/future adjacent land uses.
(i) Uses in general
Uses shall be governed by the regulations for the R-2 zoning district as outlined in Tables 5-1, 5-4 and 5-6.
(ii) Allowed Density
1. The base density shall be governed by the regulations for the underlying zoning district.
2. Adjustments to the allowed base density shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of the performance based enhancement district, but in no case shall the maximum density of the underlying zoning district be exceeded.
3. Allowed percentage reductions to base density requirements shall always be calculated off the standard base density for the underlying zoning district, with the sum of all allowed reductions being used to calculate the final allowed density.
(iii) Lot Standards
1. Minimum lot size shall be equivalent to the required square feet per unit following execution of all permitted density adjustments outlined in Section 3.7(I)(4).
2. Minimum lot width shall be based on the required minimum lot size per the following table:
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 209
TABLE 3-27: REQUIRED MINIMUM BASE LOT WIDTHS FOR PERFORMANCE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT If lot is ≥ 11000 sq ft If lot is < 11000 sq ft but greater than or equal to 9000 sq ft If lot is < 9000 sq ft but greater than or equal to 7500 sq ft If lot is < 7500 sq ft
80 foot lot width
70 foot lot width
60 foot lot width
50 foot lot width
(iv) Development Standards
Lot development standards and setbacks shall be governed by the regulations for the R-2 zoning district as outlined in Table 3-6.
(b) R-3, B-1, B-2, and B-4 Base Zoning Districts
Properties with a base zoning district classification of R-3, B-1, B-2 or B-4 can provide a harmonious intermixing of residential and business land uses to best utilize the development potential of the land given the natural environment and existing/future adjacent land uses.
(i) Uses in general
Uses may be a mix of the uses allowed within the R-3 and B-2 zoning districts as outlined in Tables 5-1, 5-4 and 5-6. The underlying district type (residential or business) shall determine which permitting process shall be used in the event of a conflict between R-3 and B-2 standards.
(ii) Allowed Residential Density
1. Exclusively residential development proposals on properties with an underlying zoning district of R-3 shall be governed by the base density regulations for the underlying zoning district.
2. The base density of residential units within a performance based mixed-use development shall be 4200 square feet of gross lot area per unit regardless of the underlying zoning district.
3. Adjustments to the allowed base density shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.7(I)(4), but in no case shall the residential density exceed twenty (20) units per acre.
(iii) Lot standards in general
1. Lot standards and setbacks shall be governed by the regulations for the underlying zoning district.
2. Development which combines residential and business uses shall conform to the mixed use standards of the performance district as outlined in Section 3.7(I)(5).
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
Page 210 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(4) Density bonuses for improved residential development
Base density square footage requirements for residential development within a performance based enhancement district may be reduced based on inclusion of the following development features and the corresponding square foot reduction factors. Under no circumstances shall the resulting density exceed the established maximum density established by this ordinance.
(a) Bonuses for all housing types:
(i) Preservation of Natural Features – the base density requirement may be reduced based on the amount of land being permanently set aside for the preservation of natural features as outlined in Table 3-28: TABLE 3-28: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES DENSITY BONUS % of Land Being Permanently Preserved Reduction in Per Unit Base Density Requirement
7.5% to less than 10%
2.0%
10% to less than 12.5%
4.0%
12.5% to less than 15%
7.0%
15% to less than 17.5%
11.0%
17.5 to less than 20%
16.0%
Greater than 20%
22.0%
(ii) Additional Landscaping – the base density requirement may be reduced based on the introduction of additional landscaping beyond the normal requirements of code as outlined in Table 3-29:
TABLE 3-29: DENSITY BONUSES FOR ADDITIONAL LANDSCAPING Reduction in Per Unit Base Density Requirement in square feet 2% 4% 7% 11% 16% 20%
Required increase in canopy and/or evergreen trees as outlined in Table 4-3
[1]
1.5 times the required plantings
2.0 times the required plantings
3.0 times the required plantings
4.0 times the required plantings
5.0 times the required plantings
6.0 times the required plantings
[1]: The required increase in landscape plantings shall exclude any shrubs planting requirements per 10 feet of building perimeter.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 211
(iii) Additional Useable Recreational Space – in conjunction with development requiring park dedication, the base density requirement may be reduced based on any additional amount of land accepted by the City for public recreation purposes over that which is normally required by code as outlined in Table 3-30: TABLE 3-30: RECREATIONAL SPACE DENSITY BONUS % increase over normally required public land dedication for recreational use Reduction in Per Unit Base Density Requirement
0.5% to less than 1%
2.0%
1% to less than 2%
4.0%
2% to less than 3%
7.0%
3% to less than 4%
11.0%
4% to less than 5%
16.0%
Greater than 5%
22.0%
(b) Bonuses exclusive to multi-family housing types:
(i) Shared Underground Parking – the base density requirement may be reduced by 15% if each unit is provided a parking space within a shared underground parking area.
(ii) Improved Construction Standards – the base density requirement may be reduced by 15% if type two (2) construction is used.
(iii) Elevators – the base density requirement may be reduced by 10% if an elevator serving each floor is provided.
(iv) Indoor Recreation Amenities – the base density requirement may be reduced by 10% if indoor recreation and/or social room(s) equal to twenty-five (25) square feet per unit or seven hundred fifty (750) square feet total, whichever is greater, are provided.
(v) Outdoor Recreation Amenities – the base density requirement may be reduced by 10% if major outdoor recreation facilities are provided such as swimming pools, tennis courts, or similar facilities requiring a substantial investment equaling at minimum five (5) percent of the construction cost of the principal structure.
(5) Bonuses for Green Buildings
(a) The incentives listed in Table 3-31 are available to developments incorporating the denoted number of green building features from schedules “A” and “B” in Table 3-31.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
Page 212 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 3-31: BONUSES FOR GREEN BUILDINGS Type of Bonus Minimum Number of Green Building Features Provided [1] From Schedule “A” From Schedule “B” CATEGORY 1: BASE DENSITY REDUCTION
 4% reduction in the per unit base density requirement
1
2
 11% reduction in the per unit base density requirement
1
3
 20% reduction in the per unit base density requirement
2
4 CATEGORY 2: OFF-STREET PARKING REDUCTION
 Decrease in required off-street parking spaces by 5%
1
2
 Decrease in required off-street parking spaces by 10%
1
3
 Decrease in required off-street parking spaces by 15%
2
4 CATEGORY 3: ADDITIONAL BUILDING HEIGHT
 Increase in building height by one (1) story beyond the district maximum
2
2
[1]: Development may include a sufficient number of green building features to take advantage of more than one type of bonus with a limit of one (1) bonus per category.
(b) The green building features listed in Table 3-32 below may be utilized to obtain the development bonuses listed in Table 3-31.
TABLE 3-32: GREEN BUILDINGS FEATURES Schedule Feature ENERGY
A
Generation of a minimum of 20 percent of the electricity needed by the development from alternative energy sources (solar, wind, geothermal or biomass) within five years.
A
Proof of purchase of carbon offsets in an amount equivalent to 15 percent of the construction costs within five years
B
Design buildings so that they can accommodate the installation and operation of solar photovoltaic panels or solar thermal heating devices. RECYCLING / WASTE REDUCTION
A
Utilize recycled materials for 50% of streets, off-street parking, sidewalks, curbs, and 25% of building materials
B
Provide at least one enclosed recycling station per building suitable for storage and collection of recyclable generated on-site
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 213
TABLE 3-32 (continued) Schedule Feature SITE CONFIGURATION
B
Provision of a community garden with at least 500 square feet per dwelling that is controlled by a property-owners association
B
Use of paving materials in driveways and parking lots that have solar reflectance index (SRI) score of at least 29 (SRI is a measure of a parking lot’s ability to reject solar heat; a higher SRI yields a cooler parking lot)
B
Configuration of new buildings with one axis 1.5 times longer than the other, and the long axis oriented in an east-west configuration for solar access
A
Include underground parking or a parking structure
A
Provide for mixed use structures with active retail or personal service uses on ground floors and residential uses on upper floors RESOURCE CONSERVATION
B
Provision of 150-foot undisturbed buffers adjacent to all perennial stream banks, wetlands, and bodies of water
A
Use only native vegetation for required landscaping
A
Use of Low Impact Development (LID) techniques instead of retention or detention ponds for stormwater management
B
Preservation of 15 percent of the tree canopy on a site comprised of the canopies of trees 10” or greater in DBH
A
Double the minimum open space set-aside amount
A
Remediate site contamination on a documented (by means of a Phase II Environmental Site Assessment) “brownfield” site TRANSPORTATION
A
Provision of a network of multi-purpose trails with at least one connection to a public trail, sidewalk or greenway for every acre of land
B
Inclusion of showering and dressing facilities in non-residential development for employees using alternative forms of transportation
A
Provide on-site transit facilities (e.g., designated park-and-ride parking spaces, bus shelters, etc). BUILDING CONFIGURATION
A
Inclusion of green roofs on at least 30% of the roof area within the development
B
Meet minimum Energy Star (or equivalent) criteria for at least 75 percent of the residential floor area
A
Design the building to achieve a minimum LEED certification of platinum [counts as two (2) schedule “A” features]
A
Design the building to achieve a minimum LEED certification of gold
B
Design the building to achieve a minimum LEED certification of silver
B
Include shade features (e.g., awnings, louvers, shutters, overhangs, etc) to shade all windows and doors on the southern building façade
B
Design buildings such that 25 percent of the residential units are consistent with Universal Design practices
A
Design buildings such that 50 percent of the residential units are consistent with Universal Design practices WATER CONSERVATION
A
Inclusion of a recycled or grey water system for landscaping irrigation
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (I) Performance Based Enhancement District
Page 214 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(6) Standards for Mixed Use Development
All mixed use development within the performance based enhancement district shall adhere to the following:
(a) Residential Units in mixed use developments
Residential units shall be incorporated within a mixed use development to be visually and/or physically integrated with nonresidential uses.
(i) When the underlying zoning district is R-3, B-1 or B-2, residential units shall be located using one of the following options;
1. Residential uses are vertically located above street-level commercial uses; or
2. Residential uses are horizontally integrated into the site development in a manner that provides a transition between adjacent low intensity uses (e.g. single family homes) to adjacent higher intensity uses (e.g. commercial).
(ii) When the underlying zoning district is B-4, the following shall apply to dwelling units:
1. Dwelling units shall not be located on the first floor street facing side of a building.
2. First floor alley or side yard facing dwelling units are permitted, but they shall not encompass more than 30% of the gross first floor area.
(b) Non-residential uses in Mixed Use Developments
(i) New non-residential uses in a mixed use development shall be restricted to lots adjacent to existing non-residential uses or lots at corner locations.
(ii) Buildings shall incorporate one or more transitional features as required by the Community Development Department (see Section 4.7, Transitional Features).
(iii) When the underlying zoning district is B-1 or B-2, individual retail and other commercial uses shall not exceed 5,000 square feet unless authorized by a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 2.4(D).
(iv) Developments are encouraged to situate buildings at the street frontage, locating parking to the side and rear of buildings to avoid views of large, paved parking areas from public rights-of-way.
(v) Loading and service areas shall be placed to the sides or rear of a structure, or shall be integrated within the building’s architecture as a means of minimizing their appearance.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 215
(J) Special Use Overlay District
(1) Restrictions on Adult Uses
With the adoption of this ordinance, the City of Monticello exercises its authority under Minn. Stat. 617.242 Subd. 7 and declares that these regulations supercede the provisions of Minn. Stat. 617.242. As such, adult uses as defined in this ordinance shall be subject to the following general provisions:
(f) Adult Use – Principal activities shall be permitted only in those areas with the BOTH required base zoning designation and the Special Use Overlay District designation.
(g) Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statute 617.241 are not permitted and are prohibited.
(h) An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an adult use/principal.
(i) Adult use/principal activities shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
(j) Adult use/principal activities shall not be located on any parcel that abuts or shares a property line with any of the following parcels or land uses:
(i) Residentially zoned property;
(ii) Agricultural land located in the neighboring township or in the City that is designated in the comprehensive plan for residential use;
(iii) A licensed day care center;
(iv) A public or private educational facility classified as an elementary, middle, junior high, or senior high school;
(v) A public library;
(vi) A public park;
(vii) A church;
(viii) Amusement places such as roller rinks, dance halls, and bowling alleys;
(ix) Liquor sales;
(k) Adult use/principal activities shall be located at least four hundred (400) radial feet apart as measured from one another.
(l) Adult use/principal activity is a separate use and no two adult use/principal activities shall be located in the same building or upon the same property and each use shall be subject to all of the requirements of this section.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.7 Overlay Zoning Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
Page 216 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(m) Adult use/principal activities shall adhere to the following signing regulations:
(i) Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the type of business which is being conducted;
(ii) Sign messages shall not contain material classified as advertising;
(iii) Sign messages shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which they are located
(n) Adult use/principal activities shall be prohibited in establishments where liquor is served.
(o) Adult use/principal activities shall be prohibited at any place or event where minors are permitted.
(2) Adult-Oriented Uses – Accessory
(a) Adult use/accessory activities shall be allowed only as regulated by Section 5.3 (D) (4).
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 217
3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
(1) Swan River PUD District
(a) Purpose: The purpose of the Swan River PUD District is to provide for the development of certain properties for elementary and secondary school activities and uses. The purpose of the district shall incorporate the Public Values Statement of record, as may be amended, adopted jointly by the Planning Commission and City Council as of January 27th, 2014.
(b) Permitted Uses: Permitted principal uses in the Swan River PUD District shall be Elementary and Secondary School, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans and development agreement, as may be amended.
(c) Accessory Uses: Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to elementary and secondary schools, and as identified by the approved final stage PUD.
(d) District Performance Standards: Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Swan River PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. Only where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage PUD, the regulations of the CCD, Central Community District shall apply.
(e) Changes: Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, or building size, mass or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4(P)(10). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
(2) Monticello High School PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Monticello High School PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for public school buildings and related land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Monticello High School PUD District shall be schools, including pre-school, K-12, and related administrative uses, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans dated June 27, 2016, and development agreement dated July 22, 2016, as may be amended.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
Page 218 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to primary and secondary school uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Monticello High School PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage PUD, then the regulations of the R-1, Single Family District shall apply.
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4(P)(10). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
(3) Mills Fleet Farm PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Mills Fleet Farm PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for retail commercial land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Mills Fleet Farm PUD District shall be retail commercial uses as found in the B-4, Regional Business District of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans dated July 19, 2016, the amendment to Planned Unit Development dated June 12th, 2017, and development agreement dated July 25th, 2016, amended October 24th, 2016 and as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any district, including Conditional Uses in the B-4 District, shall be reviewed under the requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 2, Section (O) – Planned Unit Development for Development Stage PUD and Final Stage PUD.
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to retail uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans, which shall hereby be incorporated by reference.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Mills Fleet Farm PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans, which shall hereby be incorporated by reference and development agreement dated July 25th, 2016. In such case where any
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 219
proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage PUD, then the regulations of the B-4, Regional Business District shall apply.
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (0)(10). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
(4) Red Rooster PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Red Rooster PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for office-commercial and industrial services land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Red Rooster PUD District shall be office-commercial uses as found in the B-2, Limited Business District and industrial services uses as found in the I-1, Light Industrial District of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans dated May 23rd, 2016, and development agreement dated July 25th, 2016, as may be amended.
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to office-commercial uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans, including limited non-commercial self-storage as an accessory use. Accessory buildings on the site may be utilized for indoor storage for enterprises which may or may not occupy principal use space on the property. No outdoor storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Red Rooster PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage PUD, then the regulations of the B-2, Limited Business District shall apply.
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (P)(l0). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
Page 220 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(5) Spaeth Industrial Park PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Spaeth Industrial Park PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for industrial land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Spaeth Industrial Park PUD District shall be indoor industrial uses as found in the I-2, Heavy Industrial District of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans dated July 24, 2017 and development agreement dated July 24, 2017, as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any district, including Conditional Uses in the I-2 District, shall be reviewed under the requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 2, Section (O) – Planned Unit Developments for Development Stage PUD and Final Stage PUD. Industrial Self-Storage, as defined by the Monticello Zoning Ordinance.
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to industrial uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans, but shall not include outdoor storage or other activities.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Spaeth Industrial Park PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement or use is not addressed by the Final Stage PUD, then the regulations of the I-2, Heavy Industrial District shall apply.
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (O)(l0). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
(6) Camping World PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Camping World PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for vehicle sales, service, and display commercial land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Camping World PUD District shall be vehicle sales, display, and vehicle service and repair – minor and major, as found in the B-3 Highway Business District of the Monticello
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 221
Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans dated August 14th, 2017, and development agreement dated August 14th, 2017, as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any district, including Conditional Uses in the B-3 District, shall be reviewed under the requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 2, Section (O) – Planned Unit Developments for Development Stage PUD and Final Stage PUD.
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to retail uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans. Accessory buildings on the site may be utilized for indoor uses for enterprises of commercial tenants which are identified as permitted principal uses in the B-3, Highway Business District.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Camping World PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage PUD, then the regulations of the B-3, Highway Business District shall apply.
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (P)(l0). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
(7) Autumn Ridge PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Autumn Ridge PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for residential land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Autumn Ridge PUD District shall be single family residential uses as found in the “T-N”, Traditional Neighborhood Zoning District, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans and development agreement dated September 11th, 2017, as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any district, including Conditional Uses in the T-N District, shall be reviewed under the requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 2, Section (O) – Planned Unit Developments for Development Stage PUD and Final Stage PUD.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
Page 222 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to residential uses as allowed in the T-N District, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Autumn Ridge PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement or use is not addressed by the Final Stage PUD, then the regulations of the T-N, Traditional Neighborhood District shall apply.
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (O)(l0). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
(8) Affordable Self-Storage PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Self-Storage PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for commercial land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Affordable Self-Storage PUD District shall be self-storage uses as found in the B-3, Highway Business District of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans dated September 11, 2017 and development agreement dated September 11th, 2017, as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any district, including Conditional Uses in the B-3 District, shall be reviewed under the requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 2, Section (O) – Planned Unit Developments for Development Stage PUD and Final Stage PUD.
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to industrial uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD Plans, but shall not include outdoor storage or other activities.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development in the Affordable Self-Storage PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement or use is not addressed by the Final Stage PUD, then the regulations of the B-3, Highway Business District shall apply.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 223
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (O)(l0). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
(9) Rivertown Suites PUD District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the Rivertown Suites PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for multiple family residential land uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Rivertown Suites PUD District shall be multiple family residential uses as found in the R-4, Medium-High Density Residential District of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved Final Stage Development Plans dated July 23, 2018 and development agreement dated September 7, 2018, as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any district shall be reviewed under the requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 2, Section (O) – Planned Unit Developments for Development Stage PUD and Final Stage PUD.
(c) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to residential uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans.
(d) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Rivertown Suites PUD District shall adhere to the approved final stage PUD plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the final stage PUD, then the regulations of the R-4, Medium-High Density Residential District shall apply.
(e) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (P)(10). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
CHAPTER 3: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section 3.8 Planned Unit Development Districts
Subsection (J) Special Use Overlay District
Page 224 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(10) Groveland 5th Addition – Monticello RV PUD
(f) Purpose. The purpose of the Groveland 5th Addition- Monticello RV PUD District is to provide for the development of certain real estate subject to the District for Vehicle Sales & Rental uses.
(g) Permitted Uses. Permitted principal uses in the Groveland 5th Addition - Monticello RV PUD District shall be vehicle sales and rental uses as found in the B-3, Highway Business District of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, subject to the approved Final Stage PUD Plans dated March 25th, 2019, and development agreement dated March 25th, 2019, as may be amended. The introduction of any other use from any district shall be reviewed under the requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 2, Section (0)- Planned Unit Developments for Development Stage PUD and Final Stage PUD.
(h) Accessory Uses. Accessory uses shall be those commonly accessory and incidental to vehicle sales and rental uses, and as specifically identified by the approved final stage PUD plans. This shall include the addition of an accessory sanitary sewage dump station facility for recreational vehicles and LP bulk fuel tank as approved by the City Council on July 22nd, 2019.
(i) District Performance Standards. Performance standards for the development of any lot in the Groveland 5th Addition - Monticello RV PUD District shall adhere to the approved Final Stage PUD Plans and development agreement. In such case where any proposed improvement is not addressed by the Final Stage PUD Plans, then the regulations of the B-3, Highway Business District, shall apply.
(j) Amendments. Where changes to the PUD are proposed in the manner of use, density, site plan, development layout, building size, mass, or coverage, or any other change, the proposer shall apply for an amendment to the PUD under the terms of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.4 (P)(10). The City may require that substantial changes in overall use of the PUD property be processed as a new project, including a zoning district amendment.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (A) Section Organization
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 225
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
(A) Section Organization
The Monticello landscaping and screening standards are organized into eight main sub-sections:
(1) Section 4.1(B), Purpose and Intent
Sets out the purpose and intent for the standards;
(2) Section 4.1(C), General Requirements for Landscaping
Includes the applicability provisions, requirements for landscaping plans, and standards for new plantings;
(3) Section 4.1(D), Landscaping Plan Requirements
Outlines the specific information that must be supplied to the City anytime a landscape plan is required by this ordinance;
(4) Section 4.1(E), Alternative Landscaping Plan
Includes the procedures and standards for review of alternative landscaping plans; and
(5) Section 4.1(F), Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
Includes the standards for landscaping around the perimeter and within vehicular use areas;
(6) Section 4.1(G), Standards for Perimeter Buffers
Includes the landscaping buffer standards applied to the edges of some base zoning districts;
(7) Section 4.1(H), Standards for Required Screening
Includes the screening requirements for site features like refuse, loading, and service areas;
(8) Section 4.1(I), Standards for Site Landscaping
Introduces standards for foundation plantings around some buildings;
(9) Section 4.1(J), Zoning District Specific Landscaping Standards
Outlines landscaping standards only applicable to specific zoning districts.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (B) Purpose and Intent
Page 226 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(10) Section 4.1(K), Landscaping Installation and Maintenance Standards
Includes the other standards for landscaping installation, timing, maintenance, monitoring for compliance, and incentives.
(B) Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this section to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the City. The intent of this section is to promote this purpose by:
(1) Ensuring and encouraging the planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of trees, shrubs, and groundcover;
(2) Ensuring the protection of community residents and visitors from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the City from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs, or other plants;
(3) Mitigating against erosion and sedimentation;
(4) Reducing stormwater runoff and the costs associated therewith;
(5) Preserving and protecting the water table and surface waters;
(6) Reducing audible noise from automobiles and land uses;
(7) Restoring soils and land denuded as a result of construction or grading;
(8) Increasing the tree canopy to provide shade and moderate the effect of urban heat islands;
(9) Limiting glare created by exterior lighting;
(10) Reducing visual pollution from the urban environment and increasing privacy between incompatible uses;
(11) Protecting and enhancing property values and aesthetic qualities;
(12) Helping to differentiate streets and other areas of the public realm from private lands;
(13) Providing additional improvements to air quality through the carbon dioxide uptake process provided by trees and landscaping; and
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (C) General Requirements for Landscaping
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 227
(14) Providing visual screening, where appropriate.
(C) General Requirements for Landscaping
(1) Applicability of Landscaping Standards
(a) General
Except as exempted by Section 4.1(C)(1)(b) below, the standards in Section 4.1 shall apply to all development in the City.
(b) Exemptions
Development in the CCD shall be exempt from the perimeter vehicular use area landscaping standards in subsection 4.1(F)(3).
(c) Landscape Plan
To ensure compliance with the standards of this section, a landscape plan demonstrating how landscaping will be planted on a development site shall be included as a part of any application when required by the Community Development Department.
(2) Planting Standards
Plantings provided in accordance with this section shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Deciduous canopy or shade trees shall be a minimum of two (2.0) caliper inches in size at the time of planting, as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, as amended.
(b) Evergreen canopy trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height above ground level at the time of planting.
(c) Understory or ornamental trees shall have a caliper of one-and-one half (1.5) inches at time of planting, as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004, as amended.
(d) Deciduous or evergreen shrubs shall be upright in nature and be a minimum of 24 inches in height at the time of planting.
(e) In cases where an aggregate caliper inch (ACI) requirement is utilized to derive a required amount of vegetation, and the ACI figure includes a fraction, an applicant may: Standards for Perimeter Buffers [Section 4.1(G)]
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (C) General Requirements for Landscaping
Page 228 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) Utilize a tree or trees with a caliper inch measurement exceeding the minimum size at time of planting standard of Section 4.1(C) in order to meet the required ACI; or
(ii) Round the ACI figure upwards until the figure corresponds with a whole number of trees meeting the minimum size at time of planting standard. When trees exceeding the minimum size at time of planting standard are proposed, the minimum calipers of such trees shall be clearly noted on the Landscaping Plan.
(f) In cases where application of landscaping requirements result in a fraction in the number of shrubs to be provided, the minimum number of shrubs or trees to be provided shall be rounded upwards to the next highest whole number.
(g) All landscape plant materials shall conform to the latest version of the American Standard of Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1, as amended). Plant material shall be of standard quality or better, true to name and type of species or variety.
(h) The use of native, drought tolerant vegetation is encouraged to reduce dependency upon irrigation.
(i) To curtail the spread of disease or insect infestation in a plant species, new tree plantings shall comply with the following standards:
(i) When fewer than 20 trees are required on a site, at least two different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
(ii) When more than 20 but fewer than 40 trees are required to be planted on site, at least three different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
(iii) When 40 or more trees are required on a site, at least four different species shall be utilized, in roughly equal proportions.
(iv) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed so as to prevent the utilization of a larger number of different species than specified above.
(j) Required Species
(i) All trees used in site developments shall be indigenous to the appropriate hardiness zone and physical characteristics of the site.
(ii) All deciduous trees proposed to satisfy the minimum requirements of this policy shall be long-lived hardwood species.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (C) General Requirements for Landscaping
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 229
(3) Existing Vegetation
(a) It is the policy of the City of Monticello to preserve the natural forest and woodland areas throughout the City; and with respect to specific site development, to retain, as far as practicable, substantial tree stands which should be incorporated into the site.
(b) Existing healthy, well-formed canopy and understory trees as well as healthy shrubs shall be credited toward the requirements of this section, provided the vegetation meets the minimum size standards of this Ordinance, is protected before and during development of the site in accordance with Section 4.2(B), Tree Protection During Construction, and is maintained thereafter in a healthy growing condition.
(4) Stabilization
All required landscape planting areas shall be stabilized and maintained with lawn, ground covers, mulches, or other approved materials to prevent soil erosion and allow rainwater infiltration.
(5) Berms
(a) The slope of all berms shall not exceed a two-to-one (2:1) ratio (horizontal to vertical), shall have a top width at least one-half the berm height, and a maximum height of four feet above the toe of the berm.
(b) All berms, regardless of size, shall be stabilized with a ground cover or other suitable vegetation.
(c) Berms proposed to be placed along street right-of-way shall be designed and constructed to provide adequate sight distances at intersections and shall not impair safe operation of vehicles.
(d) Berms shall in no case damage the roots or trunks of existing healthy vegetation designated to be preserved.
(6) Easements
Nothing except groundcover shall be planted or installed within any underground or overhead utility, drainage, gas easement, or within three feet of a fire protection system without the consent of the utility provider, easement holder, or the City, as appropriate.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (D) Landscaping Plan Requirements
Page 230 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(7) Sodding and Ground Cover when no Landscaping or Site Plan is Required
All areas not otherwise improved in accordance with approved site or landscaping plans shall be seeded. Exceptions to this criterion may be approved by the Community Development Department as follows:
(a) Seeding of future expansion areas as shown on approved plans.
(b) Undisturbed areas containing existing viable natural vegetation which can be maintained free of foreign and noxious plant materials.
(c) Areas designated as open space or future expansion areas properly planted and maintained with prairie grass.
(d) Use of mulch materials such as bark, rock mulch over 4 mil poly, and wood chips in support of shrubs and foundation plantings.
(D) Landscaping Plan Requirements
(1) Detailed landscape plans shall be required as specified in this ordinance and in all cases where site plan approval is specified by either this ordinance or the subdivision ordinance.
(a) The landscape plan should illustrate planned development on the site, and
(b) The landscape plan shall be produced on a separate sheet or sheets from other required plans such as grading, drainage, and utility plans.
(2) Detailed landscape plans shall include the following information:
(a) In general:
(i) Name and address of developer/owner.
(ii) Name and address of architect/designer.
(iii) Date of plan preparation.
(iv) Dates and description of all revisions.
(v) Name of project or development.
(vi) Scale of plan (engineering scale only, at 1 inch equals 50 feet or less).
(vii) North point indication.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (D) Landscaping Plan Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 231
(b) Site Analysis:
(i) Boundary lines of property with dimensions based upon certified survey.
(ii) Name and alignment of proposed and existing adjacent on-site streets.
(iii) Location of existing and proposed utility rights-of-way, easements, and lines (water, gas, electric).
(iv) Location of existing and proposed building.
(v) Topographic contours of the minimum interval of 2 feet, extending at least 100 feet beyond the site boundaries.
(vi) Location of existing and proposed parking facilities, including curbing detail and traffic island delineators.
(vii) Location of existing and proposed water bodies.
(viii) Location of existing and proposed sidewalks, trail corridors, and fire lanes.
(ix) Other existing or proposed conditions which would be expected to affect landscaping.
(x) Percentage of gross site area not covered by structures and pavement and percentage of gross site area covered by pervious and impervious surfaces.
(c) Landscape Data:
(i) Planting schedule (table) containing symbols, quantities, common names, botanical names, sizes of plant material, root specification (b.r., B & B, potted, etc.) and special planting instructions.
(ii) Existing trees and shrubbery, locations, common names, and approximate size.
(iii) Planting detail (show all species to scale at normal mature crown diameter or spread for local hardiness zone).
(iv) Typical sections in details of fences, tie walls, planter boxes, tot lots, picnic areas, berms, and the like.
(v) Typical sections of landscape islands and planter beds with identification of materials used.
(vi) Details of planting beds and foundation plantings.
(vii) Note indicating how disturbed soil areas will be restored through the use of sodding, seeding, or other techniques.
(viii) Delineation of both sodded and seeded areas with respective areas in square feet.
(ix) Coverage plan for underground irrigation system, if any.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (E) Alternative Landscaping Plan
Page 232 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(x) Exterior lighting plan (as applicable).
(d) Special Conditions:
Where landscape or man-made materials are used to provide ordinance or policy-required perimeter buffering/screening from adjacent and neighboring properties, a cross-through section shall be provided showing the perspective of the site from the neighboring property at the property line elevation.
(E) Alternative Landscaping Plan
(1) Purpose
In cases where development conditions require a deviation from the landscaping standards in this section or the tree protection standards in Section 4.2, Tree Protection, an alternative landscaping plan shall be required. An alternative landscaping plan shall indicate how compliance with the standards in this Ordinance is impossible or impractical, and shall illustrate how compliance can be achieved to the maximum extent practicable. Nothing in Section 4.1(E) shall prohibit a development configuration that meets or exceeds the landscaping and tree protection standards in this Ordinance.
(2) Justification
Alternative plans, materials, or methods may be justified due to:
(a) Natural conditions, such as streams, natural rock formations, or topography;
(b) The likelihood that landscaping material would be ineffective at maturity due to topography, placement, or other existing site conditions;
(c) Lot size or configuration;
(d) The presence of utility or other easements;
(e) The potential for interference with public safety; and
(f) Other situations where strict adherence to the landscaping or tree protection standards in this Ordinance are determined to be impractical by the Community Development Department.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (E) Alternative Landscaping Plan
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 233
(3) Allowable Deviations
The Community Development Department may approve an alternative landscape plan if it meets the purpose and intent of Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening, or Section 4.2, Tree Protection, as appropriate. Allowable deviations from the standards of this section include, but are not limited to the following:
(a) Reduced Planting Rates due to Public Facilities
An adjustment to planting locations or reduction of up to 20 percent in the type or total number of required caliper inches may be allowed when underground connections to public facilities, public utilities, or public easements or right-of-way cause difficulty in meeting the required standards.
(b) Reduction in Standards due to Nature of Parcel
A reduction in the count, spacing, or species variety standards by up to 20 percent may be allowed where the reduction is desirable in terms of protection of existing natural resources, better consistency with the goals of the comprehensive plan, or a site design that exceeds the quality of what would otherwise result under a strict application of the standards in this Ordinance, in the opinion of the Community Development Department.
(c) Reduction in Standards in Recognition of Native Plantings and/or Restoration Plan
A reduction of up to 10 percent in the type or total number of required caliper inches may be allowed where the reduction is desirable as an incentive to encourage the use of native plantings and/or the restoration of native plantings on lands dedicated for open space.
(d) Planting on Adjacent or Alternative Sites
In cases where required plantings cannot be easily sited on the subject parcel, alternative locations on adjacent or nearby parcels may be proposed.
(4) Alternative Landscape Plan Informational Requirements
Alternative landscape plans shall provide the same information required by a general landscape plan as outlined in Section 4.1(D).
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (F) Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
Page 234 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(F) Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
Except where exempted by Section 4.1(F)(1) below, all vehicular use areas shall include landscaping both within the interior of the vehicular use area and around its perimeter, as a means of mitigating the parking area’s microclimate and visual impacts.
(1) Exemptions
The following uses shall be exempt from the requirements to provide vehicular use area landscaping:
(a) Single-family detached residential development;
(b) Two- to four-family dwellings;
(c) Off-street surface vehicular use areas with four or fewer spaces;
(d) Parking structures; and
(e) Vehicle display areas for vehicle sales uses.
(2) Interior Vehicular Use Area Landscaping Standards
All vehicular use areas shall provide and maintain landscaped planting areas within the interior of the vehicular use area in accordance with the following.
(a) Configuration
Interior planting areas shall be designed in accordance with the following standards:
(i) Islands shall be located at the end of parking bays and have a minimum size of 180 square feet when adjacent to single loaded parking spaces, and a minimum size of 360 square feet when adjacent to double loaded parking spaces (see Figure 4-1: Interior Parking Islands).
Vehicular use area landscaping DOES count towards overall required site landscaping. [Section 4.1(H)(3)]
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (F) Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 235
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (F) Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
Page 236 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(ii) The maximum length of a parking bay to be bounded by interior planting islands shall be in accordance with Table 4-1.
TABLE 4-1: LANDSCAPED ISLAND REQUIREMENTS Use Type Maximum Number of Parking Stalls Between Islands Residential Uses
Multi Family Uses
12 stalls between islands Commercial, Civic, and Institutional Uses
Commercial Uses
24 stalls between islands
Civic & Institutional Uses
24 stalls between islands Industrial Uses
Industrial & Business Campus District Uses
24 stalls between islands
All other Industrial Uses
50 stalls between islands
(iii) Landscaped planting areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area for the purpose of heat abatement.
(iv) Driveway and primary drive aisle medians shall have a minimum width of four feet for medians containing shrubs and six feet for medians containing both shrubs and understory trees.
(v) Each interior planting island shall contain at least one canopy or understory tree per every 180 square feet, or portion thereof, of the total landscape island area.
(vi) Shrubs shall be planted within landscaping islands at a minimum rate necessary to ensure that at least 25 percent of the total land area occupied by landscaping islands is planted with shrubs.
(b) Protection of Planting Areas
Except as exempted by the Community Development Department, all planting areas shall be protected from vehicle damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops, or other comparable methods. This standard shall not prohibit the use of planting areas as on-site stormwater management devices.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (F) Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 237
(3) Perimeter Vehicular Use Area Landscaping Standards
Where a vehicular use area serving a use subject to these standards abuts a street right-of-way, vacant land, or any other development (except another vehicular use area), perimeter landscaping strips shall be provided and maintained between the vehicle use area and the abutting right-of-way or property line in accordance with the following standards.
(a) Location
(i) Perimeter landscaping strips shall be located on the same land where the vehicular use area is located, and shall be placed to assure visibility and safety of pedestrians on the public street, as well as those within the vehicular use area.
(ii) Perimeter landscaping strips may not be placed within future street rights-of-way as may be identified on the City’s Official Map.
(b) Minimum Width
When a vehicular use area is located within 50 feet of a street right-of-way, the perimeter landscaping shall be located within a planting strip at least six feet wide. In all other instances, the strip shall be the minimum width necessary to assure required landscaping is not damaged by vehicles or other on-site activity. In no instance shall the strip be less than three feet wide.
(c) Protection of Landscaping Strip
Except as exempted by the Community Development Department, the perimeter landscaping strip shall be protected from vehicle damage by the installation of curbing, wheel stops, extra width in the landscaping strip, or other comparable methods. This standard shall not prohibit the use of perimeter landscaping strips as on-site stormwater management devices.
(d) Required Materials (see Figure 4-3)
Each perimeter landscaping strip shall include at least eight aggregate caliper inches (ACI) of canopy trees per 100 linear feet of landscaping strip, and the remaining ground shall be landscaped (sod, mulch, etc).
(e) Adjacent to Perimeter Buffers
Perimeter landscape strips associated with a vehicle use area may be credited towards perimeter buffer standards [See Section 4.1(G), Standards for Perimeter Buffers], provided the minimum buffer standards of this section are met.
Perimeter vehicular use area landscaping counts towards overall required site landscaping. [Section 4.1(H)(3)]
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (F) Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
Page 238 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(f) Adjacent to Off-Street Surface Parking on Other Lots
Where two or more off-street surface vehicular use areas are located adjacent to one another, but upon different lots, no perimeter landscaping strip shall be required between the two vehicular use areas.
(4) Incentives for Improved Design
(a) The total aggregate caliper inch requirements for canopy and understory trees in subsection 4.1(F) may be reduced by five percent when:
(i) At least sixty-five (65) percent of the provided parking is located to the side or rear of the building;
(ii) At least thirty (30) percent of the total required parking is subject to a shared parking agreement; and
(iii) When pervious parking surfacing is used for twenty (20) percent or more of the total vehicular use area.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (G) Standards for Perimeter Buffers
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 239
(b) The above incentives may be combined to achieve a cumulative reduction in the amount of required tree ACI.
(G) Standards for Perimeter Buffers
(1) Purpose and Intent
Perimeter landscape buffers are intended to mitigate potential negative effects of different contiguous uses.
(2) Applicability
Except for adjoining single-family detached residential uses, adjoining commercial and industrial uses occurring within the same zoning district boundary, and uses in the CCD district, all development shall provide a perimeter landscape buffer to separate it from uses in a different use classification in accordance with Table 4-2: Buffer Types, and Table 4-3: Buffer Type Application.
(3) Types of Buffers
Table 4-2: Buffer Types, describes four different buffering types in terms of their function, opacity, width, and planting requirements. Where a particular buffer type is required in Table 4-3: Buffer Type Application, the requirement may be met with the combination of minimum buffer width and minimum screening requirements specified under either Option 1 or Option 2. Where an option utilizing a fence or wall is selected, the fence or wall shall comply with the standards of Section 4.3, Fences and Walls.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (G) Standards for Perimeter Buffers
Page 240 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 4-2: BUFFER TYPES ACI = AGGREGATE CALIPER INCHES Minimum Screening Requirements Within the Perimeter Buffer [1] [2] [3] [4] Buffer Type and Configuration Option 1: Minimum Width of 20 feet Option 2: Minimum Width of 10 feet [5] TYPE A – BASIC BUFFER
This perimeter buffer functions as basic edge demarcating individual properties with a slight visual obstruction from the ground to a height of ten feet.
2 ACI of canopy trees + 10 ACI of understory trees + 15 small shrubs per 100 linear feet TYPE B – AESTHETIC BUFFER
This perimeter buffer functions as an intermittent visual obstruction from the ground to a height of at least 20 feet, and creates the impression of special separation without eliminating visual contact between uses.
8 ACI of canopy trees + 10 ACI of understory trees + 15 small shrubs per 100 linear feet
2 ACI of canopy trees + 14 ACI of understory trees + 35 small shrubs per 100 linear feet TYPE C – SEMI-OPAQUE BUFFER
This perimeter buffer functions as a semi-opaque screen from the ground to at least a height of six feet.
12 ACI of canopy trees + 14 ACI of understory trees + 25 small shrubs per 100 linear feet
One 4-foot high berm or one 4-foot high solid fence + 2 ACI of canopy trees + 16 ACI of understory trees per 100 linear feet TYPE D – OPAQUE BUFFER
This perimeter buffer functions as an opaque screen from the ground to a height of at least six feet. This type of buffer prevents visual contact between uses and creates a strong impression of total separation.
18 ACI of canopy trees + 20 ACI of understory trees + 55 small shrubs per 100 linear feet
One 6-foot high solid fence + 12 ACI of canopy trees per 100 linear feet
[1]: Any required perimeter buffer width can be reduced to five feet with the provision of a solid masonry wall at least five feet in height along with ten large shrubs per every 100 linear feet.
[2]: Perimeter buffer widths (but not vegetation amounts) may be reduced in accordance with Section 2.4(G) upon approval of an Alternate Landscape Plan under the provisions of Section 4.1(E) if adhering to these requirements is not possible.
[3]: In cases where an adjacent use is designed for solar access, understory trees can be substituted for canopy trees.
[4]: Required plantings shall conform to the planting standards outlined in section 4.1(C)(2).
[5]: Fences and walls shall comply with the standards in Section 4.3, Fences and Walls.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (G) Standards for Perimeter Buffers
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 241
(4) Determination of Required Buffer Type
Table 4-3 specifies the type of perimeter landscape buffer that new development shall provide between it and adjacent property, based on the uses present on the development site and that on the adjacent property. The buffer type is indicated by a letter corresponding to one of the four buffer types depicted in Table 4-2, Buffer Types.
TABLE 4-3: BUFFER TYPE APPLICATION Existing Use Type on Abutting Land [1] Proposed use Type Single Family Residential All Other Residential Civic and Institutional Uses Office and Commercial Uses Industrial Uses
Single-Family Residential
n/a
A
B
C
D
All Other Residential
A
n/a
A
B
D
Civic and Institutional Uses
B
A
n/a
A
D
Office and Commercial Uses
C
B
A
n/a
C
Industrial Uses
D
D
D
C
n/a
[1]: Letters in cells correspond to the buffer types listed in Table 4-2, Buffer Types.
[2]: Multi-family, townhouse, multi-building campus or shopping center type developments shall provide buffers around the perimeter of the development instead of around individual buildings.
(5) Location of Perimeter Buffers
(a) Perimeter buffers required by this section shall be located only along the outer perimeter of the parcel where it abuts another parcel, and shall extend to the parcel boundary line or right-of-way line.
(b) In an industrial district, perimeter buffers are not required along lot lines abutting streets except as provided for in Tables 4-2 and 4-3 when abutting non-industrial districts. In such cases, the outdoor operation or storage components shall include perimeter buffers as necessary to screen outdoor use areas from off-site views.
(c) A perimeter buffer may be located along shared access easements between parcels in nonresidential developments.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (G) Standards for Perimeter Buffers
Page 242 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(6) Responsibility for Buffer Installation
(a) Vacant Parcels
Where a developing parcel is adjacent to a vacant parcel and a perimeter buffer is required in accordance with this section, the developing parcel shall provide a minimum of one-half of the perimeter buffer required adjacent to the vacant land.
(b) Existing Land Uses
Where a developing parcel is adjacent to an existing use and a perimeter buffer is required in accordance with this section, the developing parcel shall provide the full perimeter buffer required adjacent to the existing use in accordance with Table 4-2, Buffer Types, and Table 4-3: Buffer Type Application, unless a portion or all of a perimeter buffer that complies with the standards of this section already exists between the lots. Where all or part of a perimeter buffer exists, but the buffer does not fully comply with the standards of this section, the developing parcel shall be responsible for providing all the additional planting material necessary to meet the standards of this section.
(7) Development within Required Buffers
(a) The required buffer shall not contain any development, impervious surfaces, or site features (except fences or walls) that do not function to meet the standards of this section or that require removal of existing vegetation, unless otherwise permitted in this ordinance.
(b) Sidewalks, trails, and other elements associated with passive recreation may be placed in perimeter buffers if all required landscaping is provided and damage to existing vegetation is minimized to the maximum extent practicable.
(c) Overhead and underground utilities required or allowed by the City are permitted to cross a required buffer in a perpendicular fashion, but shall minimize the impact to vegetation to the maximum extent practicable. Where required landscaping material is damaged or removed due to utility activity within a required buffer, the landowner shall be responsible for replanting all damaged or removed vegetation necessary to ensure the buffer meets the standards in this ordinance.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (H) Standards for Site Landscaping
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 243
(8) Sight Triangles
Fencing, berms, walls, and all other landscaping features shall adhere to the requirements of Section 3.3(D)(2)(b), Corner Visibility.
(9) Credit for Existing Vegetation
Existing vegetation meeting the size standards of Section 4.1(C)(2), Planting Standards, located within the perimeter buffer area may be preserved and credited toward the perimeter buffer standards.
(H) Standards for Site Landscaping
(1) Purpose and Intent
Site landscaping material is intended to soften the visual impact of building foundations and provide for the even dispersal of trees across a development site.
(2) No Exceptions
The site landscaping provisions of Section 4.1(H) shall be required for all development.
(3) Distinguished from Other Required Landscaping
Site landscaping, for the purpose of this section, is exclusive of required perimeter buffer and screening landscaping. Plantings required to meet vehicular use area and perimeter vehicular use area landscaping standards can be counted towards meeting site landscaping requirements.
(4) Site Landscaping Standards
Site landscaping shall be supplied in the amounts identified in Table 4-4: Required Site Landscaping Plantings. Site landscaping shall meet the minimum size standards for new planting specified in Section 4.1(C)(2), Planting Standards.
Section 3.3(D)(2)(b), Corner Visibility Section 4.1(C)(2), Planting Standards
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (H) Standards for Site Landscaping
Page 244 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 4-4: REQUIRED SITE LANDSCAPING PLANTINGS Use Type [1] Required Plantings Per Site [2] [3] [4] General Standards
Single-family detached and Multi-family dwellings with less than five (5) units [5] [6]
4.0 ACI of canopy trees OR
[7]
Multi-Family Dwellings with five (5) or more units
16.0 ACI of canopy trees (including at least 3 evergreen trees) per acre + at least 2 shrubs per each 10 feet of building perimeter, or as may be otherwise specified in the zoning district
Civic & Institutional Uses
14.0 ACI of canopy trees (including at least 2 evergreen trees) per acre + at least 1 shrubs per each 10 feet of building perimeter
Office & Commercial Uses
10.0 ACI of canopy trees (including at least 1 evergreen tree) per acre + at least 2 shrubs per each 10 feet of building perimeter
Industrial Uses
4.0 ACI of canopy trees (including at least 1 evergreen tree) per acre + at least 1 shrub per every 10 feet of a building wall facing a public right-of-way District Specific Standards:
TN District lot standards
(all plantings must be in the front or side yards, and all shrub and flower plantings must be in the front yard)
See Ordinance 4.1 (J)(2)
CCD lot standards
See Ordinance 4.1 (J)(3)
IBC District lot standards
See Ordinance 4.1 (J)(4)
NOTE: ACI = Aggregate Caliper Inches
[1]: See Table 5-1, Uses By District.
[2]: At least ½ of the required shrubs shall be of an evergreen variety.
[3]: Each evergreen tree meeting the minimum size standards of this section shall count as two caliper inches towards the total number of required canopy tree caliper inches.
[4]: Credits towards required landscaping are available for the retention of non-specimen trees per the provisions of Section 4.2(D), Tree Preservation Incentives.
[5]: Required landscaping trees shall be planted within the boulevard.
[6]: Lots in the T-N District shall not adhere to these standards, but instead to the specific standards listed in section 4.1(J)(2).
[7]: Required Plantings for corner lots shall be double the listed requirements (8.0 ACI of canopy trees)
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (I) Standards for Required Screening
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 245
(5) Shrub Placement
Required shrubs shall be placed around the building perimeter, a minimum of three feet from the building, with emphasis placed on screening building foundations visible from the public right-of-way. Required shrubs may be planted up to 10 feet from the building, or up to 15 feet from the building if there is a sidewalk located between the planting area and the building wall.
(6) Tree Placement
Trees serving as site landscaping shall be dispersed across a site in accordance with good planting practice and the following priority listing:
(a) In yards between a building façade and a street right-of- way where no vehicular use area landscaping is required;
(b) Between a building and an adjacent lot with an existing use that provides more than 50 percent of the vegetative material associated with a required perimeter buffer;
(c) Between a building façade and an abutting lot with the same or a more intense zoning district classification (where no perimeter buffering is required);
(d) Within open-space set-aside areas with no existing or reforested trees;
(e) Adjacent to on-site areas of pedestrian or vehicular circulation where no other vegetative material is required (e.g., drive-thrus or stacking lanes); or
(f) Other areas near accessory structures or accessory uses.
(I) Standards for Required Screening
(1) General Requirements
In addition to the other forms of required landscaping, screening shall be required to conceal specific areas of high visual or auditory impact or hazardous areas from off-site views. Such areas shall be screened at all times, unless otherwise specified, regardless of adjacent uses, districts, or other proximate landscaping material.
Required plantings for screening count towards overall required site landscaping. [Section 4.1(H)(3)]
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (I) Standards for Required Screening
Page 246 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Items to be Screened
The following areas shall be screened in accordance with this section:
(a) Anything specifically called out by this ordinance as requiring screening.
(b) Large trash handling and recycling collection areas (e.g., dumpsters and cardboard recycling containers);
(c) All loading and service areas shall be screened and landscaped from abutting and surrounding residential uses and public rights of way;
(d) Allowed outdoor storage areas adjacent to a public right-of-way;
(e) New construction, demolition, or other site conditions that could be unsafe for pedestrians or vehicles.
(3) Screening Methods
The following items are permitted for use as screening materials, and more than one method may be used on a lot or site.
(a) Vegetative materials that can provide a 90% opacity-year round screen and which are the minimum height necessary to screen the facility from offsite views; or
(b) An opaque fence or wall meeting the following requirements:
(i) The fence or wall shall be consistent with the standards in Section 4.3, Fences and Walls.
(ii) The fence or wall shall be constructed of masonry, brick, wood, or steel.
(iii) The fence or wall shall provide a solid screening effect and not exceed the maximum height allowed for fences or walls in the underlying zoning district, or be less than six (6) feet in height.
(iv) The design and materials used in constructing a required screening fence shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
Section 4.3: Fences & Walls
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (I) Standards for Required Screening
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 247
(c) Alternative screening materials that are not listed above or alternative configurations may be proposed as part of an alternative landscaping plan [see Section 4.1(E)], if the alternative materials or configuration provide an equivalent or superior screening function.
(4) Configuration of Vegetative Materials
In cases where vegetative materials are used for screening in accordance with this subsection, the vegetative materials shall:
(a) Be planted around the perimeter of the site feature to be screened in a manner that screens the site feature from all off-site views;
(b) Be configured in two staggered rows or other arrangement that provides maximum screening;
(c) Be upright, large evergreen shrubs and capable of reaching at least six feet in height within three years of planting; and
(d) Be spaced no farther than three feet on-center.
(5) Rooftop Screening
(a) General Roof Penetrations
All roof vents, pipes and/or other roof penetrations (except chimneys), shall be fully screened, located on the rear elevations, or be otherwise configured to the maximum extent practicable to have a minimal visual impact as seen from a public street.
(b) Exceptions
Rooftop screening standards shall not apply to I-1 or I-2 zoned properties.
(c) Roof-based Mechanical Equipment
(i) Parapet walls or other techniques included as an integral part of the building design shall be used to totally screen any roof-based mechanical equipment from public rights-of-way or adjacent lands.
(ii) In cases where roof-based mechanical equipment are too tall to be screened by a parapet wall, or if changes in the surrounding grade make rooftops with parapets visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent lands, a rooftop screening system shall be used for screening (see Figure 4-4).
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (J) Zoning District Specific Landscaping Standards
Page 248 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(J) Zoning District Specific Landscaping Standards
(1) Residential Amenities (RA) District Landscaping Requirements
RESERVED
(2) Traditional Neighborhood (TN) District Landscaping Requirements
Lots in the TN district shall adhere to the following additional landscaping requirements:
(a) No less than 60% of the square footage of the front yard area shall be planted in garden meeting the following requirements:
(i) 4.0 caliper inches of canopy trees plus 2 ornamental trees. Trees may be planted in front or side yard.
(ii) No less than 1 shrub per 20 square feet of front yard area. General required site landscaping requirements are in Section 4.1(H).
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (J) Zoning District Specific Landscaping Standards
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 249
(iii) No less than 1 deciduous flower planting per 20 square feet of front yard area.
(b) No private driveway leading to a garage may be more than 18 feet in width at the front yard property line.
(c) Lot area that is not covered by shrubs and trees may be covered with lawn, gardens, and patios or decks.
(d) A landscaping plan must be approved by the Community Development Department prior to issuance of a building permit.
(e) A landscape security shall be provided to ensure the landscaping of each lot in accordance with this section.
(3) CCD District Landscaping Requirements
(a) No less than ten (10) percent of any parcel shall consist of landscaping, including plant materials, decorative paved surfaces, landscape structures, public art, water features, or other similar site improvements. This percentage shall not include required landscaping within parking lots or circulation areas, but may include pedestrian areas on private property. Tree and shrub planting shall be as required by the zoning ordinance, Section 4.1 (H), but may include trees planted within the public right of way abutting the property line toward meeting this replacement.
(b) Landscaping within parking and circulation areas shall be as required by Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(c) All other landscaping requirements of Section 4.1 shall apply within the CCD.
(4) Industrial and Business Campus (IBC) District Landscaping Requirements
RESERVED
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (K) Landscaping Installation and Maintenance Standards
Page 250 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(K) Landscaping Installation and Maintenance Standards
(1) Time for Installation of Required Landscaping
(a) Time Limit
All required landscaping (including mulching and seeding) shall be installed in accordance with the required planting standards set forth in this section prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy unless the Community Development Department grants an extension to this time limit in accordance with Section 4.1(K)(1)(b) below.
(b) Extensions
(i) The Community Development Department may, for good cause shown, grant extensions to the above time limit, allowing a developer/owner to delay the installation of required landscaping. Circumstances that may warrant an extension include but are not limited to the following:
1. Unusual environmental conditions such as drought, ice, or over-saturated soil (deep mud);
2. It is not yet the appropriate planting season for the approved plant species;
3. Credible evidence that the approved plant species or required plant sizes are not commercially available and cannot be substituted within a reasonable time despite an applicant’s diligent effort to secure the required materials; or
4. Completion of utility work occurring in a proposed landscaped area is incomplete or delayed.
(ii) Upon receipt of a performance guarantee, the City may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a maximum period of up to 180 days.
(2) Maintenance of Landscaping Materials
The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all required landscaping. Such areas shall be maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan and shall present a healthy and orderly appearance free from refuse and debris. All plant life shown on an approved landscape plan or alternative landscape plan shall be replaced if it dies, is seriously damaged, or removed.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening
Subsection (K) Landscaping Installation and Maintenance Standards
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 251
(a) Damage Due to Natural Occurrence
In the event that any vegetation or physical element functioning to meet the standards of this section is severely damaged due to an unusual weather occurrence or natural catastrophe, or other natural occurrence such as damage by wild or domestic animals, the owner or developer may be required to replant if the landscaping standards are not being met. The owner shall have one growing season to replace or replant. The Community Development Department shall consider the type and location of the landscape buffer or required vegetation area as well as the propensity for natural re-vegetation in making a determination on the extent of replanting requirements.
(b) Protection during Operations
The owner or developer shall take actions to protect trees and landscaping from unnecessary damage during all facility and site maintenance operations. Plants shall be maintained in a way that does not obstruct sight distances at roadway and drive intersections, obstruct traffic signs or devices, or interfere with the use of sidewalks or pedestrian trails.
(c) Maintain Shape
All required trees (whether canopy, understory, or otherwise) shall be maintained in their characteristic natural shape, and shall not be severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs. Trees that have been severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs which no longer serve the intended buffering or screening function shall be considered as damaged vegetation in need of replacement in accordance with Section 4.1(K)(2)(a) Damage Due to Natural Occurrence, and shall be replaced within one growing season.
(d) Natural Death
The natural death of existing vegetation within any required landscape area does not necessarily constitute a violation and does not require re-vegetation to replace the plant material unless the required landscape area no longer complies with the required standards of this section. Further, the screening is expected to remain effective continually, so any plant material which dies or ceases to function as a screen shall be replaced or reinforced immediately to conform to City ordinance.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.2 Tree Protection
Subsection (B) Protection of Specimen Trees
Page 252 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Agreement and Security
A landscaping security shall be submitted with the building permit application. Such security guarantees that in exchange for building permit, the owner will construct, install and maintain all items shown on the approved plan and that they will replace and or correct any deficiencies or defaults that occur in the plan for a period of one complete year or two complete growing seasons subsequent to the complete installation according to approved landscaping plan. 4.2 Tree Protection
(A) Purpose
The purpose of this section is to preserve existing natural resources of the community and to encourage the greening of the City. The City Council finds that the preservation of trees and other vegetation, where practicable, is in the best interest of City residents’ health and welfare. To that end, the City Council has found it necessary and desirable to establish regulations to ensure the City preserves its most significant trees and clusters of exiting trees throughout the City.
(B) Protection of Specimen Trees
(1) Applicability
(a) In General
All development in the City, except that exempted in accordance with Section 4.2(B)(1)(b) below, shall be required to protect specimen trees in accordance with this section.
(b) Exemptions
The following development shall be exempt from these standards:
(i) Development on land within the CCD zoning district and all other commercially and industrially zoned properties;
(ii) Development on land containing an existing single-family detached residential dwelling on a lot-of-record which cannot be further subdivided.
(2) Separate Plan Required
The location, species, and size of all specimen trees to be retained in accordance with this section shall be depicted on a separate inventory and protection plan clearly depicting all required information.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.2 Tree Protection
Subsection (B) Protection of Specimen Trees
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 253
(3) General Requirement
(a) No specimen tree may be removed, except in accordance with Section 4.2(B)(4), Removal of a Specimen Tree.
(b) All specimen trees shall have the following protections, whether located on public or private land:
(i) Cutting, Removal, or Harm Prohibited
Specimen trees shall not be cut, removed, pushed over, killed, or otherwise harmed.
(ii) Paving or Soil Compaction Prohibited
The area within the dripline of any specimen tree shall not be subject to paving or soil compaction greater than ten percent of the total area within the dripline, or within 12 feet of the tree trunk.
(4) Removal of a Specimen Tree
Specimen trees may be removed if the landowner demonstrates to the Community Development Department that one of the following sets of conditions is met:
(a) Removal of a Healthy Specimen Tree
A specimen tree that is in healthy condition may only be removed if all of the following standards are met:
(i) The specimen tree prevents development of a lot platted prior to the effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4 in a way that limits building area to less than otherwise allowed, or hinders compliance with the standards in Chapters 3, 4, or 5.
(ii) Mitigation is provided in accordance with Section 4.2(B)(5), Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees.
(b) Removal of a Severely Diseased, High Risk, or Dying Specimen Tree
A specimen tree that is certified as being severely diseased, high risk, or dying by a certified arborist may be removed without required mitigation.
(5) Replacement/Mitigation of Specimen Trees
Those causing the destruction or removal of a healthy specimen tree, unless exempted by this ordinance, shall be responsible for the following mitigation:
“Specimen Tree” is defined in Section 8.4
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.2 Tree Protection
Subsection (C) Tree Protection During Construction
Page 254 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) Replacement Trees Required
(i) Each healthy specimen tree removed or destroyed shall be replaced with three or more replacement trees equaling or exceeding a total of eighteen (18) aggregate caliper inches.
(ii) The required replacement trees shall be planted within 12 months of the removal or destruction of the specimen tree.
(b) Location of Replacement Trees
Replacement trees shall be either planted on the parcel of land from which the specimen tree was removed if sufficient space is available, or placed on nearby lands in accordance with Section 4.1(E), Alternative Landscape Plan.
(c) Establishment Period
Replacement trees shall be maintained through an establishment period of at least two complete growing seasons. The applicant shall guarantee the survival and health of all replacement trees during the establishment period and guarantee any associated replacement costs. If the replacement trees do not survive the establishment period, the applicant shall purchase and install new replacement trees.
(C) Tree Protection During Construction
(1) Owner’s Responsibility
During development, the owner or developer shall be responsible for the erection of any and all barriers necessary to protect any existing or installed vegetation from damage both during and after construction.
(2) Tree Protection Fencing & Tree Save Areas
(a) Where Required
Specimen trees and other existing trees being used for credit towards landscaping requirements shall be fenced with a sturdy and visible fence before grading or other development activity begins. Fencing shall be erected no closer than one linear foot to the tree’s dripline. The Community Development Department shall consider the existing site conditions in determining the exact location for tree protection fencing. Areas located inside of tree protection fencing are considered “tree save areas”.
Section 4.1(E): Alternative Landscape Plan
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.2 Tree Protection
Subsection (C) Tree Protection During Construction
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 255
(b) Inspection
All tree protection measures shall be inspected and approved by the City prior to start of any land disturbing activities. Failure to have tree protection measures approved prior to the commencement of construction is a violation of this ordinance.
(c) When Required
No construction, grading, equipment or material storage, or any other activity shall be allowed within the tree save (fenced) area. Fencing shall be maintained until after the final site inspection.
(3) Encroachments into Tree Save Areas
Encroachments into specimen tree save areas shall occur only when no other alternative exists. If such an encroachment is anticipated, the following preventive measures shall be employed:
(a) Soil Compaction
Where compaction might occur due to construction traffic or materials delivery through a tree save area, the area must first be mulched with a minimum four inch layer of wood chips. Equipment or materials storage shall not be allowed within a tree save area.
(b) Fill
No fill shall be placed within a specimen tree save area without adequate venting to allow air and water to reach the roots.
(c) Chemical Contamination
Trees located within a specimen tree save area shall be protected from chemical contamination from liquids or other materials, including but not limited to paint, chemical solvents, gasoline, oil, diesel fuel, hydraulic fluid, concrete spoils, or rinse water from vehicle cleaning, including rinsing of concrete truck tanks and chutes.
(d) Paving Limitations
Except for driveway access points, sidewalks, curb, and gutter; no paving shall occur within five feet of a specimen tree save area unless authorized through an alternative landscaping plan [See Section 4.1(E), Alternative Landscaping Plan].
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.2 Tree Protection
Subsection (D) Tree Preservation Incentives
Page 256 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(D) Tree Preservation Incentives
(1) Tree Preservation Credits
In order to encourage the preservation of as many healthy trees as practical on a development site, credit towards the minimum landscaping requirements shall be applied to all existing trees retained on a site that are not specimen trees that comply with the credit standards of this subsection. Credits are offered only for trees that are not required to be retained by other sections of this ordinance. Credits shall be granted in accordance with the following standards:
(a) Credit Amount
A credit of one-and-one-quarter (1.25) multiplied by the aggregate caliper of trees that are not specimen trees shall be credited and applied towards the landscaping standards in Section 4.1, Landscaping and Screening, when the trees that are saved comply with the following minimum size standards:
(i) Canopy Trees
Canopy trees, whether deciduous or evergreen, of seven inches in caliper or greater, measured six inches above ground level.
(ii) Understory/Ornamental Trees
Understory or ornamental trees, whether deciduous or evergreen, of four inches in caliper or greater, measured four inches above ground level.
(b) Credit Applied Towards Required Plantings
The credit shall be applied to the aggregate tree caliper inch standards for landscaping. In no case shall credits substitute for more than 75 percent of the required landscaping material.
(c) Exclusions to Credit Provisions
Dead, dying or diseased trees shall not be used towards crediting.
(2) Reduction in the Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces
Up to a five percent reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required on a development site shall be allowed if the reduction in the amount of required pavement will preserve the root zones of existing healthy specimen trees. The amount of reduction can be determined only after taking into consideration any unique site conditions and the impact of the reduction on parking needs for the use, and must be agreed upon by both the applicant and the Community Development Department. Alternative paving materials may be required by the Community Development Department in cases where required parking areas encroach upon root zones.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.3 Fences & Walls
Subsection (C) General Requirements for Fences and Walls
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 257
4.3 Fences & Walls
(A) Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this section is to regulate the location, height, and appearance of fences and walls to maintain visual harmony within residential and business districts; protect adjacent properties from the indiscriminate placement and unsightliness of fences and walls; and ensure the safety, security, and privacy of properties.
(B) Applicability
(1) In General
Unless exempted in accordance with Section 4.3(B)(2) below, the provisions of this section shall apply to the construction, reconstruction, or replacement of all fences or walls in the City. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this section and any screening standard in Section 4.1(I), Screening, the latter shall govern.
(2) Exemptions
The following are exempted from the requirements of this section.
(i) Development in the CCD District
Development on lots in the CCD district is exempt from the standards of this section.
(ii) Recreational Fencing
Customary fencing provided as a part of a permitted tennis court, athletic field, or other recreational facility.
(iii) Temporary Fencing
Temporary fencing established around construction sites, demolitions, or other site conditions unsafe for pedestrians or vehicles, provided it is consistent with the building code.
(C) General Requirements for Fences and Walls
(1) Location
(a) Fences and walls are permitted anywhere on a lot subject to the following restrictions:
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.3 Fences & Walls
Subsection (C) General Requirements for Fences and Walls
Page 258 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) The corner visibility requirements in Section 3.3(D)(2)(b) shall be met.
(ii) Fences and walls shall not be located within public right-of-way unless permitted by the Community Development Department by written encroachment agreement.
(iii) Fences and walls permitted by the Community Development Department to be within easements are subject to removal without compensation to the property owner if the City must access the area for maintenance or improvement purposes.
(iv) Fences and walls shall not be permitted within conservation easements unless specifically permitted by the easement.
(b) Fences and walls may be located directly over a property line between two or more parcels of land held in private ownership.
(c) A certificate of survey may be required by the Community Development Department to determine the location of fences and walls on a property.
(2) Blocking Natural Drainage Flow
(a) No fence shall be installed so as to block or divert a natural drainage flow on to or off of any other land.
(b) Drainage swales may not be filled to accommodate the construction of fences or walls without alternate storm water provisions being reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the installation of temporary fencing to protect existing trees, limit sedimentation, or control erosion.
(3) Fences and Walls within Buffers
Fences and walls shall be installed so as not to disturb or damage existing vegetation or installed plant material. The perimeter fencing or wall for a single development shall be of a uniform style that complies with the standards of this section.
(4) Permit Requirements
(a) A building permit is required for the construction of any fence or wall that will be more than seven (7) feet in height above grade, or for construction of a retaining wall that is more than four (4) feet in height from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall. Section 4.10: Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control Section 4.3(F): Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Public Right-of-Way
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.3 Fences & Walls
Subsection (D) Requirements for Fences and Walls by District Type
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 259
(b) Fences which do not require a building permit under the provisions of Section 4.3(D)(4)(a) above may be constructed without a permit, but shall adhere to all fencing requirements in this ordinance.
(D) Requirements for Fences and Walls by District Type
All fences and walls shall conform to the following standards. In all cases, heights are measured from finished grade on the highest side of the fence or wall.
(1) Residential Districts
In residential districts (see Table 3-1: Base Zoning Districts), fences and walls shall conform to the following:
(a) Front Yards
Fences and walls shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet in front yards and that part of side yards from the front lot line to the front building line.
(b) Side or Rear Yards
(i) Fences and walls shall not exceed a height of seven (7) feet in side and rear yards.
(ii) In side or rear yards which abut a public street, fences or walls which exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height must be set back at least six (6) feet from the property line, and the setback area shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.3(J)(4), Appearance.
(c) Transparency
Fences or walls located within a front yard or side yard adjacent to a street shall maintain a minimum of 50 percent transparency.
(d) Access
Where any fence or wall connects to a building used as a dwelling, at least one gate not less than 2 feet 6 inches in width shall be required to allow access around the building.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.3 Fences & Walls
Subsection (D) Requirements for Fences and Walls by District Type
Page 260 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Business Districts
(a) General
In business districts (see Table 3-1: Base Zoning Districts), fences and walls shall not be permitted in front yards, except as may be allowed by the security provisions of this section, and shall not exceed a height of seven (7) feet in side or rear yards. If a fence is constructed on top of a retaining or other wall, the combined height of the fence and wall shall not exceed the maximum height that would apply to a fence or wall alone.
(b) Major Utilities, Wireless Communications, Government Facilities, and Other Public Safety Uses
Fences and walls in front, side, and rear yards of major utilities, wireless communication towers, government facilities, and other public safety uses shall not exceed eight feet.
(3) Industrial Districts
(a) Industrial and Business Campus District
(i) Fences and walls shall not be permitted in front yards;
(ii) Fences shall adhere to the following yard-based requirements:
1. In all side yards, a fence shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height.
2. In all rear yards, a fence shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height provided a building permit is obtained for any additional height over seven (7) feet.
(iii) In no event shall a fence exceed seven (7) feet in height if the fence is located within (20) feet of a public right-of-way.
(b) I-1 and I-2 Districts
(i) Fences and walls shall not be permitted in front yards;
(ii) Fences shall adhere to the following yard-based requirements:
1. In all side and rear yards, a fence shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height provided a building permit is obtained for any additional height over seven (7) feet.
(iii) In no event shall a fence exceed seven (7) feet in height if the fence is located within (20) feet of a public right-of-way.
(4) Vacant Property
Vacant property may be fenced if the fence does not exceed four feet in residential districts and eight feet in business or industrial districts, the fencing maintains a See also Section 3.3(D)(2)(b) Corner Visibility, for additional restrictions on fence placement. See also Section 3.3(D)(2)(b) Corner Visibility, for additional restrictions on fence placement.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.3 Fences & Walls
Subsection (F) Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Public Rights-of-Way
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 261
minimum transparency of 50%, and the purpose of the fencing is to discourage unauthorized dumping or unauthorized parking on the property. Fencing of the vacant property shall not be construed to allow use of the property for outdoor storage.
(E) Exemption for Security Plan
A property owner or tenant or a representative of a public agency responsible for a government facility, public safety use, or other use in need of heightened security may submit to the Community Development Department a site security plan proposing fences or walls taller than those permitted by this section or proposing the use of barbed or concertina wire atop a fence or wall for security reasons. The Community Development Department may approve or approve with conditions the site security plan and its proposed exemption of fences or walls from the standards of this section, upon finding:
(1) Taller Fence or Wall Needed for Safety or Security Reasons
The condition, location, or use of the property, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage than surrounding land, or represent a significant hazard to public safety without a taller fence or the use of barbed or concertina wire atop a fence or wall; and
(2) Not Have Security, Functioning Appearance of Adjacent Properties
The proposed taller fences or walls or use of barbed or concertina wire will not have a significant adverse effect on the security, functioning, appearance, or value of adjacent properties or the surrounding area as a whole.
(F) Perimeter Fences and Walls Abutting Public Rights-of-Way
(1) Fences or walls located within 15 feet of a street or public right-of-way shall:
(a) Be of a uniform style;
(b) Be located outside the public right-of-way;
(c) Include breaks, offsets, access points, or other design details in the wall plane at least every 200 feet;
(d) Comply with the standards in Section 4.3(J), Appearance; and
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.3 Fences & Walls
Subsection (I) Barbed or Razor Wire
Page 262 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(e) Comply with the requirements of Section 4.1(I), Standards for Required Screening (if applicable).
(2) New residential developments shall be required to construct conforming fencing along the rear yards of all double frontage lots that back up to collector or arterial roadways.
(G) Prohibited Fences
(1) Fences or walls made of debris, junk, rolled plastic, sheet metal, plywood, wooden landscape lattice or waste materials are prohibited in all zoning districts unless such materials have been recycled and reprocessed for marketing to the general public as building materials that resemble new building materials and are designed for use as a fencing material (e.g., picket fencing made from recycled plastic and fiber). No metal “t” posts shall be permitted.
(H) Chain Link Fencing
Chain link fencing shall be allowed, subject to the following standards:
(1) All Districts
In all districts, chain link fences must have a top rail, and barbed ends must be placed at the bottom of the fence.
(2) Residential Districts
Chain link fencing is permitted on lots within residential zoning districts provided it does not include opaque slats, and does not exceed a height of four (4) feet.
(3) Business Districts
Chain link fencing shall not be allowed on lots within a business zoning district unless expressly authorized through approval of a security plan under the provisions of Section 4.3(E).
(4) Industrial Districts
Chain link fencing shall be allowed on lots within industrial zoning districts provided it does not include opaque slats and is coated with black or dark green vinyl.
(I) Barbed or Razor Wire
Barbed or razor wire is prohibited except as expressly authorized through approval of a security plan under the provisions of Section 4.3(E).
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.3 Fences & Walls
Subsection (J) Appearance
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 263
(J) Appearance
(1) Customary Materials
Fences and walls shall be constructed of any combination of treated wood posts and vertically-oriented planks; maintenance free vinyl, rot-resistant wood; wrought iron; decorative metal materials; brick; stone; or masonry materials. Where wood, masonry, or other opaque materials are specified for particular types of screening or buffering fences or walls, all other fence materials are prohibited.
(a) In residential districts, metal materials of 14-gauge or better, when treated with factory-applied weather resistant coating or galvanized, and framed at top and bottom with materials as listed in section (J)(1) above are permitted.
(b) Metal or vinyl fence used for garden areas in residential areas may not exceed 24” in height.
(c) In the I-2 District, metal fences may be permitted when the materials have been recycled and reprocessed to resemble new building materials and are designed for use as a fencing material, and when such materials are designed to resemble allowed materials as listed in section (J)(1) above.
(2) Finished Side to Outside
Wherever a fence or wall is installed, if one side of the fence or wall appears more “finished” than the other (e.g., one side has visible support framing and the other does not), then the more “finished” side of the fence shall face the perimeter of the lot rather than the interior of the lot.
(3) Compatibility of Materials along a Single Lot Side
All fencing or wall segments located along a single lot side shall be composed of a uniform style and colors compatible with other parts of the fence and with the associated buildings.
(4) Landscape Screening
All fences and walls exceeding four feet in height and located within 15 feet of a public street right-of-way in all districts, or as otherwise required by this ordinance, shall be supplemented with landscape screening in accordance with the following standards to soften the visual impact of the fence or wall.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.4 Exterior Lighting
Subsection (A) Purpose
Page 264 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) Shrubs Required
One evergreen shrub shall be installed for every fifteen linear feet of fence or wall, on the side of the fence or wall facing the public street right-of-way. Shrubs shall meet the size standards of Section 4.1(C)(2) Planting Standards, and may be installed in a staggered, clustered, grouped, or linear fashion.
(b) Substitution of Understory Trees
One understory or ornamental tree may be substituted for every three evergreen shrubs provided that the tree meets the size standards of Section 4.1(C)(2) Planting Standards.
(c) Integration with other Required Landscaping
Required landscape screening for fences or walls may be integrated into the landscaping required for vehicular use area screening or perimeter buffers, provided the standards in Section 4.1 Landscaping and Screening Standards, are maintained.
(5) Maintenance Required
Every fence or wall must be maintained in a condition of reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition of disrepair or danger or constitute a nuisance. Fences or walls in a state of disrepair may be removed by the City as provided by Minnesota Statutes. The cost of removing fences may be levied against the property as a special assessment. 4.4 Exterior Lighting
(A) Purpose
The purpose of this section is to regulate light spillage and glare to ensure the safety of motorists and pedestrians, and to ensure lighting does not adversely affect land uses on adjacent properties. More specifically, this section is intended to:
(1) Regulate Exterior Lighting to Mitigate Adverse Impacts
Regulate exterior lighting to assure that excessive light spillage and glare are not directed at adjacent properties, neighboring areas, and motorists;
(2) Ensure Proper Insulation
Ensure that all site lighting is designed and installed to maintain adequate lighting levels on site while limiting negative lighting impacts on adjacent lands; and
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.4 Exterior Lighting
Subsection (D) General Standards for Exterior Lighting
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 265
(3) Provide Security
Provide security for persons and land.
(B) Applicability
(1) In General
The provisions of this section shall apply to all development in the City unless exempted in accordance with Section 4.4(C) below.
(2) Time of Compliance
An exterior lighting plan shall be submitted and approved along with an application for a Site Plan [Section 2.4(F)], Subdivision [City Code Title 11, Chapter 1], Building Permit [Section 2.4(I)], or Temporary Use Permit [Section 2.4(L)], whichever occurs first.
(C) Exemptions
The following is exempted from the exterior lighting standards of this section.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings;
(2) Existing athletic field lighting;
(3) City-owned, -operated, or -maintained street lights located within a street right-of-way or other easement granted to the City; and
(D) General Standards for Exterior Lighting
(1) Hours of Illumination
Public and institutional uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses (See Table 5-1) that are adjacent to existing residential development or vacant land in residential districts shall turn off all exterior lighting—except lighting necessary for security or emergency purposes—within one hour of closing. For the purposes of this subsection, lighting “necessary for security or emergency purposes” shall be construed to mean the minimum amount of exterior lighting necessary to illuminate possible points of entry or exit into a structure, to illuminate exterior walkways, or to illuminate outdoor storage areas. Such lighting may be activated by motion sensor devices.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.4 Exterior Lighting
Subsection (E) Design Standards for Exterior Lighting
Page 266 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Illumination Direction
In all districts, lighting shall be directed downward. In addition, upwardly-directed lighting shall not be used to illuminate structures, except for low-wattage architectural lighting or lighting for the American flag.
(E) Design Standards for Exterior Lighting
All exterior lighting shall meet the following standards:
(1) Maximum Lighting Height
(a) Except for outdoor sports fields or performance areas, the height of outdoor lighting, whether mounted on poles or walls or by other means, shall be no greater than 16 feet in residential districts and no greater than 25 feet in business districts.
(b) Wherever possible, illumination of outdoor seating areas, building entrances, and walkways shall be accomplished by use of ground mounted fixtures not more than four feet in height.
(2) Shielding
(a) Exterior
Light fixtures in excess of 60 watts or 100 lumens shall use full cut-off lenses or hoods to prevent glare or spillover from the project site onto adjacent lands and streets.
(b) Interior
No interior light source shall be positioned, aimed, or configured so as to result in the light source being visible from land occupied by existing residential development.
(c) Canopies
No light source in a canopy structure shall extend downward further than the lowest edge of the canopy ceiling.
(d) Awnings
Awnings or canopies used for building accents over doors, windows, etc., shall not be internally illuminated (i.e., from underneath or behind the awning). Illumination casting downward from the awning may be allowed provided that the light source shall not extend downward farther than the lowest edge of the awning.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.4 Exterior Lighting
Subsection (G) Exemptions for a Security Plan
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 267
(3) Maximum Illumination Levels
All outdoor lighting and indoor lighting visible from outside shall be designed and located so that the maximum illumination measured in footcandles at ground level at a property line or right-of-way center line shall not exceed the standards in Table 4-5, Maximum Illumination Levels. Cut-off lighting shall be designed to direct light downward (e.g., shoe box style).
TABLE 4-5: MAXIMUM ILLUMINATION LEVELS Type of Use [1] Maximum Illumination (Footcandles)
All Uses
0.5 at all ROW center lines
Residential or Civic & Institutional Use
0.5 at Property Line
Commercial or Industrial Use [2]
1.0 at Property Line
Parking Lots
1.0 at Property Line
[1]: See Table 5-1: Uses by District
[2]: The minimum illumination level at the property line shall be 0.2 footcandle.
(F) Wall Pack Lights
Wall packs on buildings may be used at entrances to a building to light unsafe areas. They are not intended to draw attention to the building or provide general building or site lighting. Wall packs on the exterior of the building shall be fully shielded (e.g., true cut-off type bulb or light source not visible from off-site) to direct the light vertically downward and be of low wattage (preferably 100 watts or lower). Wall pack light sources visible from any location off the site are prohibited.
(G) Exemptions for a Security Plan
Government facilities, parks and open areas, public safety, and other uses (see Table 5-1) where sensitive or dangerous materials are stored may submit to the Community Development Department a site security plan proposing exterior lighting that deviates from the standards in this subsection. The Community Development Department shall approve, or approve with conditions, the site security plan and its proposed deviation from the standards of this subsection, upon finding that:
(1) Deviation Necessary to Protect Public or Ensure Security
The proposed deviation from the standards is necessary for the adequate protection of the public;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.4 Exterior Lighting
Subsection (J) Lighting Requirements for the CCD District
Page 268 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Significantly Greater Danger of Theft or Damage Without Additional Lighting
The condition, location, or use of the land, or the history of activity in the area, indicates the land or any materials stored or used on it are in significantly greater danger of theft or damage, or members of the public are at greater risk for harm than on surrounding land; and
(3) Deviation is Minimum Required and Will Not Have Adverse Effect
The proposed deviation from the standards is the minimum required, and will not have a significant adverse effect on neighboring lands.
(H) Illumination of Outdoor Sports Fields and Performance Areas
Lighting of outdoor sports fields and performance areas shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Glare Control Package
All lighting fixtures shall be equipped with an existing glare control package (e.g., louvers, shields, or similar devices) and aimed so that their beams are directed and fall within the primary playing or performance area.
(2) Hours of Operation
The lighting system for any game or event shall be extinguished after the end of the game or event.
(I) Sign Lighting
Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall comply with the standards of this section, and exterior light sources shall be aimed and shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the sign face and the light source is not visible from off-site areas.
(J) Lighting Requirements for the CCD District
(1) Parking lot lighting shall be consistent with the common lighting style for fixtures and poles within the CCD design guidelines, or as adopted by the City Council.
(2) Public street lighting shall be consistent with a common lighting style throughout the CCD, based on a style for fixtures and poles to be identified in the City’s public improvement specification.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (A) Findings, Purpose, and Effect
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 269
4.5 Signs
(A) Findings, Purpose, and Effect
(1) Findings
The City finds:
(a) Exterior signs have a substantial impact on the character and quality of the environment.
(b) Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages.
(c) Signs can create traffic hazards and aesthetic concerns, thereby threatening the public health, safety and welfare.
(d) The City's zoning regulations include the regulation of signs in an effort to provide adequate means of expression and to promote the economic viability of the business community, while protecting the City and its citizens from a proliferation of signs of a type, size, location and character that would adversely impact upon the aesthetics of the community and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the community. The regulation of the physical characteristics of signs within the City has had a positive impact on traffic safety and the appearance of the community.
(2) Purpose and Intent
(a) It is not the purpose or intent of Section 4.5 to regulate the message displayed on any sign; nor is it the purpose or intent of this section to regulate any building design or any display not defined as a sign, or any sign which cannot be viewed from outside a building.
(b) The purpose and intent of Section 4.5 is to:
(i) Regulate the number, location, size, type, illumination and other physical characteristics of signs within the City in order to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
(ii) Maintain, enhance and improve the aesthetic environment of the City by preventing visual clutter that is harmful to the appearance of the community.
(iii) Improve the visual appearance of the City while providing for effective means of communication, consistent with constitutional guarantees and the City's goals of public safety and aesthetics.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (C) Permit Not Required
Page 270 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iv) Provide for fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations set forth herein under the zoning authority of the City.
(3) Effect
A sign may be erected, mounted, displayed or maintained in the City if it is in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. The effect of Section 4.5, as more specifically set forth herein, is to:
(a) Allow a wide variety of sign types in commercial zones, and a more limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards set forth in Section 4.5.
(b) Allow certain small, unobtrusive signs incidental to the principal use of a site in all zones when in compliance with the requirements of Section 4.5.
(c) Prohibit signs whose location, size, type, illumination or other physical characteristics negatively affect the environment and where the communication can be accomplished by means having a lesser impact on the environment and the public health, safety and welfare.
(d) Provide for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of Section 4.5.
(B) Permit Required
No sign shall be erected, altered, improved, reconstructed, maintained or moved in the City without first securing a sign permit from the City:
(1) The content of the message or speech displayed on the sign shall not be reviewed or considered in determining whether to approve or deny a sign permit.
(2) Application for a sign permit shall be in conformance with the requirements of Section 2.4(K), Sign Permits:
(C) Permit Not Required
The following signs shall not require a permit and are allowed in addition to those signs allowed by Sections 4.5(I) and 4.5(J) of this section. These exemptions, however, shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this section or any other law or ordinance regulating the same. Section 2.4(K) Sign Permits
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (C) Permit Not Required
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 271
(1) The changing of the display surface on a painted or printed sign only. This exemption, however, shall apply only to poster replacement and/or on site changes involving sign painting on a surface other than the surface of the building.
(2) Permanent signs two (2) square feet or less in size.
(3) One (1) temporary sign per property in residential districts not to exceed four (4) square feet.
(4) In a State general election year, noncommercial signs of any size may be posted in any number forty-six (46) days before the State primary in a State general election year until ten (10) days following the State general election. Election signs posted in connection with elections held at times other than those regulated by Minn. Stat. 211B.035 shall not be posted more than 13 weeks prior to the election and shall be removed by the party responsible for the erection of the sign or the property owner within ten (10) days after the election. All such noncommercial signs are permitted on private property in any zoning district with the express consent of the owner or occupant of such property.
(5) Official and Public signs.
(6) One (1) sign shall be allowed per street frontage when a property is offered for sale or lease, provided that:
(a) Within residential zoning districts (see table 3-1), no sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height for single-family, two-family, townhouse, and quadraminium units; or thirty two (32) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height for multi-family or institutional uses.
(b) For non-residential zoning districts (see table 3-1), as well as for any parcel larger than ten (10) acres in any zoning district, signs may be up to ninety six (96) square feet in area or twelve (12) feet in height as defined in this ordinance. One (1) additional such sign shall be allowed for any street frontage which exceeds one thousand (1,000) linear feet. For the purposes of this section, frontage on any right of way, including local streets, County or State Highways, or I-94 shall constitute a “frontage”, regardless of access.
(7) Sandwich board signs are allowed within all business zoning districts (see table 3-1) provided that:
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (D) Prohibited Signs
Page 272 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) Not more than one (1) sign is allowed per principal building except that one sign is allowed per tenant within a principal building having two (2) or more tenants each with an exclusive exterior entrance.
(b) The sign shall only be displayed when the business is open to the public.
(c) Except in the CCD district, the sign shall be placed only on the business property and shall be located within required principal building setbacks, or encroaching into required setback areas a maximum of five (5) feet, and shall not be placed on any vehicle.
(d) The signs shall be located so as to maintain a minimum five (5) foot pedestrian walkway and so as not to obstruct vehicular traffic.
(e) The sign shall be set back a minimum of two (2) feet from the back of curb of a public street or private drive aisle.
(f) The sign shall conform to the following height and area requirements:
(i) Height: Five (5) feet.
(ii) Area: Six (6) square feet.
(g) For sandwich board signs within the CCD district, sandwich board signs may be located in accordance with the provisions of subpart (c) above. In addition, such signs may be placed upon the sidewalk or boulevard portion of a public right-of-way upon the issuance of an annual permit in accordance with the provisions and process of Section 2.4(K) of this ordinance.
(D) Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited:
(1) Any sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles any official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or emergency vehicle signs, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(2) All off premises signs unless specifically provided for by this ordinance.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (E) Nonconforming Signs and Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 273
(3) Flashing signs.
(4) Roof signs.
(5) Rotating signs.
(6) Shimmering signs.
(7) Signs which move or imitate movement, except for dynamic scrolling signs as defined in this ordinance.
(8) Signs painted, attached or in any other manner affixed to trees or similar natural surfaces, or attached to utility poles, bridges, towers, or similar public structures.
(9) Off Premises Signs:
(a) Off premise signs existing as non-conforming structures at the time of adoption of this ordinance greater than six (6) square feet in area shall be considered a principal use of property.
(b) Annual permits are required for all off premises signs. Off premises signs shall be removed as a condition of construction of another principal use upon the property or platting or subdivision approval for the land on which it is located.
(10) Abandoned signs.
(E) Nonconforming Signs and Uses
(1) Signs: A non-conforming sign lawfully existing upon the effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4 shall be regulated in accordance with Chapter 6 of this ordinance.
(2) Uses: When the principal use of land is legally non-conforming under Chapter 6 of this ordinance, all existing or proposed signs in conjunction with that land use shall be considered conforming if they are in compliance with the sign provisions for the most restrictive zoning district in which the principal use is allowed.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (H) General Provisions
Page 274 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) When a sign is considered to be non-conforming due to size, location, or other factor, but represents a conforming use of land, such sign may be continued, including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement, but not including expansion, unless it is considered to be abandoned as defined by this ordinance. When a non-conforming sign has been damaged to an extent of 50% or more of its market value, such sign shall be considered to be abandoned if no building or sign permit has been applied for within 180 days of the date of damage.
(F) Enforcement and Penalties
Section 4.5 shall be administered and enforced in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 7 of this ordinance.
(G) Substitution
The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by Section 4.5 of this ordinance may substitute non-commercial copy in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary.
(H) General Provisions
(1) Accessory Structures
Except as provided for by Section 4.5(D)(9), all signs shall be considered accessory structures.
(2) Setbacks
All freestanding signs shall be set back fifteen (15) feet from any property line abutting a public right-of-way and five (5) feet from any side or rear property line. No sign may be located within a drainage and utility easement.
(3) Standards Adopted
The design and construction standards as set forth in Chapter 4 of the 1997 edition of the Uniform Sign Code as may be amended, are hereby adopted.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (H) General Provisions
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 275
(4) Electrical Signs
The installation of electrical signs shall be subject to the State's Electrical Code. Electrical service to such signs shall be underground.
(5) Approval
No sign shall be attached or be allowed to hang from any building until all necessary wall and roof attachments have been approved by the Community Development Department.
(6) Sign Interference
No signs, guys, stays or attachments shall be erected, placed or maintained on trees nor interfere with any electric light, power, telephone or telegraph wires or the supports thereof.
(7) Illuminated Signs
Illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent lights from being directed at oncoming traffic in such brilliance that it impairs the vision of the driver and may not interfere with or obscure traffic signs or signals. Lighting may not illuminate any adjacent properties, buildings, or streets. Notwithstanding this provision, LED (Light Emitting Diode) light displays may be installed without shielding of the light source provided that:
(a) Unshielded LED light displays may only be located on properties within the FBS, Freeway Bonus Sign District, an overlay zoning district as defined in Section 3.7(G) of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Unshielded LED lights are not installed in any area that abuts residentially zoned property.
(c) Unshielded LED lights are not installed in such a way as to direct light towards residentially zoned property within 500 feet of the light source.
(d) Unshielded LED lights may not exceed a maximum illumination of 5000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign’s face at maximum brightness;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (H) General Provisions
Page 276 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(e) Dimmer Control. Unshielded LED lights must have an automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period between one half-hour before sunset and one half-hour after sunrise.
(8) Permit Display
Signs requiring permits shall display in a conspicuous manner the permit sticker or sticker number.
(9) Placement
No sign or sign structure shall be erected or maintained that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No sign or sign structure shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(10) Structure
A freestanding sign or sign structure constructed so that the faces are not back to back, shall not have an angle separating the faces exceeding thirty (30) degrees unless the total area of both sides added together does not exceed the maximum allowable sign area for that district.
(11) Square Footage Calculation (Total Area = A x B):
(a) For wall signs, the area of a sign shall be that area within the marginal lines created by the sign surface which bears the advertisement or, in the case of messages, figures or symbols attached directly to the part of a building, which is included in the smallest rectangular figure which can be made to circumscribe the message, figure, or symbol displayed thereon:
(b) For monument signs, area shall be calculated as for wall signs. Structural members of the sign, including supports or other decorative features shall not be considered as a part of the measured sign area:
(c) For pylon signs, the entire area of the sign face or cabinet shall be considered as a part of the measured sign area. Structural supports, provided that they have no message or other graphics, shall be exempt from the area calculation.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (H) General Provisions
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 277
(12) Height
The top of a wall sign, including its superstructure, if any, shall be no higher than the roof of the building to which such sign may be attached.
(13) Landscaping
A site plan shall be submitted as a part of any application for a freestanding sign which includes plans for the landscaping of the area near the sign, and which demonstrates that the sign will complement the existing or proposed general site landscaping of the property.
(14) Vehicle Fuel Facilities
Signs for vehicle fuel facilities shall be regulated by the sign provisions for the zoning district in which the facility is located, except that within a freestanding sign, an area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet shall be allowed for continuous display (no flashing, scrolling or other animation) of electronic or non-electronic changeable copy identifying current fuel prices in accordance with Minnesota state statutes section 239.751.
(15) Window Signs
Window signs are not considered a part of the maximum sign area otherwise allowed under Section 4.5 of this ordinance and do not require a permit.
(16) Changeable Copy Signs
(a) Changeable copy signs are subject to the following additional regulations:
(i) Signs must be permanently anchored to the structure.
(ii) Signs must be incorporated within the overall sign structure for both monument and pylon signs and must be consistent in design with the sign structure.
(b) Within commercial and industrial districts and for civic and institutional uses including, but not limited to, public school facilities, hospital and medical facilities, municipal facilities and places of public assembly, one (1) changeable copy sign shall be allowed per site provided that the area of the sign not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the allowable sign area or fifty (50) square feet, whichever is less, for a freestanding or wall sign. The area of this sign shall be counted against the maximum sign area for the building, except where the property owner has agreed to forgo the use of temporary signs in accordance Section 4.5(I)(2) in which case the area of the changeable copy sign shall be allowed in excess of the maximum sign area.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (H) General Provisions
Page 278 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(17) Time and Temperature Signs
Within commercial and industrial zoning districts, an area not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet within a freestanding or wall sign shall be allowed for display of an electronic time and temperature sign subject to the sign provisions for the zoning district in which the sign is located.
(18) Projecting Signs
Projecting signs may be allowed in commercial districts provided that:
(a) There is a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance under the base of the sign to the ground below.
(b) The sign does not project more than five (5) feet beyond the wall to which it is mounted, may not project over any vehicular drive aisle or traveled portion of a public or private street and except in the CCD, Central Community District may not project over a public right-of-way.
(c) The area of the projecting sign is not more than fifty (50) percent of the maximum area allowed for an individual wall sign in the respective zoning district in Section 4.5(J).
(19) Dynamic Displays
(a) Findings
Based on studies related to the use of dynamic sign displays and driver distraction, the City finds that dynamic signs, as defined by the zoning ordinance, have a unique potential to create driver distraction, a major cause of traffic crashes. As a result, the City has adopted special regulations that relate to such signs. These regulations shall apply to all proposed dynamic signage in the City, whether new or existing, conforming or non-conforming at the time of adoption of this ordinance.
(b) Regulations governing Dynamic Sign Displays
(i) Dynamic sign displays shall have messages that change instantaneously, and do not fade, dissolve, blink, or appear to simulate motion in any way. Prohibited blinking signs shall include signs which are displayed as continuous solid messages for less than the time required by subpart (iii) of this subsection below. The exception to this regulation is the allowance of messages that appear to scroll horizontally across the sign, but are otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, including the definition of “scrolling signs”.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (H) General Provisions
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 279
(ii) With the exception of dynamic sign displays for civic or institutional uses, dynamic sign displays shall not be permitted in any Residential zoning district.
(iii) Dynamic sign displays shall be permanent signs.
(iv) No dynamic sign display shall change more than one time per three (3) second period; time and temperature displays may change as frequently as once every three (3) seconds.
(v) Dynamic sign displays shall be no brighter than other illuminated signs in the same district.
(vi) Dynamic sign displays shall be designed to freeze the display in the event of malfunction, and the owner shall discontinue the display immediately upon malfunction, or upon notice from the City that the display violates the City’s regulations.
(vii) Applicants for dynamic sign displays shall sign a license agreement supplemental to the building permit agreeing to operation of a sign in conformance with these regulations. Violation of these regulations shall result in forfeiture of the license, and the City shall be authorized to arrange disconnection of electrical service to the sign display.
(viii) With the exception of dynamic sign displays for civic or institutional uses, no dynamic sign display shall be permitted to be located in a yard or on the side of a building which abuts a residentially zoned or used parcel.
(ix) Dynamic sign displays for civic or institutional uses adjacent to or abutting residential uses or residentially zoned property shall be subject to the requirements of Section 4.5(H) of this ordinance and the following additional requirements.
1. Dynamic displays are limited to inclusion on existing or proposed monument signage as allowed by Section 4.5(J) of this ordinance; the total of such monument signage shall not exceed 100 square feet.
2. Dynamic displays shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) of the allowable sign area or 25 feet in total for the parcel, whichever is less, and shall be limited to one (1) sign display per parcel.
3. Dynamic sign displays must be setback a minimum of fifteen (15) from the public right of way and one hundred (100) from the property line when adjacent to residential uses or residentially zoned property.
4. Dynamic sign displays must have an automatic dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower level for the time period between one half-hour before sunset and one half-hour after sunrise.
5. Dynamic sign displays shall not exceed a maximum illumination of 5000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum illumination of 500 nits (candelas per square meter)
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (I) Temporary Signs
Page 280 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign’s face at maximum brightness.
6. Dynamic sign displays may only be illuminated between the hours of 7 AM – 10 PM.
(20) Design and Materials Standards for Signs in Commercial Districts, Industrial Districts, the CCD District, PUDs, and Performance Based Enhancement District Development
(a) In General
The design and materials of any sign shall be consistent with the building materials requirements of the district in which the sign is located, and shall be the same as, or compatible with, the materials and design of the principal building(s) on the property.
(b) Specific Materials for Pylon Signs
All exposed pole or post structures must be wrapped or faced with stucco, architectural metal, brick or stone consistent with building architecture.
(I) Temporary Signs
(1) For property in a Business District or an Industrial District (see table 3-1), the use of temporary sign devices shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days per calendar year per business. When multiple temporary signs are permitted per parcel, such signs shall be spaced seventy-five (75) lineal feet apart. The area of temporary sign devices shall not exceed forty (40) square feet. Off-premises temporary signage is prohibited. A temporary sign permit is required to be obtained prior to displaying the sign.
(a) The number of days and dates of use shall be provided on the permit application. Each business may request up to a total of four permits per calendar year, or until 120 days are reached cumulatively, whichever occurs first.
(2) In cases where properties forego, in writing, temporary signage allowed by Section 4.5(I)(1) above, an additional permanent message board sign up to fifty (50) square feet in area shall be allowed. Such sign may be incorporated into a property’s freestanding sign or the building as additional wall sign area. Freestanding signs shall be subject to the height limitations of the applicable zoning district.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (I) Temporary Signs
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 281
(3) Subject to other provisions of Section 4.5(I), one (1) additional temporary sign device shall be permitted for a business on a one-time basis for a period of up to forty (40) days to be utilized within six (6) months of the first day of the business opening to the public. Such signage shall not be limited by the provisions of Sections 4.5(I)(2).
(4) Businesses or organizations with their activities located in the CCD, Central Business District, may display temporary, off-premise signs by express permit issued by the City Council or the Council’s designee where access to commercial areas requires directional signage from the City’s arterial roads. Signs allowed under this section shall be considered to be in addition to any other sign allowances, including permanent signage, other on-site temporary signs, or “sandwich board” signs displayed pursuant to Section 4.5(C)(7). Signs allowed under this section may, at the discretion of the Council, be permitted under the following conditions:
(a) Off-premise, temporary signs shall be no more than four (4) square feet in area.
(b) Off-premise temporary signs shall be no more than three (3) feet in height.
(c) Off-premise temporary signs shall be limited to no more than one (1) sign every seventy-five (75) lineal feet of street frontage, but no more than three (3) signs per parcel.
(d) Notwithstanding other regulations to the contrary, such signs may be placed upon the public sidewalk within a City street right of way. Any such sign placed on the public sidewalk shall be located so as to avoid impeding pedestrian traffic, and to avoid visual interference with vehicular traffic.
(e) An application for an off-premise, temporary sign shall be accompanied by a written statement of permission from the owner of the private property on which the sign is located. Such statement shall include an express grant of permission for City inspectors to enter the property for the purpose of inspecting and/or removing said signs.
(f) An application for signs subject to the provisions of this section may be made for a single period of display, or in the alternative, the City may grant approval for annual license for the display of such signs in accordance with Section 2.4(K). Separate fees may be established for single-period or annual-period permits.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (J) District Regulations
Page 282 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(g) Eligible days for the display of signs subject to this section shall be Thursday, Friday, Saturday, or Sunday only.
(5) All signs comprised of non-commercial speech are permitted on private property in any zoning district with an established principal commercial, industrial, institutional, or public use, with the express consent of the owner of such property.
(a) The total area of such sign devices shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in total.
(b) Signs may be placed for up to 21 days per 30-day period.
(c) Signs may not be placed within the public right of way or easements.
(d) Such signs shall be spaced a minimum of 75 linear feet from any other sign on the site.
(e) No permit shall be required for such signage.
(6) Temporary signage may be located on a vacant parcel adjacent to a parcel occupied by an active and permitted principal use, when such properties are held in the same ownership.
(J) District Regulations
In addition to the signs allowed by Section 4.5(C) and Section 4.5(I), the following signs shall be allowed within the specific zoning districts:
(1) Within residential zoning districts (see table 3-1), the following additional regulations apply:
(a) Except for the uses specified in Sections 4.5(J)(1)(b) and 4.5(J)(1)(c) below, not more than one (1) sign shall be allowed provided that:
(i) The area of the sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet.
(ii) Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height of four (4) feet.
(b) In addition to the sign allowed by Section 4.5(J)(1)(a) above, residential uses shall be allowed one (1) monument sign per collector or arterial street access. Such sign shall meet the requirements of this ordinance and shall be constructed at the time of plat or phased plat development adjacent to the collector or arterial access.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (J) District Regulations
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 283
(c) Civic and institutional uses shall be allowed two (2) monument signs per lot meeting the requirements of this ordinance.
(2) Within business and industrial zoning districts (see table 3-1), the following additional regulations shall apply:
(a) Total Area of Signs
The total area of all signs (with the exclusion of freestanding signs as may be allowed by this code) displayed on a lot shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the total building facade fronting not more than two (2) public streets.
(b) Freestanding Signs
(i) Unless otherwise specified in this section, one (1) sign is allowed per lot. The area of a freestanding sign may not exceed one hundred (100) square feet each side with a maximum height of twenty-two (22) feet.
(ii) If a monument, rather than pylon sign is utilized, an additional one hundred (100) square feet of area beyond the total area calculated in Section 4.5(J)(2)(a) above, devoted to wall, canopy or marquee signs shall be granted.
(iii) In addition to the sign allowed by sections (i) and (ii) above, additional signage may be allowed per lot in an amount not to exceed three (3) signs with an individual square footage maximum of ten (10) square feet each and thirty (30) total square feet. Such signage shall not exceed three (3) feet in height. Signage shall be setback at least 6’ from adjacent property lines and shall not be located within a public right of way or easement without a license agreement approved by the City Council. Such signs may not include changeable copy or dynamic displays.
(iv) For shopping centers greater than one hundred and fifty thousand (150,000) square feet of aggregate building square footage and greater than twenty (20) acres in site area, two (2) freestanding signs may be permitted. Two (2) pylon signs may be constructed or, as an alternative, one (1) pylon and one (1) monument sign may be constructed. When the latter option is chosen, the monument sign shall be no greater than fourteen (14) feet in height nor more than one hundred (100) square feet in area. The pylon sign may be no greater than twenty-five (25) feet in height and three hundred (300) square feet in area.
(c) Wall, Canopy, or Marquee Signs The Freeway Bonus Sign Overlay District allows for additional signage in specific commercial and industrial areas [Section 3.7(G)]
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.5 Signs
Subsection (J) District Regulations
Page 284 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) Wall, canopy, projecting, and marquee signs shall be consistent with the maximum area requirements of Section 4.5(J)(2)(a).
(ii) Wall, canopy and marquee signs are permitted on any building facade except those which abut properties zoned for residential use.
(d) Multiple Occupancy Commercial And Industrial Buildings
When a single principal building is devoted to two (2) or more commercial or industrial principal uses, signs shall be allowed subject to review and approval of the Community Development Department based upon the following requirements:
(i) The maximum individual sign sizes for multiple occupancy buildings and individual businesses that may display a sign shall not exceed the maximum provisions in the same zoning district in Section 4.5(J).
(ii) Commercial retail, office, or mixed use multiple occupancy buildings may display a freestanding sign consistent with the applicable zoning district provisions in Section 4.5(J).
(iii) Individual tenants of a multiple occupancy building within a commercial or industrial zoning district shall not display separate wall, canopy, or marquee signs except through administrative site plan submittal review of a comprehensive sign plan subject to the following requirements:
1. Such sign shall be limited to the maximum wall sign size permitted in the applicable zoning district provisions in Section 4.5(J).
2. Such sign shall be located only on an exterior wall abutting a public street and shall be located on not more than two exterior walls which face a public street.
3. A comprehensive sign plan is submitted that includes all of the following information:
a. A site plan to scale showing the location of lot lines, buildings, structures, parking areas, existing and proposed signs, and any other physical features of the area included within the proposed comprehensive sign plan.
b. Elevations to scale of buildings included within the comprehensive sign plan including the location of existing or proposed wall, canopy, or marquee signs.
c. To scale plans for all existing and proposed signs of any type included within the comprehensive sign plan indicating area, dimensions, height, materials, colors, and means of illumination (if any).
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.7 Transitional Features
Subsection (B) Applicability
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 285
4. No permit shall be issued for a new or replacement sign for an individual tenant except upon a determination by the Community Development Department that it is consistent with the approved comprehensive sign plan. 4.6 Underground Utilities
All utilities within or serving new development [e.g. cable television, electrical (excluding transformers), gas, sewer, telephone, and water lines] shall be placed underground. 4.7 Transitional Features
(A) Purpose and Intent
Transitional features are architectural elements or site aspects that must be used to ease the transition between new development and existing structures and community character. It is the intent of these standards to:
(1) Blend land use types throughout the City to minimize visual conflicts;
(2) Limit the excessive consumption of land though the utilization of large vegetated buffers to separate potentially conflicting use types; and
(3) Limit interruptions in vehicular and pedestrian connections created by efforts to segregate uses.
(B) Applicability
(1) Transitional features shall be required when:
(a) Different use types abut one another (e.g. residential, institutional, commercial, office);
(b) Adjacent residential lots contain differing densities (e.g. a single family home site adjacent to a duplex);
(c) A lot is developing or redeveloping within the R-2, CCD or T-N zoning districts;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.7 Transitional Features
Subsection (C) Standards
Page 286 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(d) The Community Development Department determines that design compatibility cannot be achieved between uses in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, or IBC districts.
(2) The Community Development Department may require the use of screening in addition to the use of transitional feature(s) where such is necessary to reduce potential adverse impacts between incompatible uses or different building types.
(C) Standards
In areas where transitional features are required, one or more of the following approaches shall be used, subject to approval and as required by the Community Development Department, to establish a transition between uses:
(1) Use setbacks that are within 25 percent of the average setbacks for existing uses on the same block face provided no new use is closer to the right-of-way than any existing use;
Figure 4-5: Average Setbacks
The new construction (highlighted in green) on the right demonstrates appropriate average setbacks. The dwelling highlighted in red on the left has a front setback that is too deep.
(2) Ensure the façade width and height between façades of structures on opposing sides of a street are consistent with each other such that neither façade exceeds the other’s dimensions by more than 25 percent;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.7 Transitional Features
Subsection (C) Standards
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 287
Figure 4-6: Façade Height & Width
Ensuring similar façade height and width dimensions of opposing façades can be an effective means of establishing a transition between uses.
(3) Graduate building height and mass in the form of building step-backs or other techniques so that structures with a higher intensity have a comparable scale with adjacent structures housing lower intensity uses;
Figure 4-7: Step Back Construction
Step-backs in building heights between different use types can be an effective transitional element.
(4) Use similarly sized and patterned architectural features such as windows, doors, awnings, arcades, pilasters, cornices, wall offsets, building materials, and other building articulations included on the lower intensity use as depicted in Figure 4-8.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.7 Transitional Features
Subsection (C) Standards
Page 288 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Figure 4-8: Architectural Features
The example on the bottom demonstrates effective use of transition features.
(5) Locate off-street parking, loading, service, and utility areas to the rear of structures, adjacent to similar site features on surrounding sites;
(6) Prevent incompatible exterior lighting or sources of audible noise or disturbance from building façades facing lower intensity uses;
(7) Prevent abrupt changes in roof form by allowing adjacent incompatible uses to use similar roof types, slopes, or arrangements;
(8) Orient porches, balconies, outdoor space, and other site attributes such as vending machines associated with attached residential development away from adjacent detached residential uses;
(9) Orient primary building façades directly across from opposing primary façades regardless of use type (as seen in Figure 4-9); and
Figure 4-9: Parallel Primary Facades
Organizing buildings so that the primary façades face one another can serve as a transitional feature when two different building types occupy opposing sides of a street.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.7 Transitional Features
Subsection (C) Standards
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 289
(10) When dealing with multi- building developments on one or more lots, establish a continuum of use intensity where uses of moderate intensity (darkest colors in Figure 4-10) are sited between high-intensity uses (medium colors in Figure 4-9) and low-intensity uses (light colors in Figure 4-9) (i.e. retail to multi-family residential to detached residential).
Figure 4-10: Staggering Intensity
Multi-building developments can be organized to concentrate the highest intensity uses in a single area and feather the intensity and density outwards from high intensity centers.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.7 Transitional Features
Subsection (C) Standards
Page 290 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (C) Change in Use or Occupancy
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 291
4.8 Off-street Parking
(A) Purpose
The regulation of off-street parking spaces in these zoning regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off-street parking of motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land or structures.
(B) Application of Off-Street Parking Regulation
The regulations and requirements set forth herein shall apply to all off-street parking facilities in all of the zoning districts of the City.
(C) Change in Use or Occupancy
(1) Change in Use or Occupancy of Land
(a) Any change of use or occupancy of land already dedicated to a parking area, parking spaces, or loading spaces shall not be made, nor shall any sale of land, division, or subdivision of land be made which reduces area necessary for parking, parking stalls, or parking requirements below the minimum prescribed by these zoning regulations.
(b) Off-street parking spaces and loading spaces or lot area existing upon the effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4 shall not be reduced in number or size unless said number of size exceeds the requirements set forth herein for a similar new use.
(2) Change in Use or Occupancy of a Building
Any change of use of occupancy of any building or buildings, including additions thereto, requiring more parking area shall not be permitted until there is furnished such additional parking spaces as required by these zoning regulations.
(3) Site Plan Drawing Necessary
All applications for a building permit or certificate of occupancy in all zoning districts shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned indicating the location of off-street parking and loading spaces in compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 4.8.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
Page 292 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(D) Prohibited Uses Related to Off-street Parking
(1) Required accessory off-street parking spaces in any district shall not be utilized for open storage, sale, or rental of goods; or storage of inoperable vehicles and/or storage of snow.
(2) For single family and two family dwellings, off-street parking in the rear yard is prohibited as illustrated in Figure 4-11.
(3) Except for temporary uses as permitted by Section 5.4 and trailers parking in a designated loading area, no vehicle may be parked and used for storage of items in any district.
(E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
(1) Location of Required Parking
(a) Required accessory off-street parking shall be on the same lot under the same ownership as the principal use being served except under the provisions of Section 4.8(G)(3), subject to the Public Improvement Project Exception as regulated by Section 6.2 (D)(1).
(b) Except for single, two-family, townhouse dwellings and parcels in the CCD, head-in parking directly off of and adjacent to a public street with each stall having its own direct access to the public street shall be prohibited.
(c) Except in the case of single, two-family, and townhouse dwellings, parking areas shall be designed so that circulation between parking bays or aisles occurs within the designated parking lot and does not depend upon a public street or alley.
(d) Except in the case of single, two-family, and townhouse dwellings and parcels in the CCD, parking area design which requires backing into the public street is prohibited.
(e) All accessory off-street parking facilities required by this ordinance shall be located and restricted as follows:
(i) For single family and two family dwellings, the part of a paved driveway within boulevard portion of the street right-of-way shall only be used for parking in a manner that does not block any public sidewalk or pathway.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 293
(ii) In the case of single family dwellings, parking shall be prohibited in any portion of the rear yard. In the case where the only attached or detached garage on a property is located in the rear yard, parking may be allowed in designated driveways leading directly into a garage, or on one (1) open surfaced space located on the side of a driveway away from the principal use as shown in Table 4-9 and Figure 4-11. Said extra space shall be surfaced as required by Table 4-9 and Figure 4-11.
(iii) In the case of single family dwellings, parking in the side yard shall be allowed on a surfaced space as shown in Table 4-9 and Figure 4-11.
(f) All parking must occur on a paved surface except as may be permitted by this ordinance.
(2) Vehicular Use Area Design
(a) Curb Cuts and Access
(i) Each property shall be allowed one (1) curb cut access per one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of street frontage. All property shall be entitled to at least one (1) curb cut.
(ii) The maximum driveway width at the property line shall not exceed thirty (30) feet and shall taper to a width not to exceed twenty-eight (28) feet at the public street.
(iii) Within all districts, a five foot radius curb may be constructed at the public street in addition to the maximum driveway width allowed.
(iv) Driveway access curb openings on a public street except for single, two-family, and townhouse dwellings shall not be located less than forty (40) feet from one another.
(v) No curb cut access shall be located less than forty (40) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street right-of-ways. This distance shall be measured from the intersection of lot lines.
(vi) All driveway access openings shall require a culvert unless the lot is served by storm sewer or is determined unnecessary by the Community Development Department. Size of culvert shall be determined by the Community Development Department but shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches in diameter.
(vii) Except for single, two-family, and townhouse residential development (and as otherwise noted in this ordinance), all open vehicular use areas shall have a perimeter concrete curb barrier around the entire parking lot, said curb barrier shall not be closer than six (6) feet to any lot line as measured from the lot line to the face of the curb.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
Page 294 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Stall, Aisle, and Driveway Design
(i) Each parking space shall be not less than nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet in length exclusive of access aisles, and each space shall be served adequately by access aisles. EXCEPTION: Where desired, up to 25% of the parking spaces may be not less than seven and one-half (7-1/2) feet in width and not less than sixteen (16) feet in length when served adequately by access aisles to accommodate compact car parking and should be marked as such.
(ii) Except in the case of single family, two-family, and townhouse dwellings, parking areas and their aisles shall be developed in compliance with the following standards:
TABLE 4-6: PARKING STALL AND AISLE STANDARDS Angle Wall to Minimum Wall to Interlock Minimum Interlock to Interlock Minimum
30
48.6’
44.5’
40.3’
45
56.8’
53.4’
50.0’
60
62.0’
59.7’
57.4’
90
64.0’
64.0’
64.0’
Parallel Parking: Twenty-two (22) feet in length
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 295
(c) Surfacing
(i) Except in the case of single family and two-family dwellings, driveways and stalls shall be surfaced with six (6) inch class five base and two (2) inch bituminous topping or concrete equivalent. Drainage plans shall be reviewed and subject to approval by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department staff may waive this requirement if it is determined that the drainage plans do not merit further study. Community Development Department determination in this regard shall be based on the size of parking surface area, simplicity of design plan, and proximity/accessibility to existing storm sewer facilities.
(ii) The grade elevation of any parking area shall not exceed five (5) percent.
(d) Striping
Except for single, two-family, and townhouses, all parking stalls shall be marked with white painted lines not less than four (4) inches wide.
(e) Lighting
Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining property, abutting residential uses, and public right-of-ways and be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(f) Landscaping and Screening
All open, non-residential, off-street parking areas of five (5) or more spaces shall be screened and landscaped from abutting or surrounding residential districts in compliance with Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(i) Interior Vehicular Use Area Landscaping – see Section 4.1(F)(2)
(ii) Perimeter Vehicular Use Area Landscaping – see Section 4.1(F)(3)
(iii) Perimeter Buffers – see Section 4.1(G)
(g) Signs
No sign shall be so located as to restrict the sight lines and orderly operation and traffic movement within any parking lot.
Section 4.8(E)(5) outlines requirements for a CUP to potentially lessen surfacing requirements Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
Page 296 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Parking Within a Structure
The off-street parking requirements may be furnished by providing a space so designed within the principal building or one (1) structure attached thereto; however, unless provisions are made, no building permit shall be issued to convert said parking structure into a dwelling unit or living area or other activity until other adequate provisions are made to comply with the required off-street parking provisions of this ordinance.
(4) Vehicular Use Area Stall Calculation Requirements
(a) General Provisions
(i) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shown in Table 4-7 shall be provided and maintained by ownership, easement, and/or lease for and during the life of the respective uses hereinafter set forth.
(ii) When determining the number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction, each fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall constitute another space.
(iii) In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other places of public assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each twenty-two (22) inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining requirements.
(iv) Should a structure contain two (2) or more types of use, each shall be calculated separately for determining the total off-street parking spaces required.
(b) Floor Area
(i) The term "floor area" for the purpose of calculating the number of off-street parking spaces required shall be determined on the basis of the interior floor area dimensions of the buildings, structure, or use times the number of floors.
(ii) Whenever practical, final parking calculations shall be based on an actual building floor plan.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 297
TABLE 4-7: MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES BY USE Use Type Minimum # of Spaces & Additional Requirements Residential Uses
Detached Dwelling
2.0 spaces for each dwelling unit
Duplex
2.0 spaces for each dwelling unit
Townhome
2.5 spaces for each dwelling unit, of which two (2) must be enclosed, plus one (1) guest parking space for every four (4) units
Multiple Family
In general
2.5 spaces for each dwelling unit, of which two (2) must be enclosed, plus one (1) guest parking space for every four (4) units, or as may otherwise be specified in the zoning district
Senior housing
Reservation of area equal to 1.0 space per unit
 Initial development shall require only 0.5 spaces per unit, and said number of spaces may continue until such time as the City Council considers a need for additional parking spaces has been demonstrated
Group Residential Facility, Single Family
2.0 spaces for each three persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided
Group Residential Facility, Multi-Family
2.0 spaces for each three persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided
Manufactured Home
2.0 spaces per manufactured home Civic and Institutional Uses
Active Park Facilities (public or private)
5.0 spaces for each acre of park over one (1) acre; two (2) spaces per acre for playgrounds; and ten (10) spaces for each acre of play field
 When a public recreation site has more than one (1) use designation, the areas must be divided for determining the required parking
Assisted Living Facilities
0.5 spaces for each assisted living unit (a required half space shall be rounded up)
Baseball Fields, Stadium
1.0 space for each eight (8) seats of design capacity
Cemeteries
See Parking Schedule #2 [Section 4.8(H)(3)]
Clinics/Medical Services
4.0 spaces for each one thousand (1000) square feet
Hospitals
2.0 spaces per each bed
Nursing/Convalescent Home
4.0 spaces plus one (1) for each three (3) beds for which accommodations are offered
Passenger Terminal
8.0 spaces plus one (1) additional space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1000) square feet
Passive Parks and Open Space
See Parking Schedule #2 [Section 4.8(H)(3)]
Public Buildings or Uses
10.0 spaces plus one (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet in excess of two thousand (2000) square feet of floor area in the principal structure
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
Page 298 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Use Type Minimum # of Spaces & Additional Requirements Civic and Institutional Uses (continued)
Schools,
Kindergarten through Junior High
1.0 space for each classroom plus one (1) additional space for each fifty (50) student capacity
Schools,
High School & post-secondary
1.0 space for each seven (7) students based on design capacity plus one (1) for each three (3) classrooms
Place of Public Assembly
1.0 space for each four (4) seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall
 Facilities as may be provided in conjunction with places of public assembly shall be subject to additional requirements which are imposed by this ordinance
Utilities (major)
See Parking Schedule #2 [Section 4.8(H)(3)] Office Uses
Offices
3.0 spaces plus at least one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor space Commercial Uses
Adult Uses
1.0 space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor space.
Auction House
1.0 space for each forty (40) square feet of floor space.
 Outside sales area shall be added to the floor space of the principal building when determining square footage of floor space
Auto Repair – Minor
8.0 spaces plus one (1) additional space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1000) square feet
Automotive Wash Facilities
10.0 spaces or one (1) space for each employee on the maximum shift, whichever is greater
 For self service facilities, there shall be a minimum of two (2) spaces
 If the wash facility is integrated into an approved vehicle fuel sales business, the wash facility shall require no additional parking
Bed & Breakfasts
1.0 space for each rental unit in addition to required residential off-street parking
Boarding House
2.0 spaces for each three (3) persons for whom accommodations are provided for sleeping
Business Support Services
1.0 space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space
 If in the CCD district, one (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor space
Communications/Broadcasting
1.0 space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
Convenience Stores
1.0 space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space
 If in the CCD district, one (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor space
Country Club
4.0 spaces per golf hole plus spaces provided for accessory uses in accordance with this ordinance
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 299
Use Type Minimum # of Spaces & Additional Requirements Commercial Uses (continued)
Day Care Centers
1.0 space for each employee plus one (1) space per five children
Entertainment/Recreation, Indoor Commercial
Bowling Alley
5.0 spaces for each alley plus additional spaces as may be required herein for related uses associated with the principal structure
Theater
1.0 space for each four (4) seats based on the design capacity of the main assembly hall; facilities as may be provided in conjunction with such buildings or uses shall be subject to additional requirements imposed by this ordinance
 If the theater is located in the original plat of Monticello, the required spaces shall be reduced to 1.0 space per five (5) seats
Entertainment/Recreation, Outdoor Commercial
10.0 spaces plus one (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area inside an associated structure
Event Center
1.0 space for each two and one-half (2.5) guests, measured by building capacity based on building code limits of all areas for the event, and one (1) parking space for each 200 square feet for areas devoted to food preparation, event staging, and other support activities.
Financial Institution
1.0 space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
Funeral Homes
20.0 spaces for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) space for each funeral vehicle maintained on the premises
 Aisle spaces shall also be provided off the street for making up a funeral procession
Hotels or Motels
1.0 space for each rental unit plus one space for each ten (10) units and one (1) space for each employee on the maximum shift
Kennels (commercial)
1.0 space for each four hundred (400) square feet of floor space.
Landscaping / Nursery Business
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Personal Services
1.0 space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor space
 If in the CCD district, one (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor space
Recreational Vehicle Camp Site
1.0 space per each recreational vehicle plus one (1) guest space per ten recreational vehicles
Repair Establishment
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Restaurants
Sit down/dining area
1.0 space for each forty (40) square feet of gross floor area of dining and bar area
Pick-up or Counter Area
1.0 space for each fifteen (15) square feet of gross floor area but not less than fifteen (15) spaces
Kitchen Area
1.0 space for each eighty (80) square feet of kitchen area
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
Page 300 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Use Type Minimum # of Spaces & Additional Requirements Commercial Uses (continued)
Retail Commercial Uses
In General
1.0 space for each two hundred (200) square feet
 If in the CCD district, one (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor space
In which 50% or more of the gross floor area is devoted to storage, warehouses, and/or industry. The number of spaces may be determined by either of the listed options
OPTION #1: One (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet devoted to public sales or service plus one (1) space for each 500 square feet of storage area
OPTION #2: One space for each employee on the maximum shift plus one (1) space for each 200 square feet devoted to public sales or service
Specialty Eating Establishments
1.0 space for each two hundred (200) square feet
 If in the CCD district, one (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor space
Vehicle Fuel Sales
4.0 spaces plus two (2) spaces for each service stall (not pump)
 Those facilities designed for sale of other items than strictly automotive products, parts, or service shall be required to provide additional parking in compliance with other applicable sections of this ordinance
Vehicle Sales and Rental
8.0 spaces plus one (1) additional space for each eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area over one thousand (1000) square feet
Veterinary Facilities
1.0 space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet
Wholesale Sales
1.0 space for each two hundred (200) square feet
 If in the CCD district, one (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of floor space Industrial Uses
Auto Repair – Major
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Extraction of Materials
See Parking Schedule #2 [Section 4.8(H)(3)]
General Warehousing
8.0 spaces plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on the maximum shift or, at a minimum, at least eight (8) spaces plus one (1) space for each one thousand (1000) square feet of floor area
Truck or Freight Terminal
8.0 spaces plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on the maximum shift or, at a minimum, at least eight (8) spaces plus one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area
Waste Disposal & Incineration
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Wrecker Services
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Heavy Manufacturing
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Industrial Services
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Light Manufacturing
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 301
Use Type Minimum # of Spaces & Additional Requirements Industrial Uses (continued)
Machinery/Truck Repair
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Recycling and Salvage Center
See Parking Schedule #1 [Section 4.8(H)(2)]
Self-Storage Facilities
1.0 space per 100 lockers/units on the inside of the fenced area and at least five (5) spaces outside the fenced area
 If a caretaker’s quarters is provided on-site, at least one (1) covered parking space for exclusive use by the caretaker shall be provided
(iii) Unusable space (e.g. entries, halls, service areas, bathrooms, etc) within uses may be excluded from floor area calculations when applicable.
(iv) Required parking spaces may be reduced through alternative development types (e.g. Planned Unit Development, utilization of Performance Based Enhancement Overlay District provisions, etc) as permitted in this ordinance.
(c) CCD District Exceptions
Property owners in the CCD District shall comply with the parking supply requirements as listed in Table 4-7 of this ordinance. However, property owners may be granted flexibility from a portion of their required parking supply under the following conditions:
(i) Where the City finds that there will be adequate opportunity to provide public parking in the vicinity of the subject property, and at the City’s option, the owner shall pay into a “CCD” Parking Fund an amount as established by City Council Resolution. Said fund shall be used for the acquisition, construction, and/or maintenance of publicly-owned parking in the “CCD” district.
(ii) The City may, in addition to, or as an alternative to, the option listed in Section 4.8(E)(4)(c)(i) above, and at the discretion of the City, offer the property owner the opportunity to choose to supply parking at a rate which is sixty (60) percent of the requirement listed in Section 4.8 provided that the owner grants an easement to the public for automobile parking use over the subject area. The owner shall retain responsibility for maintenance of said parking area.
(iii) Location: Parking shall not be located on a parcel between the front building line of the principal building and the public street, except where expressly provided for by the City Council after recommendation from the Planning Commission.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
Page 302 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(d) Parking Stall Requirement: Schedule #1
Uses subject to Off-Street Parking Schedule #1 must provide the minimum number of off-street parking spaces indicated in Table 4-8, Off-Street Parking Schedule #1.
TABLE 4-8: OFF STREET PARKING SCHEDULE #1 Activity Number of Spaces Required
Office or Administrative Area
1.0 space per three hundred (300) square feet
Indoor Sales Area
1.0 space per two hundred (200) square feet
Outdoor Sales, Display, or Storage Area (3000 sq ft or less)
1.0 space per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet
Outdoor Sales, Display, or Storage Area (over 3000 sq ft)
1.0 space per one thousand (1000) square feet
Indoor Storage / Warehousing / Vehicle Repair / Manufacturing Area
≤ 3000 sq ft
1.0 space per two hundred (200) square feet
3000 ≤ 5000 sq ft
1.0 space per five hundred (500) square feet
5000 ≤ 10,000 sq ft
1.0 space per seven hundred fifty (750) square feet
> 10,000 sq ft
1.0 space per one thousand two hundred fifty (1250) square feet
(e) Parking Stall Requirement: Schedule #2
Uses subject to Off-Street Parking Schedule #2 have widely varying parking demand characteristics, making it very difficult to specify a single appropriate off-street parking standard. Upon receiving a development application for a use subject to Schedule #2 standards, the Community Development Department is authorized to apply the off-street parking and loading standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or establish minimum off-street parking requirements on the basis of a parking study prepared by the applicant. The study must include estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or other acceptable estimates as approved by the Community Development Department, and should include other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The study must document the source of data used to develop the recommendations.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (E) Standards Applicable to All Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 303
(5) Vehicular Use Area Design Conditional Use Permit
Stall aisle and driveway design requirements outlined in Section 4.8 may be lessened subject to the following conditions:
(a) Any reduction in requirements requires completion of the conditional use permit process outlined in Section 2.4(D) of this ordinance.
(b) Final approval of parking and driveway drainage plans associated with conditional use permit request shall be provided in writing by the Community Development Department. Engineering expenses greater than the portion of building permit fee allocated for engineer plan review shall be paid by applicant prior to occupancy of structure.
(c) Only properties which have existing buildings and are being expanded or remodeled for a new use shall be eligible for this conditional use permit.
(d) The applicant must show, and the Planning Commission must find, that there are existing non-conformities of the property which are being eliminated by the expansion or remodeling which justify a deferral to the paving, landscaping, or curbing requirements.
(e) A deferral shall be considered by the City as a part of an application which includes full site plans, drawn to scale, of both the immediate paving, landscaping and curbing improvements and the ultimate paving, landscaping, and curbing improvements.
(f) In all districts other than the A-O District, this deferral shall apply only to the required paving, curbing and landscaping which is applicable to the existing portion of the use and building. Paving, curbing and landscaping attributable to any expansion shall be installed at the time of the expansion.
(6) Deferred Parking
Where a proposed use clearly demonstrates affirmative design efforts toward the preservation and enhancement of desirable natural site characteristics, ordinance- required paved parking spaces may be reduced and installation deferred until such time as the need for the full complement of parking. The need shall be determined in conformance with a "proof of parking" plan so approved by the Community Development Department.
Section 2.4(D): Conditional Use Permits
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (F) Standards Applicable to Residential Uses
Page 304 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(7) Permit Required
A permit shall be required for the installation of any surfacing material intended to be utilized for off-street parking. The fee for an off-street parking permit shall be set forth in a fee schedule adopted by the City Council. The fee payment shall accompany the permit application.
(8) Maintenance
It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the lessee and owner of the principal use, uses, or building to maintain in a neat and adequate manner, the parking space, accessways striping, landscaping, and required fences.
(F) Standards Applicable to Residential Uses
(1) Location of Required Parking in Residential Areas
(a) For single family and two family dwellings, off-street parking on a paved driveway within fifteen (15) feet of any street surface shall be allowed as long as it does not block any public sidewalk or pathway.
(b) In the case of townhouse dwellings, parking shall be prohibited in any portion of the front yard except designated driveways leading directly into a garage or one (1) open paved space located on the side of a driveway away from the principal use. Said extra space shall be surfaced with concrete or bituminous material. For single family and two-family dwellings, parking shall be located as found in Table 4-9 and Figure 4-11.
(c) Parking and/or storage of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles and equipment, emergency vehicles, and small commercial vehicles shall conform to the requirements of Table 4-9 and Figure 4-11. For the purposes of Table 4-9 and Figure 4-11, emergency vehicles shall be treated as “small commercial vehicles”, but without limitations as to size.
(d) Under no circumstances shall large commercial vehicles be parked or stored in residential zoning districts, or on property that is used for residential purposes.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (F) Standards Applicable to Residential Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 305
TABLE 4-9: TYPE OF REQUIRED BUFFER YARD FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS Diagram Area Key Passenger Vehicles [1] Recreational Vehicles [1] Emergency Vehicles [1] Small Construction Vehicles [1] Other Notes
Driveway leading directly into a garage within the front yard of a lot
A
Any number
(paved)
One such vehicle
(paved)
One such vehicle
(paved)
Any number
(paved)
Parking space adjacent to the driveway within the front yard of a lot
B
One passenger or small commercial vehicle (paved)
One such vehicle, if it is the only such vehicle within the front yard (surfaced)
One such vehicle (paved)
One passenger or small commercial vehicle (paved)
Other portions of the front yard
C
No
No
No
No
Side yard, adjacent to garage side of structure
D
Yes, within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building (surfaced)
Yes within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building (unsurfaced)
Yes, within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building
(surfaced)
Yes, within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building
(surfaced)
Must maintain minimum 3 foot setback to side lot line in all cases
Side yard more than 15 feet from garage
E
No
No
No
No
Side yard on opposite side of house from garage
F
No
No
No
No
Side yard on corner lot facing a public street
G
Yes, within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building (surfaced)
Yes within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building. (unsurfaced)
Yes, within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building (surfaced)
Yes, within a space consisting of the 15 feet adjacent to the building (surfaced)
Must maintain minimum 3 foot setback to side lot line in all cases. This space may encroach to within 5 feet of the right of way, provided screening is included.
[1] see section 8.4 for definition
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (F) Standards Applicable to Residential Uses
Page 306 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Diagram Area Key Passenger Vehicles [1] Recreational Vehicles [1] Emergency Vehicles [1] Small Construction Vehicles [1] Other Notes
Rear yard
H
No
Yes (unsurfaced)
No
No
No current limit to number of such vehicles – must maintain a 3 foot setback to lot line
[1] see section 8.4 for definition
Figure 4-11
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (F) Standards Applicable to Residential Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 307
(2) Vehicular Use Area Design in Residential Areas
(a) Curb Cuts and Access
(i) Single family uses shall be limited to one (1) curb cut access per property.
(ii) Curb cut access shall be at a minimum three (3) feet from the side yard property line in residential districts.
(b) Surfacing
Paving and surfacing requirements for parking and storage of passenger vehicles, emergency vehicles, recreational vehicles, and small commercial vehicles for single and two-family dwellings shall be as found in Table 4-9 and Figure 4-11.
(c) Residential District Garage Requirements
In all residential zoning districts, all detached single family homes and duplex units shall include development of an attached or detached garage. The minimum size requirement for the garage floor shall be 450 sq ft with a minimum garage door opening of 16 ft. with the following exceptions and/or deviations by district:
(i) R-1 District
An attached garage of at least 550 square feet shall be constructed as part of any single family home.
(ii) R-A District
1. An attached garage of at least 700 square feet shall be constructed as part of any single family home.
2. Garage frontage: From side building line to side building line of any single family structure, no more than 40% of such building width shall consist of Garage doors that face the street. Side or rear loaded garages are not subject to this regulation. An exception shall be made for garage doors that face the street, but are set back at least ten feet in back of the front building line of the principal use.
3. No portion of any garage space may be more than five feet closer to the street than the front building line of the principal single family use.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (G) Standards Applicable to Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
Page 308 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iii) R-2 District
An attached garage of at least 450 square feet shall be constructed as part of any single family home.
(iv) T-N District
1. A garage of at least 480 square feet, attached or detached, shall be constructed as a part of any single family home.
2. Garage frontage: From side building line to side building line of any single family structure, no more than 50% of such building width shall consist of garage doors that face the street. Side or rear loaded garages, or detached garages in the rear yard, are not subject to this regulation. An exception shall be made for garage doors that face the street, but are set back at least ten feet in back of the front building line of the principal use.
3. No portion of any garage space may be more than five feet closer to the street than the front building line of the principal single family use.
(G) Standards Applicable to Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
(1) Location of Required Parking for Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
(a) In business, industrial and institutional areas, no parking area may be located upon a public drainage and/or utility easement adjoining a public street without an encroachment agreement approved by the Community Development Department.
(b) In the B-1 district, off-street parking shall not include semi-trailer trucks.
(2) Vehicular Use Area Design Applicable to Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
(a) Access and Curbing
(i) Curb cut access in industrial and commercial zoning districts may exceed twenty-four (24) feet with the approval of the Community Development Department. Denial by the Community Development Department of curb cut access in excess of twenty-four (24) feet may be appealed following the procedures outlined in Section 2.4(H) of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (G) Standards Applicable to Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 309
(ii) Curb cut access shall not be closer than six (6) feet to any lot line as measured from the lot line to the face of the curb. An exception to the setback requirement shall be granted in Business Districts where adjoining business provide for private cross access between parking lots.
(iii) All off-street parking areas and driveways shall have a six (6) inch non-surmountable continuous concrete curb around the perimeter of the parking area and driveways. The Community Development Department may approve bituminous curbing as a temporary measure under the following conditions:
1. If the area is shown by adequate site plans and reasonable growth to be subject to a future expansion of the driveway and/or parking area.
2. The area is shown by adequate site plans to be able to control site traffic and circulation as recommended by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department may approve movable curb stops as a temporary traffic control measure.
3. The area is shown by adequate drainage plans to be able to control drainage as recommended by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department may approve bituminous curbing as a temporary drainage control measure.
(iv) Adjoining business properties may allow cross parking and/or access if authorized by a Conditional Use per the requirements of Section 2.4(D) and subject the following conditions:
1. The required island and landscaping requirements in Section 4.1 are met.
2. The vehicular use area meets the required setback at the perimeter of the parcels in question.
3. The curb cut access locations to the parking lot(s) are approved by the City.
4. A shared parking/access and maintenance agreement is provided by the parking owners and recorded against all subject properties.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (G) Standards Applicable to Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
Page 310 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Parking Setbacks for the CCD District
(i) From public street right of way: Six (6) feet
(ii) From private property: Six (6) feet, except that parking lots may provide shared access driveways or spaces between adjoining private parking lots. In the CCD, such shared access driveways or spaces shall be permitted, exempt from the requirement for a Conditional Use Permit applicable in other zoning districts.
(c) Perimeter Vehicular Use Buffer
(i) Open, non-residential off-street parking areas shall be designed to screen headlights from abutting or surrounding residential districts through the use of a half-berm design. Said design shall be required in all instances where headlights are directed at surrounding or abutting residential properties. A half-berm is required in addition to any buffer yard landscaping requirements with a design as illustrated in Figure 4-12:
(ii) In the event that drainage or other conditions do not permit a berm of this size and for parcels in the CCD district which abut residentially zoned property, a solid, maintenance free fence may be permitted for all or a portion of the retaining wall to the extent necessary to permit property drainage. Examples may include a two-foot retaining wall and berm, with a four foot tall fence section. This alternative may be allowed by Conditional Use Permit. Any fence proposed in lieu of the required design must be 100 percent opaque and in character with the surrounding area.
See also Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping See also Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
Figure 4-12
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.8 Off-street Parking
Subsection (G) Standards Applicable to Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 311
(3) Joint Facilities for Commercial, Industrial & Civic/Institutional Uses
The City Council may, after receiving a report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, approve a conditional use permit for one (1) or more businesses to provide the required off-street parking facilities by joint use of one (1) or more sites where the total number of spaces provided are less than the sum of the total required for each business should they provide them separately. When considering a request for such a permit, the Planning Commission shall not recommend that such permit be granted nor the Council approve such a permit except when the following conditions are found to exist:
(a) Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking facilities required for a theatre, bowling alley, dance hall, bar, or restaurant may be supplied by the off-street parking facilities provided by types of uses specified as a primarily daytime use in subparagraph (d) below.
(b) Up to fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking facilities required for any use specified under (d) below as primary daytime uses may be supplied by the parking facilities provided by the following nighttime or Sunday uses: Auditoriums incidental to a public or parochial school, churches, bowling alleys, dance halls, theatres, bars, or restaurants.
(c) Up to eighty (80) percent of the parking facilities required by Section 4.8 for a church or for an auditorium incidental to a public or parochial school may be supplied by off-street parking facilities provided by uses specified under (d) below as primarily daytime uses.
(d) For the purpose of this section, the following uses are considered as primarily daytime uses: Banks, business offices, retail stores, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, clothing or shoe repair or service shops, manufacturing, wholesale, and similar uses.
(e) Conditions required for joint use:
(i) The building or use for which application is being made to utilize the off-street parking facilities provided by another building or use shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of such parking facilities with the following exception: For theatres located in the Original Plat of Monticello, theatre parking provided by another use shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of said theatre.
(ii) The applicant shall show that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the two (2) buildings or uses for which joint use of off-street parking facilities is proposed.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.9 Off-street Loading Spaces
Subsection (B) Location
Page 312 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iii) A properly drawn legal instrument executed by the parties concerned for joint use of off-street parking facilities, duly approved as to form and manner of execution by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Administrator and recorded with the County Recorder, Wright County. 4.9 Off-street Loading Spaces
(A) Purpose
The regulation of loading spaces in these zoning regulations is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public right-of-way and so to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements for off-street loading and unloading from motor vehicles in accordance with the utilization of various parcels of land or structures.
(B) Location
(1) All required loading berths shall be off-street and located on the same lot as the building or use to be served.
(2) The location of required loading births shall be such that circulation occurs within the designated site or property and does not depend upon a public street or alley.
(3) All loading berth curb cuts shall be located at a minimum fifty (50) feet from the intersection of two (2) or more street right-of-ways. This distance shall be measured from the property line.
(4) No loading berth shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a residential district unless within a structure.
(5) Loading berths shall not occupy the front yard setbacks.
(6) Loading berths located at the front or at the side of buildings on a corner lot shall only be permitted if the following conditions can be met:
(a) Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement.
(b) Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off-street parking access.
(c) Loading berths shall comply with all other requirements of Section 4.8.
(d) All screening requirements of Section 4.1(I) are met.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.9 Off-street Loading Spaces
Subsection (F) Size
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 313
(7) Each loading berth shall be located with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or public alley in a manner which will cause the least interference with traffic.
(C) Surfacing
All loading berths and accessways shall be improved with not less than six (6) inch class five base and two (2) inch bituminous surfacing to control the dust and drainage according to a plan submitted to and subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(D) Accessory Use, Parking and Storage
Any space allocated as a required loading berth or access drive so as to comply with the terms of these zoning regulations shall not be used for the storage of goods, inoperable vehicles, or snow shall not be included as part of the space requirements to meet the off-street area.
(E) Screening
All loading areas shall be screened and landscaped in compliance with Section 4.1(I), of this ordinance.
(F) Size
Unless otherwise specified in these zoning regulations, the first loading berth shall be not less than fifty-five (55) feet in length, and all loading berths shall be not less than thirty (30) feet in length. All loading berths shall be not less than ten (10) feet in width and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space.
Section 4.1(I): Standards for Required Screening
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (A) Purpose
Page 314 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(G) Number of Loading Berths Required
The number of required off-street loading berths shall be as follows:
(1) Manufacturing, Fabrication, Processing, Warehousing, Storing, Retail Sales, Schools and Hotels
For such a building five thousand (5,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area, one (1) loading berth fifty-five (55) feet in length and one (1) additional berth for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or fraction thereof, plus one (1) berth thirty (30) feet in length for each thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
(2) Auditorium, Convention Hall, Exhibition Hall, Sports Arena or Stadium
Ten thousand (10,000) to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area, one (1) loading berth; for each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof, one (1) additional loading berth. 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
(A) Purpose
(1) Statutory Authorization
This Section is adopted pursuant to the authorization and policies contained in Minnesota Statutes Chapters 103B and 462; Minnesota Rules, Parts 6120.2500-6120.3900, Minnesota Rules Chapters 8410, 8420 and 70510.0210.
(2) Findings
The City of Monticello finds that uncontrolled Stormwater runoff and construction Site Erosion from Land Development and Land Disturbing Activities can have significant adverse impacts upon local and regional water resources, diminishing the quality of public health, safety, public and private property and natural resources of the community.
(3) Purpose
The general purpose of this Section is to establish regulatory requirements for land Development and Land Disturbing Activities aimed at minimizing the threats to public health, safety, public and private property and natural resources within the community resulting from construction Site Erosion and post-construction Stormwater runoff.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (B) Definitions
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 315
(4) This ordinance is intended to meet the current construction site erosion and sediment control and post-construction stormwater management regulatory requirements for construction activity and small construction activity (NPDES Permit) as defined in 40 CFR pt. 122.26(b)(14)(x) and (b)(15), respectively.
(5) This ordinance is intended to meet the Minimal Impact Design Standards (MIDS) developed under Minnesota Statutes 2009, Section 115.03, subdivision 5c.
(B) Definitions
Definitions for the following terms can be found in Section 8.4
(1) Best Management Practices (BMPs)
(2) Contractor
(3) Dewatering
(4) Erosion
(5) Erosion Prevention
(6) Final Stabilization
(7) Impervious Surface
(8) Land Disturbing Activity
(9) Owner
(10) Permanent Cover
(11) Sediment
(12) Stabilized
(13) Stormwater
(14) Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(15) Surface Water or Waters
(16) Temporary Erosion Protection
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (D) Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan Requirements
Page 316 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(C) Permits
(1) The thresholds for required Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control permits along with the permit review process is outlined in Section 2.4(M) of this ordinance.
(2) The Permittee(s) shall be responsible for obtaining required permits from other government agencies prior to conducting grading work (e.g. dewatering a site for development will require one or more permits from the MPCA).
(D) Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan Requirements
Grading, drainage, stormwater management and erosion control plans are required for any activities that require a grading permit as defined in Section 2.4(M). The plans shall contain the following information and be in conformance with the City’s Plan Requirements and Design Guidelines (“Design Manual”):
(1) The name and address of the applicant, a legal description of the site, north point, date and scale of drawing and number of sheets;
(2) An existing site map: a map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediately adjacent areas, which shall include the following information:
a. Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet;
b. A delineation of all Surface Waters located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a description of all vegetation which may be found in the water, a statement of general water quality and any classification given to the water body or wetland by the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency, and/or the United States Army Corps of Engineers;
c. The location and dimensions of existing stormwater drainage systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating the direction and the rate the stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public water, or wetland and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects;
d. A description of the soils of the site, including a map indicating soil types of areas to be disturbed as well as a soil report containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed and for the type of sewage disposal proposed which describes any remedial steps to be taken by the applicant to render the soils suitable;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (D) Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 317
e. The location and type of vegetative cover on the site and clearly delineating any vegetation proposed for removal; and
f. 100 year floodplain, flood fringes and floodways boundaries.
g. The location of any water body, and any biologically or archaeologically significant areas within one mile of the site that is identified as: (CGP Part I.B.6).
i. Impaired pursuant to section 303(d) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 303(d)) where the identified pollutant(s) or stressor(s) are phosphorus (nutrient eutrophication biological indicators), turbidity, dissolved oxygen or aquatic biota (fish bioassessment, aquatic plant bioassessment and aquatic macroinvertebrate bioassessment), and with or without a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) approved Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) for any of these identified pollutant(s) or stressors(s) also meeting the specific impaired waters criteria of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) construction general permit (Permit No: MN R10001), regarding construction-site erosion and sediment control;
ii. An outstanding resource value waters as listed in Minn. R. 7050.0180, subp. 3, 4, 5, 6, 6a and 6b;
iii. A trout waters as listed in Minn. R. 6264.0050, subp. 2 and 4;
iv. A wetland defined in Minn. R. 7050.0186 subd.1a.B;
v. Any lands where state or federally listed endangered or threatened species are known to occur, or properties listed in the National Register of Historic Places, including archaeological sites may be impacted.
(3) A site construction plan which shall include the following information:
a. Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing of those activities;
b. Locations and dimensions of all temporary soil or dirt stockpiles;
c. Locations and dimensions of all erosion prevention measures and best management practices necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance;
d. Schedule of anticipated start and completion dates of each land disturbing activity including the dates of installation of erosion prevention measures for each phase needed to meet the requirements of this ordinance; and
e. Provisions for maintenance of the erosion and sediment prevention measures prior to final stabilization.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (D) Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan Requirements
Page 318 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(4) A plan of final site conditions, which shall include the following information:
a. Finished grading shown at contours at the same interval as provided on the existing site map to clearly indicate the relationship of proposed changes to the site’s existing topography and remaining features;
b. A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials that will be added to the site;
c. A drainage plan of the developed site delineating in which direction and the rate stormwater will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be allowed to collect;
d. The proposed size, alignments and intended use of any structures to be erected on the site;
e. A clear delineation and tabulation of all impervious surfaces to be installed on the site, including a description of the surfacing material to be used;
f. Any other information pertinent to the particular project which in the opinion of the applicant is necessary for the review of the project; and
g. Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. Required specifications are referenced in the City of Monticello’s Design Manual.
h. Provisions for maintenance of erosion and sediment plan, specifically in boulevards, easements and other public areas, and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
i. Provisions for regular permittee inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan(s).
j. Modifications to the plan shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as a new application per the requirements of Section 2.4(M).
(5) A copy of the applicant’s Minnesota Pollution Control Agency’s Permit for discharging stormwater from construction activity (MN R100001), if the area of disturbed land is equal to or greater than one (1) acre. A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan must be prepared and must meet the NPDES requirements and conform to the SWPPP standards specified in the MPCA NPDES construction general permit (Permit No: MN R10001).
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (E) Stormwater Management
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 319
(E) Stormwater Management
Plan Required: The proposed provisions for stormwater runoff shall be documented in a stormwater management plan including a narrative, prepared by a Minnesota licensed engineer to stating how the proposed activity meets the requirements of the City of Monticello’s Design Manual.
(1) Minimum Standards For Runoff Water Management Plans
A runoff water management plan shall include the following items:
a. A map containing a delineation of the subwatershed contributing runoff from off site, and proposed and existing subwatersheds on site. The delineation shall conform to the nomenclature of the water resources management plan and shall indicate any significant departures from the watershed delineation of the water resources management plan
b. Delineation of existing on site "wetlands", as defined in the Wetland Conservation Act, lakes, watercourses, shoreland, and/or floodplain areas.
c. For water bodies and channels, a listing of normal (runout) and calculated 10-year and 100-year elevations on site for both existing and proposed conditions.
d. Stormwater runoff volumes and rates for existing and proposed conditions.
e. All hydrologic and hydraulic computations completed to design the proposed stormwater management facilities. Reservoir routing procedures and critical duration runoff events shall be used for design of water storage areas and outlets.
f. A checklist of best management practices to demonstrate that, to the maximum extent practical, the plan has incorporated the structural and nonstructural best management practices described in the book "Protecting Water Quality In Urban Areas", published by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency or the applicable publications.
g. A grading plan identifying stormwater overflow routes along streets or drainage easements designed to protect structures from damage due to:
i. Storms in excess of the design storm, or
ii. Clogging, collapse or other failure of the primary drainage facilities.
h. An assessment of the potential for construction or contribution to regional detention basins, as opposed to the construction of on-site stormwater basins. The water resources management plan identifies potential regional stormwater basins for control of rate and nutrient loading. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether on site storage is required within the subdivision:
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (E) Stormwater Management
Page 320 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
i. If the stormwater management plan indicates construction or enlargement of a storage site or water quality storage in a wetland or other water body, the facility or its equivalent shall be constructed to meet the goals of the water resources management plan.
ii. If a proposed subdivision is indirectly tributary to a water body and the intervening regional detention storage is inadequate, in the opinion of city staff, to meet the water quality goals for downstream water bodies as described in the water resources management plan, additional on-site stormwater basin construction will be required to meet these goals.
iii. If a proposed subdivision will increase rates of runoff and where downstream stormwater storage or conveyance facilities are inadequate to protect downstream riparian owners from effects of these increases, then on site stormwater storage must be constructed to restrict stormwater rates to the predevelopment rates.
(2) Where on site water quality detention basins are required, the permittee(s) will have to comply with the design and sizing requirements determined by the City of Monticello’s Design Manual.
(3) Maintenance of Private Stormwater Management Facilities
a. No private Stormwater Management Facilities may be approved unless a maintenance plan is provided and is consistent with the City’s Design Manual. All such facilities shall be inspected annually, with reports submitted to the City, and maintained in proper condition consistent with the performance standards for which they were originally designed.
b. Owners of private Stormwater Management Facilities shall provide an agreement to the City describing responsibility for the long-term operation and maintenance of the facilities.
(4) Public Stormwater Management Facilities – Easements
The applicant shall establish, in a form acceptable to the city, temporary and perpetual easements, or dedicated outlots, for ponding, flowage, and drainage purposes over hydrologic features such as water bodies and stormwater basins. The easements or outlots shall include the right of reasonable access for inspection, monitoring, maintenance, and enforcement purposes.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (F) Construction Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 321
(F) Construction Requirements
(1) Construction Specifications
a. Site Dewatering and Basin Draining: Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, upflow chambers, hydrocyclones, swirl concentrators or other appropriate controls as appropriate. Water shall not be discharged in a manner that causes Erosion, scour, sedimentation or flooding of the site, receiving channels or wetlands.
b. Grading, erosion and sediment controls as specified in the City’s Design Manual.
c. Tracking: All roads, access drives and parking areas must utilize a temporary tracking pad and must be of sufficient width and length to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways and/or the stormwater conveyance system. Temporary tracking pads must be installed and maintained in all locations on the site where vehicles enter and exit.
d. Clearing and grading of natural resources, such as forests and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with all provisions of this ordinance. Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and drainage patterns shall be recommended as necessary and used to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department.
e. Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized.
f. Building products that have the potential to leach pollutants must be under cover (e.g., plastic sheeting or temporary roofs) to prevent the discharge of pollutants or protected by a similarly effective means designed to minimize contact with stormwater.
g. Pesticides, herbicides, insecticides, fertilizers, treatment chemicals, and landscape materials must be under cover (e.g., plastic sheeting or temporary roofs) to prevent the discharge of pollutants or protected by a similarly effective means designed to minimize contact with stormwater.
h. Fueling and Maintenance of Equipment or Vehicles; Spill Prevention and Response: The Permittee(s) shall take reasonable steps to prevent the discharge of spilled or leaked chemicals, including fuel, from any area where chemicals or fuel will be loaded or unloaded including the use of drip pans or absorbents unless infeasible. The Permittee(s) must conduct fueling in a contained area unless infeasible. The Permittee(s) must ensure adequate supplies are available at all times to clean up discharged materials and that an appropriate disposal method is available for recovered spill materials. The
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (F) Construction Requirements
Page 322 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Permittee(s) must report and clean up spills immediately as required by Minn. Stat. 115.061, using dry cleanup measures where possible.
i. Phasing may be required on all sites based on site specifics, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the Community Development Department.
j. Silt fence or equivalent sediment control measures to be used must conform to the City’s standards.
k. Silt fences or equivalent sediment control measures must be installed along the downslope and sideslope perimeters and up-gradient of any buffer zones from the approved grading and construction limits before any up-gradient land-disturbing activities begin. Perimeter controls should be located to maintain a buffer of existing vegetation during construction, as site conditions allow, along the edges of any curbs, wetlands, channels or other water resources that could receive sediment from the site. These controls shall remain in place until final stabilization has been established.
l. Sufficient silt fence or equivalent sediment control measures are required to hold all sheet flow runoff generated at an individual site to minimize sediment from entering surface waters, including curb and gutter systems and storm sewer systems. Additional measures such as check dams, diversion, temporary or permanent sedimentation basins and drainage ditches are required to handle channelized flow. Additional upgradient sediment control practices or redundant BMPs shall be installed if down gradient sediment controls are overloaded (based on frequent failure or excessive maintenance requirement) (CGP Part IV.C.1.a-b).
m. All storm drain inlets must be protected during construction until all sources with potential for discharging to the inlet have been stabilized (CGP Part IV.C.4).
n. Soil stabilization shall be initiated immediately to limit soil erosion but in no case completed later than fourteen (14) days after construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased, and seven (7) days if discharge points are located within 1-mile of an impaired or special waterbody.
o. Final stabilization on all sites shall become established within six (6) months. The City of Monticello may require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative option employed.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (F) Construction Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 323
p. Seeding shall be in accordance with the City's current seeding specification as detailed in the Design Manual. All seeded areas shall be fertilized, mulched, and disc anchored as necessary for seed retention.
q. Special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in Design Manual shall be in place on steep slopes or in drainage ways to ensure stabilization.
r. Soil stockpiles which shall be inactive for a period of seven (7) or more days shall include provisions for perimeter sediment controls. The placement of soil stockpiles adjacent to public rights-of-way or waterways is prohibited.
s. The entire site must be stabilized to a minimum of 70% coverage, using a heavy mulch layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion, at the close of the construction season.
t. Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site.
u. Techniques that divert upland runoff past disturbed slopes shall be employed.
v. For sites that have more than ten (10) acres of disturbed soil that drains to a common location, one or more temporary sediment basins shall be constructed. Use of temporary basins is encouraged when construction projects will impact steep slopes or when highly erodible soils are present. The basin shall provide treatment to the runoff before it leaves the construction site or enters surface waters. The temporary sediment basins must be designed and constructed as follows
i. Provide live storage for a calculated volume of runoff from a two (2)-year, 24-hour storm from each acre drained to the basin. All basins shall provide at least 1,800 cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained or more.
ii. For basins where the calculation from the previous requirement has not been performed, a temporary sediment basin providing 3,600 cubic feet of live storage from each acre drained to the basin shall be provided.
iii. The outlet structure must be designed to withdraw water from the surface in order to minimize the discharge of pollutants.
iv. The basin outlet shall be designed to prevent short-circuiting and the discharge of floating debris.
v. Ensure the basin can be completely drawn down to conduct maintenance activities.
vi. Include energy dissipation on the outlet of the basin and a stabilized emergency overflow to prevent failure of pond integrity.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (F) Construction Requirements
Page 324 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
vii. Be located outside of surface waters or any buffer zone, and be designed to avoid draining water from wetlands unless appropriate approval from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources is obtained.
viii. If installation of a temporary sediment basin is infeasible, equivalent sediment controls such as smaller sediment basins, and/or sediment traps, silt fences, vegetative buffer strips, or any appropriate combination of measures are required for all down-slope boundaries of the construction area and for side-slope boundaries where appropriate. Determination of infeasibility shall be documented in the erosion and sediment control plan.
(2) Waterway and Watercourse Protection Requirements
The Permittee(s) shall implement the following waterway and watercourse measures on the site:
a. A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by the local government unit and regulating agency if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during construction.
b. Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during, and within 24 hours after any in-channel work.
c. The normal wetted perimeter of any temporary or permanent drainage ditch or swale that drains water from the site, or diverts water around a site must be stabilized within 24 hours of connecting to a surface water and within 200 feet of the water’s edge of a Public Waters that drains to waters where the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources has promulgated “work in water restrictions” during specified fish spawning time frames (CGP Part IV.A.2).
d. Portions of the ditch that are under construction must be stabilized within 24 hours after the construction activity in that portion has ceased. The normal wetted perimeter is defined as the area that is in contact with water during annual flow events.
e. All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed according to the criteria outlined in the Plan Requirements and Design Guidelines.
f. Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels.
(3) Pollution Prevention Management Measures
The Permittee(s) shall implement the following pollution prevention management measures on the site:
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (G) Inspection
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 325
a. Solid Waste: Collected sediment, asphalt and concrete millings, floating debris, paper, plastic, fabric, construction and demolition debris and other wastes must be disposed of properly and must comply with MPCA disposal requirements.
b. Hazardous Materials: Oil, gasoline, paint and any hazardous substances must be properly stored, including secondary containment, to prevent spills, leaks or other discharge. Restricted access to storage areas must be provided to prevent vandalism. Storage and disposal of hazardous waste must be in compliance with MPCA regulations.
c. External washing of trucks and other construction vehicles must be limited to a defined area of the site. Runoff must be contained and waste properly disposed of. No engine degreasing is allowed on site.
d. Portable toilets must be positioned so that they are secure and will not be tipped or knocked over. Sanitary waste must be disposed of properly in accordance with Minn. R. ch. 7041.
e. Concrete and other washout waste must have effective containment for all liquid and solid wastes generated by these operations related to the construction activity. The liquid and solid washout wastes must not contact the ground outside a proper containment area. Waste must be disposed of properly and in compliance with MPCA rules, and a sign must be installed adjacent to each washout facility.
(4) Special and Impaired Waters
Additional BMPs together with enhanced runoff controls are required for discharge from a site to special and impaired water as defined by Appendix A of the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency General Stormwater Permit for Construction Activity.
(G) Inspection
(1) Notification
The Erosion Control Inspector shall make inspections as hereinafter required and either shall approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as approved.
(2) Procedure
The City shall inspect all permit sites once per week and within 24 hours after a rain event greater than 0.5 inches. The City shall also require inspections at other
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (G) Inspection
Page 326 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
development benchmarks as follows and as applicable. Inspections must be continued until final stabilization has occurred. To obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the City of Monticello at least one working day before the following:
a. Installation of sediment and erosion control measures;
b. Start of construction or site development;
c. Close of the construction season;
d. Completion of final stabilization/landscaping;
e. Removal of erosion control measures;
f. Final project compliance and acceptance close-out.
(3) Material Requirements
Seed tags shall be submitted to the Erosion Control Inspector for approval prior to commencing work. Proof of application rates shall be provided.
(4) Permittee Inspection
The permittee or his/her agent shall also make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved Grading, Drainage and Erosion Control Plan(s). The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the City of Monticello at the time interval specified in the approved permit. The records of each inspection and maintenance activity shall include the following information:
a. Date and time of inspection
b. Name(s) of persons conducting the inspection;
c. Findings of inspections, including recommendations for corrective actions;
d. Corrective actions taken, including the dates, times and the name of the party completing the corrective action;
e. Date and the amount of rainfall events that are greater than 0.5 inch in a 24-hour period; and
f. Documentation of any changes made to the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (H) Site Maintenance
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 327
(5) Authorization
A member of the Community Development Department shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under Section 4.9(E)(4).
(H) Site Maintenance
(1) Responsibilities
a. Within 24 hours, the permittee shall clean dirt and debris from streets that has resulted from construction work by the Developer, home builders, subcontractors, their agents or assigns. Prior to any construction in the plat, the Developer shall provide the Community Development Department with a schedule for erosion and sediment control inspection, street cleaning, and street sweeping.
b. All silt fences and biorolls must be repaired, replaced or supplemented when they become nonfunctional or the sediment reached one-half (1/2) of the height of the fence or bioroll. Repairs shall be made within 24 hours of discovery or as soon as field conditions allow access.
c. Temporary and permanent sedimentation basins must be drained and the sediment must be removed when the depth of the sediment collected in the basin reached one-half (1/2) the storage volume. Drainage and removal must be completed within 72 hours of discovery or as soon as final conditions allow access.
d. The applicant shall remove all deltas and sediment deposited in the surface waters, including drainage ways, catch basins, and other drainage systems and must restabilize the areas where sediment removal results in exposed soil. The removal and stabilization must take place within seven (7) days of discovery unless precluded by legal, regulatory or physical access constraints. In the event of an access constraint, the applicant shall use all reasonable efforts to obtain access. If the access is precluded, removal and stabilization must take place within seven (7) calendar days of obtaining access. The applicant is responsible for contacting all local, regional, state and federal authorities and obtaining any required permits prior to conducting any work.
e. No development, utility or street construction will be allowed and no Building Permits will be issued unless the development is in full compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (J) Certification
Page 328 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(I) Final Stabilization
The Permittee(s) must ensure Final Stabilization of the site after the completion of construction activities and prior to the termination of the permit. Final Stabilization is not complete until all requirement in accordance to the definition in Section (B) are complete that are intended to prevent discharge of pollutants associated with stormwater discharges from the project.
(J) Certification
(1) Approved Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan
a. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the Community Development Department, as applicable, shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work.
b. The Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) must:
i. Ensure the SWPPP is prepared by an individual trained in the design of construction SWPPPs in accordance with the MPCA NPDES construction general permit training requirements (CGP Part III.A.3);
ii. Ensure at least one individual is present or available to the project site within 72 hours that is trained in the job duties for construction site management to inspect, oversee implementation of, revise, and amend the SWPPP (CGP Part III.F.b);
iii. Ensure at least one individual is present or available to the project site within 72 hours that is trained in the job duties for construction installation to perform or supervise the installation, maintenance and repair of Best Management Practices (BMPs) (CGP Part III.F.c);
iv. Document the name(s) of the trained personnel to design the construction SWPPP, the construction site manager and the construction installer. Documentation shall include the date of training, name of instructor(s), name of entity providing the training, content covered and hours of training attended (CGP Part III.A.3).
(2) As-built Grading Plan and Development Plan
Within thirty (30) days after completion of site development as per the approved Grading, Drainage and Erosion Plan, and prior to the approval of individual building permits, the Developer shall provide the City with an As-Built Grading Plan and Development Plan as defined in the City of Monticello Plan Requirements and Design Guidelines.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.10 Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management & Erosion Control
Subsection (K) Enforcement
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 329
(3) Procedure
The City will withhold issuance of building permits until the approved certified As-Built Grading Plan and As-Built Development Plan are on file with the City, all securities as required by this ordinance are received, conservation easement posts are installed, and all erosion control measures are in place as determined by the Community Development Department.
(4) Removal of Erosion Control Measures
The above specified requirements will be authorized for removal upon the sodding of the rear yards, completion of punch list items involving ponds and slopes, final stabilization, completion of proper turf establishment and placement of the proper conservation easement posts and signs as specified. Inspection is required after the removal of erosion control measures to verify proper restoration. Please refer to City of Monticello’s Design Manual for specifications.
(5) Notice of Termination (NOT)
The applicant must ensure final stabilization of the project. The applicant must submit a NOT within 30 days of final stabilization being achieved, or another party assuming control on all areas of the project that have not achieved final stabilization.
(K) Enforcement
(1) Notice of Violation
If the Grading permittee fails to meet or maintain sediment and erosion control measures per the Approved Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management, and Erosion Control Plan, the City shall issue a Notice of Violation. The Notice of Violation shall detail the default and prescribe a remedy and required schedule for compliance.
(2) Lapse and Order for Work
a. If the Grading permittee fails to meet or maintain sediment and erosion control measures per the Approved Grading, Drainage, Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan, the City may, in its discretion, perform the work or contract to have the work completed and draw down on the security to pay any costs.
b. The City will endeavor to notify the Developer in advance of any proposed action, but failure of the City to do so will not affect the Developer's and City's rights or obligations hereunder.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.11 Building Materials
Subsection (B) General Requirements
Page 330 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Stop Work Order / Revocation of Grading Permit
In the event that any person holding a Grading Permit pursuant to this ordinance violates the terms of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, environment, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the City of Monticello may suspend or revoke the Grading Permit through the issuance of a stop work order or the revocation of the Grading or Building Permit.
(4) Violation and Penalties
a. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this ordinance. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed, continued, or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense.
b. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine as specified by the City ordinance per the fee schedule for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 4.11 Building Materials
(A) Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to enhance the quality and longevity of buildings in all zoning districts of the City, and to protect citizen investments in property value by ensuring complementary building style, construction, and appearance.
(B) General Requirements
(1) Consistency required
In all districts, all buildings shall be finished on all sides with consistent architectural quality, materials, and design.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.11 Building Materials
Subsection (C) Residential District Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 331
(2) New materials
In recognition of the ever-changing marketplace for new finishing materials, the Community Development Department may authorize the use of materials not listed herein if it is determined that such a material is substantially similar or superior to one or more of the approved building materials.
(C) Residential District Requirements
(1) All Residence Districts
No metal siding shall be permitted wider than 12 inches or without a one-half (1/2) inch or more overlap and relief.
(2) R-1 and R-2 Districts
A minimum of 15% of the front building façade of any structure in the R-1 or R-2 Districts, less the square footage area of the garage doors, shall be covered with brick or stone. Any attached or major detached accessory building that can be seen from the street shall meet this same standard. Structures with front facades covered by at least 70% stucco or real wood may reduce the brick or stone coverage to 5%. The Community Development Department may approve optional facade treatments when additional architectural detailing so warrants. Such detailing may include usable front porches, extraordinary roof pitch or other features.
(3) R-A and T-N Districts
A minimum of 20% of the front building façade of any structure in the R-A or T-N zoning district, less the square footage area of the garage doors, shall be covered with brick or stone. Any attached or major detached accessory building that can be seen from the street shall meet this same standard. Structures with front facades covered by at least 70% stucco or real wood may reduce the brick or stone coverage to 10%.
(4) R-3 District and other Districts with Multiple Family Housing
A R-3 District and other districts with multiple family housing shall be subject to building material standards as follows: all building walls facing a public street shall be covered with stone, brick, cultured masonry simulating brick or stone, or other enhanced materials acceptable to the City Council to an extent not less than 20% of the exposed wall silhouette area. In addition, multiple family structures of thirteen (13) or more units shall, when lap horizontal siding, be constructed of heavy gauge steel or cement-board, with no use of vinyl or aluminum permitted.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.11 Building Materials
Subsection (D) Business District Requirements
Page 332 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
Natural wood or species that is resistant to decay may be permitted where approved by the City Council.
(5) Roofing Materials
Roofing materials in residential districts, including for principal and accessory buildings, shall consist of shingles made of asphalt, fiberglass, durable rot-resistant wood (such as cedar), stone (such as slate) or architectural metal (including steel and copper). Heavy gauge steel or copper may be used for standing-seam roofing. Steel may be used only when designed to resemble traditional residential architectural roofing materials.
(D) Business District Requirements
In all Business Zoning Districts (see table 3-1), the following building materials standards shall apply.
(1) No galvanized or unfinished steel, galvalum, or unfinished aluminum buildings, except those specifically designed to have a corrosive designed finish such as“corten” steel, shall be permitted in the districts listed herein.
(2) Buildings in these zoning districts shall maintain a high standard of architectural and aesthetic compatibility with conforming surrounding properties to ensure that they will not adversely impact the property values of the abutting properties and shall have a positive impact on the public health, safety, and general welfare, insofar as practicable.
(3) Exterior building finishes in the districts subject to this Section shall consist of materials compatible in grade and quality to the following:
(a) Brick
(b) Natural Stone
(c) Decorative rock face or concrete block
(d) Cast-in-place concrete or pre-cast concrete panels
(e) Wood, provided that the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood, or cypress
(f) Glass
(g) Exterior Insulated Finish systems, where said system is manufactured to replicate the look of one of the approved building materials in this section
(h) Stucco
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.11 Building Materials
Subsection (E) Industrial Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 333
(4) Metal exterior finishes shall be permitted only where coordinated into the overall architectural design of the structure, such as in window and door frames, mansard roofs or parapets, and other similar features, and in no case shall constitute more than 15% of the total exterior finish of the building.
(5) Metal Roofing. Metal shall be an allowed roofing material in the “B”, Business Districts, provided such material is designed to resemble traditional commercial architecture and/or is designed to complement the architectural design of the building.
(6) Building Materials and Design for the CCD District: All buildings within the CCD shall meet the materials and design standards of the Comprehensive Plan as defined by the Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan Amendment, the requirements of the CCD District, as well as the standards in Section 4.11 of this ordinance.
(E) Industrial Requirements
(1) In the Industrial and Business Campus District (IBC), the following building materials and standards shall apply:
(a) Buildings shall maintain a high standard of architectural and aesthetic compatibility with conforming surrounding properties to ensure that they will not adversely impact the property values of the abutting properties and shall have a positive impact on the public health, safety, and general welfare, insofar as practicable.
(b) Exterior building finishes shall not consist of galvanized or unfinished steel, or unfinished aluminum.
(c) Exterior building finishes shall consist of materials compatible in grade and quality to the following:
(i) Brick;
(ii) Natural Stone;
(iii) Decorative rock face block or burnished block;
(iv) Wood, provided that the surfaces are finished for exterior use and wood of proven exterior durability is used, such as cedar, redwood, or cypress
(v) Glass;
(vi) Stucco or substantially similar finish product;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.11 Building Materials
Subsection (E) Industrial Requirements
Page 334 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(vii) Exterior Insulated Finish systems, where said system is manufactured to replicate the look of one of the approved building materials in this section.
(d) Metal exterior finishes shall be permitted only where coordinated into the overall architectural design of the structure, such as in window and door frames, mansard roofs or parapets, and other similar features, and in no case shall constitute more than 15% of the total exterior finish of the building.
(2) In the Light Industrial District (I-1), the following building material standards shall apply:
(a) Exterior building finishes shall not consist of galvanized or unfinished steel, or unfinished aluminum.
(b) Any exterior wall adjacent to a public street must have a higher level of aesthetics. This could be accomplished by architectural design features, increased use of stone and/or brick across twenty-five (25%) of the façade area, combination of glass and architectural metals, or a wall plane articulation across twenty-five (25%) of the façade area. Such articulation must extend at least 5 feet from the primary building line of the principal building structure.
(3) In the Heavy Industrial (I-2) districts, the following building material standards shall apply:
(a) Exterior building finishes shall not consist of galvanized or unfinished steel, or unfinished aluminum.
(b) Any exterior wall adjacent to a public street must have a higher level of aesthetics. This could be accomplished by architectural design features, increased use of stone and/or brick across fifteen (15%) of the façade area, combination of glass and architectural metals, or a wall plane articulation across fifteen (15%) of the façade area. Such articulation must
extend at least 5 feet from the primary building line of the principal building structure.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Subsection (B) WECS Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 335
(F) Institutional Requirements
All institutional uses shall adhere to the building materials requirements spelled out for commercial districts in Section 4.11(D) above. 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
(A) Purpose
The purpose of this section is to regulate the installation and operation of Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) within the City of Monticello not otherwise subject to siting and oversight by the State of Minnesota under the Minnesota Power Plant Siting Act (MN Statutes Chapter 216E)
(B) WECS Requirements
(1) General Standards
(a) Number per Lot
No more than one (1) WECS per lot shall be permitted.
(b) Height and Setbacks
In all Zoning Districts, the setback of any WECS or associated structures shall comply with the minimum yard requirements for principal structures within the district in which the WECS is to be located or the distance of 1.1 times the total height, whichever is greater.
(c) Tower configuration
(viii) All wind turbines which are part of a Commercial WECS shall be installed with a tubular, monopole type tower;
(ix) All Non-Commercial WECS shall be installed with monopole or lattice tower type;
(x) No guyed towers shall be permitted.
(d) Color and Finish
(i) All wind turbines and towers that are part of a Commercial WECS shall be white, grey or another non-obtrusive color.
(ii) Finishes shall be matte or non-reflective.
(iii) Blades may be black in order to facilitate deicing.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Subsection (B) WECS Requirements
Page 336 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(e) Lighting
(i) Lighting, including lighting intensity and frequency of strobe, shall adhere to but not exceed requirements established by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) permits and regulations.
(ii) Red strobe lights are preferred for night-time illumination to reduce impacts on migrating birds; red pulsating incandescent lights should be avoided.
(f) Other Signage
All signage on site shall comply with City Code section 6.7. The manufacturer’s or owner’s company name and/or logo may be placed upon the nacelle (compartment containing the electrical generator) of the WECS.
(g) Feeder Lines
All communications and feeder lines, equal to or less than 34.5 kV in capacity, installed as part of a WECS shall be buried where reasonably feasible. Feeder lines installed as part of a WECS shall not be considered an essential service.
(h) Shadow Flicker
Shadow flicker may not exceed 30 hours per year and shall not fall more than 10 feet from an existing residential property.
(i) Waste Disposal
Solid and Hazardous wastes, including but not limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or worn parts, as well as used oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
(j) Discontinuation and Decommissioning
(i) A WECS shall be considered a discontinued use after 45 days without energy production, unless a plan is developed and submitted to the City of Monticello outlining the steps and schedule for returning the WECS to service. All WECS and accessory facilities shall be completely removed within 90 days of the discontinuation of use.
(ii) Each Commercial WECS shall have a Decommissioning plan outlining the anticipated means and cost of removing WECS at the end of their serviceable life or upon becoming a discontinued use. The cost estimates shall be made by a competent party; such as a Professional Engineer, a contractor capable of decommissioning or a person with suitable expertise or experience with decommissioning. A security or bond in an amount
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Subsection (B) WECS Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 337
sufficient to cover complete decommissioning process shall be required as a condition of the conditional use permit.
(k) Orderly Development
Upon issuance of a conditional use permit, all Commercial WECS shall notify the appropriate state agencies as may be required by State Statute (e.g. Department of Commerce, Public Utilities Commission, Environmental Quality Board).
(2) Safety Design Standards
(a) Engineering Certification
For all WECS, the manufacture’s engineer or another qualified engineer shall certify that the turbine, foundation and tower design of the WECS is within accepted professional standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
(b) Clearance
Rotor blades or airfoils must maintain at least 12 feet of clearance between their lowest point and the ground.
(c) Warnings
For all Commercial WECS, a sign or signs shall be posted on the tower, transformer and substation warning of high voltage. Signs with emergency contact information shall also be posted on the turbine or at another suitable location as determined by the City.
(d) Unauthorized Climbing
The WECS shall be guarded against unauthorized climbing. The first twelve (12) feet of the tower shall be non-climbable by design or be enclosed by a six (6) foot high, non-climbable fence with a secured access.
(3) WECS Performance Standards
(a) Noise
All WECS shall comply with Minnesota Rules 7030 governing noise and Section 5.2(A)(2)(f) of this ordinance.
(b) Electrical codes and standards
All WECS and accessory equipment and facilities shall comply with the National Electric Safety Code and other applicable standards.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Subsection (B) WECS Requirements
Page 338 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Federal Aviation Administration
All WECS shall comply with FAA standards and permits.
(d) Minnesota State Building Code
All WECS shall comply with the International Building Code as adopted by the State of Minnesota Building Code.
(e) Interference
(i) The applicant shall minimize or mitigate interference with electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwaves, or television signals cause by any WECS.
(ii) The applicant shall notify all communication tower operators within two miles of the proposed WECS location upon application to the City for a WECS permit.
(iii) No WECS shall be constructed so as to interfere with any governmental unit microwave transmissions.
(f) Right of Entrance
Through acceptance of a conditional use permit for a WECS, the owner/operator grants permission to the City to enter the property to remove the WECS pursuant to the terms of the conditional use permit and to assure compliance with other conditions set forth in the permit.
(g) Avoidance and mitigation of damages to infrastructure and utilities
(i) Roads
1. Applicants shall identify all county, City or township roads to be used for the purpose of transporting commercial WECS, substation parts, concrete, and/or equipment for construction, operation or maintenance of the commercial WECS and obtain applicable weight and size permits from the impacted road authority(ies) prior to construction.
2. Applicants shall be responsible for restoring or paying damages as agreed to by the applicable road authority(ies) sufficient to restore the road(s) and bridges to preconstruction conditions.
(ii) Drainage system
The applicant shall be responsible for immediate repair of damage to public drainage systems stemming from construction, operation or maintenance of the WECS.
(iii) Public and Private Utilities
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Subsection (D) WECS Permit and Site Plan Application Requirements
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 339
The owner of the WECS is responsible for any damage to any below grade public or pivate utilities, due to the installation, operation, decommissioning, or action otherwise resulting for any WECS.
(C) Required Permits
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct in place, re-erect, replace or make structural repairs to any tower without making application for and receiving an approved conditional use or site plan approval and building permit, when applicable. In all cases, review by the Community Development Department for all required permits will be necessary. Site Plans and Conditional Use Permits shall be applied for and reviewed under the applicable procedures established in Chapter 2 of this ordinance.
(D) WECS Permit and Site Plan Application Requirements
(1) All applications for a WECS conditional use and/or site plan review shall provide the following to be considered complete:
(a) The names of project applicant;
(b) The name of the property owner;
(c) The legal description AND address of the project;
(d) A description of the project including:
(i) Number of proposed units;
(ii) Type of units proposed for construction;
(iii) Name plate generating capacity of each unit;
(iv) Rotor diameter(s);
(v) Tower height(s) determined by the distance from the surrounding grade to the rotor hub or top of the tower, whichever is higher; and
(vi) Total height of all wind turbines and means of interconnecting with the electrical grid.
(e) Property Survey, including the location of property lines, wind turbines, electrical wires, interconnection points with the electrical grid, and all related accessory structures. The survey shall include distances and be drawn to a measurable scale.
(f) Evidence that the applicant can obtain and maintain adequate liability insurance for the WECS and subject property;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.12 Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
Subsection (D) WECS Permit and Site Plan Application Requirements
Page 340 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(g) Engineer’s Minnesota State certification and project design specifications;
(h) Documentation of land ownership or legal control of the property.
(2) Additional Submittal Requirements for Commercial WECS only:
(a) The latitude and longitude of individual wind turbines;
(b) A USGS topographical map, or map with similar data, of the property and surrounding area, including any other WECS within 10 rotor diameters of the Proposed WECS;
(c) Location of wetlands, scenic, and natural areas including bluffs within 1,320 feet of the proposed WECS;
(d) FAA Permit Application;
(e) Location of all known Communications Towers within two (2) miles of the proposed WECS;
(f) Proof that the WECS will not interfere with emergency or other microwave transmission;
(g) A noise study, prepared by a qualified professional, that demonstrate that except for intermittent episodes, the WECS shall not emit noise in excess of the limits established in Minnesota Rules 7030 governing noise and Section 5.2(A)(2)(f) of this ordinance, as applicable.
(h) A shadow flicker model that demonstrates that shadow flicker shall not fall on, or in, any existing residential structure. Shadow flicker expected to fall on a roadway or a portion of a residentially zoned property may be acceptable if the flicker does not exceed 30 hours per year; and the flicker will fall more than 100 feet from an existing residence; or the traffic volumes are less than 500 vehicles (ADT). The shadow flicker model shall:
(i) Map and describe with a 1,000 foot radius of the proposed dispersed wind energy system the topography, existing residences and location of their windows, location of other structures, wind speeds and directions, existing vegetation and roadways. The model shall represent the most probable scenarios of wind constancy, sunshine constancy, and wind directions and speed;
(ii) Calculate the locations of shadow flicker caused by the proposed project and the expected durations of the flicker at these locations, calculate the total number of hours per year of flicker at all locations;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (A) Purpose
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 341
(iii) Identify problem areas where shadow flicker will interfere with existing or future residences and roadways and describe proposed mitigation measures, including, but not limited to, a change in siting of the WECS, a change in the operation of the WECS, or grading or landscaping mitigation measures.
(i) Decommissioning Plan; and
(j) Description of potential impacts on nearby WECS and wind resources on adjacent properties. 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
(A) Purpose
The City of Monticello acknowledges the legal right of telecommunication providers to locate within the City, and the need to accommodate the communication needs of residents and businesses. However, the City wishes to implement its legal authority to adopt zoning requirements which are nondiscriminatory, not intended to prohibit telecommunications service, and not based on health effects of radio frequency emissions. In order to establish uniform, nondiscriminatory regulations that protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the City, these regulations are intended to:
(1) Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design, landscaping, and siting standards.
(2) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure and weather related occurrences through structural standards and setback requirements;
(3) Maximize the use of existing and approved towers and buildings to accommodate new telecommunication antennas in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the community;
(4) Utilize business, industrial and public land, buildings and structures for telecommunications whenever possible and/or appropriate;
(5) Provide for the appropriate location and development of towers and antennas to accommodate the communication needs of the residents and businesses within the City of Monticello;
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (B) Private Amateur Radio
Page 342 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(B) Private Amateur Radio
Private Amateur Radio, for the purposes of this Ordinance, shall mean equipment, including antennae, antennae support structures, and other related material, necessary to conduct Ham and Short Wave Radio reception and transmissions, only for use by those persons properly licensed by the Federal Communications Commission for such reception and transmissions, and who are in full compliance with all licensing requirements.
(1) One (1) antenna and associated antenna support structure shall be a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts, provided that:
(a) The owner/operator has current versions of all required licenses to operate said equipment.
(b) All equipment shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications, and pursuant to valid building and electrical permits, and any other applicable permit requirements.
(c) Subject to CUP provisions in Section 4.13(B)(1)(d) of this chapter, no antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed the allowable height limits of the applicable zoning district in which it is located, plus twenty (20) feet.
(d) By Conditional Use Permit, the height provisions of Section 4.13(B)(1)(c) of this chapter may be exceeded, up to a maximum height of seventy (70) feet, upon a showing that the additional height is necessary for proper function of the equipment due to interference from terrain, vegetation, or adjoining buildings. Any such additional height shall require a setback from all property lines of no less than one-half (1/2) foot for every one (1) foot above the limits established in Section 4.13(B)(1)(c).
(e) Except as allowed by Section 4.13(B)(1)(f) of this chapter, no freestanding antenna or antenna support structure shall be located within any required yard other than the rear yard of any parcel.
(f) An antenna and its support structure may be located within the buildable area of a lot if mounted directly to the principal structure.
(2) Any private amateur radio antenna or antenna support structure which is no longer in use, or for which the owner of property no longer has valid licenses, or which has fallen into disrepair to the extent that it can no longer serve its intended
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (D) Commercial Transmission/Reception Antennae and Antenna Support Structures
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 343
purpose, or which constitutes a hazard or nuisance, shall be considered a violation of the zoning ordinance, and shall be removed.
(C) Private Receiving Antennae and Antenna Support Structures
Private Receiving Antennae and Antenna Support Structures, for the purposes of this ordinance, shall mean television and other electronic reception antennae for private use.
(1) Private antennae less than three (3) meters in width and related support structures shall be a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts, provided that:
(a) No antenna or antenna support structure shall exceed the allowable height limits of the applicable zoning district in which it is located, plus twenty (20) feet.
(b) No freestanding antenna or antenna support structure shall be located within any required yard other than the rear yard of any parcel.
(c) An antenna and its support structure may be located within the buildable area of a lot if mounted directly to the principal structure.
(2) Any private antenna or antenna support structure which is no longer in use, or which has fallen into disrepair to the extent that it can no longer serve its intended purpose, or which constitutes a hazard or nuisance, shall be considered a violation of the zoning ordinance, and shall be removed.
(D) Commercial Transmission/Reception Antennae and Antenna Support Structures
Commercial Transmission and Reception Antennae and Antenna Support Structures, for the purposes of this ordinance, shall mean commercial and industrial communications equipment accessory to business operations of one meter in width or greater, but not personal wireless telecommunications service equipment.
(1) Commercial transmission/reception antennae and antenna support structures shall be allowed as accessory uses only by Conditional Use Permit following the provisions of Section 2.4(D) of the zoning ordinance, and shall comply with the following additional requirements:
(a) Antennae and antenna support structures for commercial transmission/reception shall not occupy the front yard of any parcel.
(b) Antennae and antenna support structures allowed under this section shall be fully screened from adjoining residentially zoned parcels.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (E) Wireless Telecommunications Service Antennae and Antenna Support Structures
Page 344 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Antennae and antenna support structures allowed under this section shall be fully screened from adjoining public right of way.
(d) Antennae and antenna support structures allowed under this section shall be fully screened from adjoining commercially-zoned property, that is, any parcel with a “B” zoning designation.
(e) Antennae and antenna support structures allowed under this section shall meet all other zoning conditions related to the location of mechanical equipment, whether ground or roof-top mounted.
(E) Wireless Telecommunications Service Antennae and Antenna Support Structures
Wireless telecommunications service antennae and antenna support structures, for the purposes of this ordinance, shall mean any equipment necessary to provide or support all types of wireless electronic communications, including, but not necessarily limited to, wireless “cellular” telephone, radio, and internet transmission and reception communications between mobile communications providers and users, including public safety communications. “Small cell” wireless antennae and antenna support structures, defined exclusively as those facilities that are fifty (50) feet or less in height and located within the public right of way subject to the City’s Right of Way ordinance, are generally excepted from these provisions. Such facilities are subject to the provisions of Section 4.13(E)(3).
(1) Wireless Telecommunications Service Antennae
(a) Co-location of antennae for personal wireless services shall be a conditional use in all zoning districts on any existing conforming antenna support structure.
(2) Wireless Telecommunications Service Antennae Support Structures
(a) Except as otherwise allowed by Section 4.13(E)(2)(b) below, support structures for personal wireless service antennae shall be allowed as an accessory use only by conditional use permit, subject to the following provisions:
(i) Antenna support structures for personal wireless services shall be no greater in height than the maximum height requirements of the zoning district in which the antenna support structure is located, unless otherwise allowed within this section.
(ii) Antenna support structures for personal wireless services “A-O” zoning district, all residential zoning districts and the “B-1” zoning district shall
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (E) Wireless Telecommunications Service Antennae and Antenna Support Structures
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 345
be required to be attached to, or mounted upon, the principal building, and shall match said building in color and other design features so as to minimize visibility.
(iii) Antenna support structures for personal wireless services in the “B-2”, “B-3” and “B-4” zoning district shall be limited in height to seventy five (75) feet as measured from the natural grade at the location of the structure.
(iv) Antenna support structures for personal wireless services in the “I”, Industrial districts shall be limited in height to one hundred fifty (150) feet as measured from the natural grade at the location of the structure.
(v) Any antenna support structure shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of other antenna arrays.
(vi) Any freestanding antenna support structure shall be of monopole design.
(vii) All freestanding antenna support structures for personal wireless services shall be painted a galvanized light-grey color.
(b) Support structures for personal wireless service antenna may be allowed as an accessory use by Conditional Use Permit on residentially zoned lots occupied by public uses, subject to the following provisions:
(i) The site upon which the antenna support structure is located is occupied by a principal structure.
(ii) In no case shall an antenna support structure exceed one hundred ninety nine (199) feet as measured from natural grade at the location of the structure.
(iii) Any antenna support structure shall be designed to accommodate the colocation of other antenna arrays.
(iv) Any freestanding antenna support structure shall be of monopole design.
(v) All freestanding antenna support structures for personal wireless services shall be finished with a galvanized light-grey color.
(vi) The provisions of Section 4.13(F) of this Chapter are satisfied.
(3) “Small Cell” Wireless Facilities
(a) “Small cell” wireless service antennae and antenna support structures shall require a Conditional Use Permit when located in the right of way adjacent to any residentially zoned parcel, PUD (Planned Unit Development) zoned project which includes residential dwellings, or other residential use, or any historic district. The CUP shall be reviewed pursuant to the provisions of Section 2.4(A) of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance, and any other relevant
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (F) General provisions for wireless telecommunications service antennae and antenna support structures.
Page 346 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
restrictions. No Conditional Use Permit shall be granted for any such facility that creates a substantial burden on the adjoining residential area or the public right of way in which it is located.
(b) No “small cell” support structure shall exceed fifty (50) feet in height above the finished grade of the ground on which the structure is located.
(c) Notwithstanding subp. (b), the City may approve “small cell” facilities taller than fifty (50) feet by Conditional Use Permit in rights of way adjacent to non-residential property when the City finds that such approval will have specific and substantial public benefits, including, but not limited to, reduction in the overall number or visual impacts of such facilities in the public right of way.
(d) Small cell facilities proposed to be co-located on existing support structures on private property, such as parking lot light poles, may be allowed as permitted uses provided no portion of the existing support structure or proposed antenna will exceed the allowable height for such structures in the subject zoning district and that the property is not a residentially zoned parcel, PUD (Planned Unit Development) zoned project which includes residential dwellings, or other residential use, or any historic district.
(e) Any small cell wireless service antennae or new antenna support structures located outside of the public right of way, such as on private property, regardless of ownership, and which would exceed the allowable height for the support structure in the subject zoning district shall require a Conditional Use Permit and be subject to all other general requirements of Section 4.13, including this section, as well as any other applicable zoning or city code restrictions.
(F) General provisions for wireless telecommunications service antennae and antenna support structures.
(1) No new freestanding antenna support structure shall be located within one (1) mile of any existing freestanding antenna support structure.
(2) No new freestanding antenna support structure shall be approved when there exists a co-location opportunity within one-half (1/2) mile of the proposed structure location.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (F) General provisions for wireless telecommunications service antennae and antenna support structures.
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 347
(3) Prerequisite
A proposal for a new telecommunications tower shall not be approved unless it can be documented by the applicant to the satisfaction of the City that the telecommunications equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or structure within a one (1) mile radius of the proposed tower—transcending all municipal boundaries—due to one or more of the following reasons:
(a) The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of an existing or approved tower or building, as documented by a licensed professional engineer, and any existing or approved tower or structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
(b) The planned equipment would cause interference with other existing or planned equipment at the tower or structure.
(c) Existing or approved towers and structures within a one (1) mile radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary for reasonable function.
(d) The applicant has demonstrated that location of the antennas, as proposed is necessary to provide adequate coverage and capacity to areas which cannot be adequately served by locating the antennas in a less restrictive district or an existing structure. Information provided as part of the capacity analysis, that is a trade secret, pursuant to Minnesota Statute 13.37, shall be classified as non-public data.
(e) Other unforeseen reasons that make it unfeasible to locate the telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or building.
(4) Siting Provisions
(a) Antennae shall be located on existing buildings and structures whenever possible.
(b) No part of any antenna or antenna support structure, nor any appurtenances to such structure or antenna, shall extend over any public right of way or property line, nor be located within an public utility or drainage easement.
(c) Antenna support structures shall be designed to replicate materials and colors of similar structures in the area, such as lighting or utility poles.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (F) General provisions for wireless telecommunications service antennae and antenna support structures.
Page 348 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(5) Setbacks
(a) In all zoning districts, the antenna support structure and any appurtenant structures shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of the district in which the proposed structure is to be located, or the distance determined as the fall zone of the structure by a licensed professional engineer, whichever is greater.
(b) In all Zoning Districts, no freestanding antenna support structure shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of an existing residence, or the proposed home location on an approved Preliminary Plat.
(c) All antenna support structures shall be located in the rear yard of parcel whenever practical.
(6) Design and Construction
(a) No advertising or identification of any kind intended to be visible from the ground or other structures is permitted, except applicable warning and equipment information signage required by the manufacturer or by federal, state, or local authorities.
(b) All antennae, antenna support structures, and accessory structures shall be in compliance with all City and State Building Codes, as applicable, and shall obtain all necessary permits.
(c) Structure design, mounting and installation of the antenna and antenna support structure shall be in compliance with the manufacture’s specifications, and installation plans shall be approved and certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(d) Antenna support structures and antennae shall be grounded for protection against a direct strike by lightning and shall comply, as to electrical wiring and connections, with all applicable provisions of all State codes.
(e) All transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within a structure or cabinet whenever possible, and shall adhere to the following:
(i) If a new tower accessory building is necessary to house such equipment, it shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment, and shall be screened from view by landscaping as deemed necessary by the City Council.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (G) Application process and submittal requirements for wireless telecommunications service antenna support structures
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 349
(ii) Accessory equipment associated with a rooftop antenna, satellite dishes, or wall antenna shall be located within the building, cabinet, or within a roof or ground enclosure which is constructed of materials and color scheme compatible with the principal building.
(iii) All transmitting, receiving and switching equipment shall be housed within a structure or cabinet. Such structure shall be architecturally designed to blend in with the surrounding environment, and shall be screened from view by landscaping consistent with the screening and landscaping requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance.
(iv) Antenna support structures located within 1000’ feet of the FiberNet Monticello Co-Location Building shall be required to locate all transmitting, receiving and switching equipment within the FiberNet Monticello Co-Location.
(7) Lights and Attachments
(a) No antenna or antenna support structure shall have lights, reflectors or other illuminating devices of any kind, unless required by a Federal or State regulatory authority.
(b) Lights attached to antenna support structures may be approved by the City Council as a part of a Conditional Use Permit when such lights are used to illuminate a parking lot or other use on the ground, provided such lights meet the exterior lighting requirements of the Monticello Zoning Ordinance.
(8) Site Landscaping
(a) The site on which an antenna or antenna support structure is located shall be landscaped to control dust, weeds, drainage, and to improve aesthetics of the property.
(9) Non-Interference
(a) No antenna installation shall transmit signals in a way that causes interference with any other electronic device.
(G) Application process and submittal requirements for wireless telecommunications service antenna support structures
(1) Submittal Requirements. All applications for a Conditional Use Permit for any antenna or antenna support structure shall be accompanied by the following materials:
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (G) Application process and submittal requirements for wireless telecommunications service antenna support structures
Page 350 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) Documentation, in the form of a signed lease or other adequate proof of property interest, demonstrating that the applicant has authority to seek the requested permit from the owner or owners of the parcel in question.
(b) A statement describing the proposed project, together with written justification supporting the proposed installation.
(c) Proof of insurance against injury or property damage caused by structural failure of any element of the installation.
(d) The legal description of the property on which the improvements are to be located.
(e) A certified survey of the property showing all existing conditions, along with the proposed improvements.
(f) A coverage study prepared by a Radio Frequency Engineer showing alternative antenna support structure locations, co-location options, and whether such alternatives can accommodate the proposed antenna with reasonable coverage, including any known approved but unconstructed locations. Such plan shall include all existing towers, buildings, and other possible support structures.
(g) A landscaping and screening plan.
(h) A grading and drainage plan.
(i) Architectural drawings of all appurtenant structures planned for the site.
(j) A decommissioning plan outlining the means, process, and anticipated costs of removing all improvements at the end of their service life, or upon discontinued use.
(k) A security acceptable to the City adequate to ensure safe removal of all improvements upon decommissioning.
(l) A development agreement specifying the terms of the Conditional Use Permit, including improvements, decommissioning, financial security, and other elements.
(m) Other information specified by the Community Development Director and/or City Council necessary to support the application and permit adequate municipal review of the request.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (I) Removal of Abandoned or Unused Antennae, Antenna Support Structures, or Other Appurtenant Elements.
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 351
(H) Outside Review
At the request of the Community Development Director, the City may seek and obtain the advice of outside experts to review technical materials submitted by the applicants, including the advice of structural experts, radio frequency engineers, or for any other related area of analysis. The applicant shall submit an escrow to cover the costs of such expertise.
(I) Removal of Abandoned or Unused Antennae, Antenna Support Structures, or Other Appurtenant Elements.
Any tower and/or antenna which is not used for six (6) successive months shall be deemed abandoned and may be required to be removed from the property. All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is approved by the City Council. After the facilities are removed, the site shall be restored to its original or an improved state. If a tower is not removed within twelve (12) months after the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the City and the costs of removal assessed against the property. The owner of the tower and the owner of the property are both responsible for removal of the tower as required by this Section.
CHAPTER 4: FINISHING STANDARDS
Section 4.13 Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
Subsection (I) Removal of Abandoned or Unused Antennae, Antenna Support Structures, or Other Appurtenant Elements.
Page 352 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(this page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.1 Use Table
Subsection (A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 353
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS 5.1 Use Table
(A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
(1) Organization of Table 5-1
Table 5-1 organizes all principal uses by Use Classifications and Use Types.
(a) Use Classifications
The Use Classifications are: Agricultural Uses; Residential Uses; Civic and Institutional Uses; Office Use; Commercial Uses; and Industrial Uses. The Use Classifications provide a systematic basis for assigning present and future land uses into broad general classifications (e.g., residential and commercial uses). The Use Classifications then organize land uses and activities into specific “Use Types” based on common functional, product, or physical characteristics, such as the type and amount of activity, the type of customers or residents, how goods or services are sold or delivered and site conditions.
(b) Use Types
The specific Use Types identify the specific uses that are considered to fall within characteristics identified in the use Classifications. For example; detached dwellings, parks and recreational areas, and schools are “Use Types” in the Single Family Residence District.
(2) Symbols used in Table 5-1
(a) Permitted Uses = P
A “P” indicates that a use is permitted by right, subject to compliance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. Uses may be subject to special regulations as referenced in the “Additional Requirements” column.
(b) Conditionally Permitted Uses = C
A “C” indicates that a use is permitted provided the City can establish conditions necessary to ensure the use is compatible to the proposed location and surrounding properties. Inability of the City to establish conditions to adequately control anticipated impacts is justification for denial of a conditionally permitted use. Conditional Uses may also be subject to special regulations as referenced in the “Additional Requirements” column.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.1 Use Table
Subsection (A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
Page 354 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Interim Permitted Uses = I
An “I” indicates that a use may be permitted for a brief period of time provided certain conditions are met, and a specific event or date can be established for discontinuance of the use. Inability of the City to establish conditions to adequately control anticipated impacts is justification for denial of an interim permitted use. Interim Permitted Uses may also be subject to special regulations as referenced in the “Additional Requirements” column.
(d) Prohibited Uses = Shaded Cells
A shaded cell indicates that the listed use is prohibited in the respective base zoning district.
(e) Uses Not Provided for Within Zoning Districts
In any zoning district, whenever a proposed use is neither specifically allowed nor denied, the Community Development Department shall determine if the proposed use is comparable in potential activities and impacts to a use listed within the zoning district and is acceptable related to land use compatibility, traffic, and/or nuisance issues and established conditions and standards relating to development of the use. Where such a determination is made, the requirements established for the listed use shall apply as minimum standards for the proposed use. Additional requirements may be applied to address differences between the listed use and the proposed use. If no comparable use determination can be made, the use will be considered prohibited in which case an amendment to the ordinance text would be required to clarify if, where and how a proposed use could be established.
TABLE 5-1: USES BY DISTRICT Use Types “P” = Permitted “C” = Conditionally Permitted “I” = Interim Permitted Base Zoning Districts Additional Requirements A O R A R 1 R 2 T N R 3 R 4 M H B 1 B 2 B 3 B 4 C C D I B C I 1 I 2 Agricultural Uses
Agriculture
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P *SEE TABLE 5-1A P
P
P
5.2(B)(1)
Agricultural Sales
P
5.2(B)(2)
Community Gardens
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.2(B)(3)
Stables
C
5.2(B)(4)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.1 Use Table
Subsection (A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 355
TABLE 5-1: USES BY DISTRICT (cont.) Use Types “P” = Permitted “C” = Conditionally Permitted “I” = Interim Permitted Base Zoning Districts Additional Requirements A O R A R 1 R 2 T N R 3 R 4 M H B 1 B 2 B 3 B 4 C C D I B C I 1 I 2 Residential Uses 5.2(C)(1)
Attached Dwelling Types
5.2(C)(2)(a)
- Duplex
P
C *SEE TABLE 5-1A
5.2(C)(2)(b)
- Townhouse
C
P
5.2(C)(2)(c)
- Multiple-Family
C
P
C
C
5.2(C)(2)(d)
Detached Dwelling
P
P
P
P
P
P
None
Group Residential Facility, Single Family
P
P
P
P
P
5.2(C)(3)
Group Residential Facility, Multi-Family
C
C
C
5.2(C)(3)
Mobile & Manufactured Home / Home Park
C
C
C
P
C
5.2(C)(4) Civic & Institutional Uses
Active Park Facilities (public)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P *SEE TABLE 5-1A
P
P
P
None
Active Park Facilities (private)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.2(D)(1)
Assisted Living Facilities
C
P
C
C
P
5.2(D)(2)
Cemeteries
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
5.2(D)(3)
Clinics/Medical Services
C
P
P
C
None
Essential Services
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
None
Hospitals
C
P
P
C
5.2(D)(4)
Nursing/Convalescent Home
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
5.2(D)(5)
Passenger Terminal
C
C
C
C
None
Passive Parks and Open Space
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
None
Place of Public Assembly
C
C
C
C
C
P
C
5.2(D)(6)
Public Buildings or Uses
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
C
C
P
P
C
P
P
5.2(D)(7)
Schools, K-12
C
C
C
C
C
C
I
I
5.2(D)(8)
Schools, Higher Education
C
None
Utilities (major)
C
C
C
5.2(D)(9)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.1 Use Table
Subsection (A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
Page 356 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 5-1: USES BY DISTRICT (cont.) Use Types “P” = Permitted “C” = Conditionally Permitted “I” = Interim Permitted Base Zoning Districts Additional Requirements A O R A R 1 R 2 T N R 3 R 4 M H B 1 B 2 B 3 B 4 C C D I B C I 1 I 2 Commercial Uses
Adult Uses *SEE TABLE 5-1A
P
P
3.7(K)
Auction House
C
5.2(E)(2)
Auto Repair – Minor
C
C
P
P
5.2(E)(3)
Automotive Wash Facilities
P
C
5.2(E)(4)
Bed & Breakfasts
C
C
C
C
C
5.2(E)(5)
Brew Pub
P
P
5.2(E)(6)
Business Support Services
P
P
P
P
P
None
Commercial Lodging
C
P
P
5.2(E)(7)
Commercial Self-Storage
C
P
5.2(F)(3)
Communications/Broadcasting
P
P
P
P
5.2(E)(8)
Convenience Retail
C
P
P
P
5.2(E)(9)
Country Club
C
5.2(E)(10)
Day Care Centers
C
C
P
P
C
5.2(E)(11)
Entertainment/Recreation, Indoor Commercial
P
P
C
C
C
5.2(E)(12)
Entertainment/Recreation, Outdoor Commercial
C
C
C
C
5.2(E)(13)
Event Center
C
C
C
5.2(E)(14)
Financial Institution
P
C
P
5.2(E)(15)
Funeral Services
P
P
5.2(E)(16)
Kennels (commercial)
C
5.2(E)(17)
Landscaping / Nursery Business
P
5.2(E)(18)
Offices
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.2(E)(20)
Personal Services
C
P
P
P
5.2(E)(22)
Production Brewery or Micro-Distillery without Taproom
P
P
5.2(F)(12)
Production Brewery or Micro-Distillery with Taproom or Cocktail Room
C
C
C
C
C
5.2(E)(23)
5.2(F)(13)
Recreational Vehicle Camp Site
C
5.2(E)(24)
Repair Establishment
C
P
P
P
P
5.2(E)(25)
Restaurants
C
P
P
C
5.2(E)(26)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.1 Use Table
Subsection (A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 357
TABLE 5-1: USES BY DISTRICT (cont.) Use Types “P” = Permitted “C” = Conditionally Permitted “I” = Interim Permitted Base Zoning Districts Additional Requirements A O R A R 1 R 2 T N R 3 R 4 M H B 1 B 2 B 3 B 4 C C D I B C I 1 I 2
Retail Commercial Uses (other) Buildings Less than 10,000 SF
P
P
P
5.2(E)(27)
Retail Commercial Uses (other) Buildings Over 10,000 SF
C
P
P
5.2(E)(27)
Specialty Eating Establishments
C
P
P
P
5.2(E)(28)
Vehicle Fuel Sales
C
C
C
5.2(E)(29)
Vehicle Sales and Rental
C
5.2(E)(30)
Veterinary Facilities (Rural)
C
5.2(E)(31)
Veterinary Facilities (Neighborhood)
C
C
C
5.2(E)(31)
Wholesale Sales
P
P
P
None Industrial Uses
Auto Repair – Major
C *SEE TABLE 5-1A
P
P
5.2(F)(1)
Bulk Fuel Sales and Storage
P
P
5.2(F)(2)
Contractor's Yard, Temporary
I
I
I
5.2(F)(4)
Extraction of Materials
I
I
I
5.2(F)(5)
General Warehousing
C
P
P
5.2(F)(6)
Heavy Manufacturing
C
5.2(F)(7)
Industrial Services
C
P
None
Industrial Self-Storage Facilities
C
C
5.2(F)(8)
Land Reclamation
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
5.2(F)(9)
Light Manufacturing
P
P
P
5.2(F)(10)
Machinery/Truck Repair & Sales
P
P
5.2(F)(11)
Recycling and Salvage Center
C
C
5.2(F)(14)
Truck or Freight Terminal
C
C
5.2(F)(15)
Waste Disposal & Incineration
C
5.2(F)(16)
Wrecker Services
C
P
5.2(F)(17)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.1 Use Table
Subsection (A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
Page 358 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 5-1A: CENTRAL COMMUNITY DISTRICT (CCD) USES SUB-AREA Riverfront (A) Broadway (B) Walnut & Cedar (C) Pine (D) General CCD Notes Use Types Entertain- ment and open space, supported by retail Retail, sup- ported by entertainment; Housing 2nd Retail, sup-ported by housing and services Office, large space retail users, and retail service Housing, supported by limited retail and services Additional Use requirements applicable per 5.2 of this ordinance.
Uses: Residential Uses
Single Family
P* CUP
*Upper floors only
Multi 3 du or under
P*
CUP* P
* Upper floors only
Townhouse CUP CUP* CUP P *Townhouses on Broadway east of Pine only
Multi 4-12du CUP CUP CUP CUP
Multi 13+ du CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
Ground-Floor CUP* P P *Allowed on ground floor for townhouses on Broadway east of Pine
Commercial
Brew Pub <10,000 sq. ft. P P P P
Brew Pub >10,000 sq. ft. CUP P CUP P
Commercial Day Care CUP CUP P
Commercial Lodging P CUP CUP P
Entertainment/Recreation, Indoor Commercial (including theaters) CUP* CUP* CUP* CUP <10,000 sq. ft. only
Entertainment/Recreation Outdoor Commercial
Event Centers
CUP
CUP
CUP
CUP
CUP
Subject to 5.2 (F)(14)
Funeral Services CUP
Personal Services P P P P CUP
Places of Public Assembly CUP CUP CUP CUP CUP
Production Brewery/Taproom P P P P
Micro Distillery/Cocktail Room P P P P
Professional Office -Services and Retail CUP* P P P P
Upper floors preferred
Commercial Office CUP* - not allowed on ground floor P/CUP* on ground floor P/CUP* on ground floor P
Upper floors preferred
Financial P P P P
Drive thru by CUP
Restaurants, Bars <10,000 sq. ft. P P P P CUP
Restaurants, Bars >10,000 sq. ft. CUP P CUP P CUP
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.1 Use Table
Subsection (A) Explanation of Use Table Structure
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 359
Retail Sales <10,000 sq. ft. P P P P P
Retail Sales >10,000 sq. ft. CUP CUP CUP P CUP
Retail with Service CUP P P P P
Specialty Eating Establishments <10,000 sq. ft. P P P P CUP
Vehicle Fuel Sales CUP
Veterinary Facilities <10,000 sq ft CUP CUP CUP CUP
No outdoor uses
Industrial Uses
Industrial PUD PUD Only PUD Only
Civic & Institutional Uses
Clinics/Medical Services CUP CUP P P
Public Buildings or Uses (incl. public parks) P CUP P CUP CUP
Schools Pre-K-12 CUP CUP CUP
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (A) General Regulations Applicable to All Uses
Page 360 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
5.2 Use-Specific Standards
(A) General Regulations Applicable to All Uses
(1) Combination Uses
In commercial and industrial base zoning districts, combination uses may be allowed within the principal building with each use subject to all regulations in this ordinance.
(2) Nuisances Prohibited
In addition to any nuisance provisions within City code, the following shall apply:
(a) Refuse and Garbage
(i) In all districts, all refuse, rubbish, or garbage shall be kept in an enclosed building or properly contained in a closed container designed for such a purpose.
(ii) The owner of vacant land shall be responsible for keeping the land free of refuse, rubbish, or garbage.
(b) Glare
(i) Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking area, sign, or other structure, shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets.
(ii) Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property.
(iii) The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to cast light on adjacent property.
(iv) Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way.
(v) Any light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one (1) foot candle (meter reading) as measured from the center line of said street.
(vi) Any light or combination of lights which cast light on residential property shall not exceed 0.4 foot candles (meter reading) as measured from said property.
(c) Smoke Table 3-1: Base Zoning Districts City Code Chapter 1, Section 7: Public Nuisances Section 4.4(E): Design Standards for Exterior Lighting
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (B) Regulations for Agricultural Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 361
The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 1-15.
(d) Dust and Other Particulated Matter
The emission of dust, fly ash, or other particulated matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota Pollution Control Standards, Minnesota Regulation APC 1-15.
(e) Noise
Noises emanating from any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the State of Minnesota pollution control standards and rules. In no case shall noise emanations constitute a nuisance as defined and regulated by this code.
(3) Building and Structure Location
All buildings and structures shall be so placed so that they will not obstruct future streets which may be constructed by the City in conformity with existing streets and according to the system and standards employed by the City.
(B) Regulations for Agricultural Uses
(1) Agriculture
(a) Agricultural related buildings and structures including farm dwellings shall be subject to Minnesota Pollution Control Standards.
(b) Agricultural uses shall not include commercial feed lots or other commercial operations.
(c) The keeping and/or raising of livestock raising shall be prohibited in all zoning districts except for the A-O district.
(2) Agricultural Sales
All agricultural sales businesses shall adhere to the following:
(a) Activities shall be limited to those listed within the definition for an Agricultural Sales Business.
(b) The Agricultural Sales Business shall be located on land owned or leased by the producer or the operator of the business, and not within or on any public right-of-ways or easements.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (B) Regulations for Agricultural Uses
Page 362 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) The operator must be able to demonstrate at all times to the City that there is sufficient access, parking and maneuvering space, that the location and adequacy of approaches are sufficient, that there is suitable and safe access for pedestrians, and that customer parking is away from the travel way and in close proximity to the Agricultural Sales Business.
(d) All waste materials shall be enclosed in containers provided on the site, and shall not generate any nuisance impacts on adjacent properties.
(e) All sidewalks, roadways, and parking areas shall be treated as necessary to eliminate dust nuisance impacts on adjacent properties.
(3) Community Garden
(a) Prior to a parcel being utilized as a community garden, the landowner shall be required to secure an annual community garden permit from the Community Development Department.
(b) Each community garden must have two or more gardeners as a prerequisite for obtaining a permit to ensure code and permit guidelines are followed.
(c) Unused plots and common areas shall be maintained and kept free of weeds, dead plant materials, and other debris/garbage.
(d) Containers, including water bins, and planters, shall not hold standing water unless they are completely covered.
(e) Composting of vegetative matter is allowed (leaves, plants, wood chips, etc.); composting of meat, human or pet waste is prohibited.
(f) Overhead lighting is prohibited.
(g) Signage is limited to a single, non-illuminated, single sided sign of four square feet.
(4) Stables
(a) Animal building, holding, grazing, and exercise areas are located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any residential, commercial, or industrial use district.
(b) The land area of the property containing such use of activity meets the minimum established for the district.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (C) Regulations for Residential Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 363
(c) All applicable requirements of the State Pollution Control Agency are complied with.
(C) Regulations for Residential Uses
(1) General Regulations for All Dwellings
All dwellings located in any residence district shall conform to the following minimum requirements in addition to the specific requirements applicable to the individual residence districts:
(a) Except for in the M-H zoning district, all dwellings shall be placed on a permanent foundation which complies with the Minnesota State Building Code, and which are solid for the complete circumference of the dwelling.
(b) All dwellings shall have a minimum width and depth of 20 feet, exclusive of porches, entryways, or attached storage sheds.
(c) All dwellings shall be served by public sanitary sewer and water.
(d) Direct vehicular access to residential units from arterial or collector roadways shall be prohibited unless no other reasonable alternative exists as determined by the Community Development Department.
(e) In addition to standards applicable to all houses in residential districts, manufactured homes, as defined by Minnesota Statutes, shall be built in compliance with the Minnesota Manufactured Homes Building Code and all statutory requirements.
(f) No cellar, basement, garage, tent, trailer, motor vehicle or accessory building shall at any time be used as an independent residence or dwelling unit, either temporarily or permanently. Tents, play houses or similar structures may be used for play or recreational purposes.
(g) Except for dwellings classified as elderly (senior citizen) housing, the minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be as prescribed in individual zoning district regulations.
(h) Apartment and condominium dwelling units shall only be located in multiple-family buildings or in buildings within the CCD district as regulated by this ordinance. MN Statutes on Manufactured Homes (327.31 –327.35)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (C) Regulations for Residential Uses
Page 364 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Attached Dwelling
(a) Regulations applicable to all Attached Dwelling Types
(i) Trash Handling and Recycling
Multiple-family structures with more than four dwelling units shall adhere to the accessory use standards for large trash handling and recycling areas as outlined in Section 5.3.
(ii) Size of Development
All attached dwelling developments that contain more than two (2) structures with dwelling units and/or having a structure containing more than ten (10) dwelling units shall require a conditional use permit.
(iii) Usable Open Space
Except for mixed use projects in the CCD District, each multiple family dwelling site or townhouse site shall contain at least five hundred (500) square feet of usable open space for each dwelling unit contained thereon, or a minimum of 30% green space, whichever is greater. For the purposes of this ordinance, green space shall include lawn, shrubs, trees, or other planted open space usable for gardens, shade, or recreation and shall not include planted areas between parking areas or sidewalks and parking areas which are less then ten feet in width, nor shall it include any part of the public right-of-way, delineated wetland(s), or required stormwater ponding areas below the 10 year flood elevation.
(b) Duplex
(i) A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per unit shall be provided within an enclosed garage of at least four hundred (400) square feet.
(ii) All driveways and required off-street parking spaces shall be surfaced with concrete, bituminous or approved equivalent.
(iii) Legal non-conforming single family dwellings located within R-3 Zoning Districts may be converted to duplex dwellings by conditional use permit where environmental conditions on the property support preservation of trees, drainage patterns, or other related features.
(c) Townhouse
(i) No building shall contain more than eight (8) dwelling units.
(ii) Each dwelling unit shall have separate and individual front and rear entrances.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (C) Regulations for Residential Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 365
(iii) Private driveways for garages in townhouse developments shall provide a minimum of twenty (20) feet worth of parking space which does not interfere with the use of public sidewalks or trails.
(iv) Setbacks:
1. Buildings in townhouse developments shall be located at least twenty (20) feet apart and twenty (20) feet from the back of the curb of a private roadway.
2. The applicable setbacks required in the underlying zoning district shall be met along the perimeter lot lines of the development and along all public roadways.
(d) Multiple Family
(i) Development of a multiple family building shall be compatible with the existing and planned land use of the area and conflicts shall not be created between commercial and residential use and activities.
(ii) If in the R-2 district, multiple family buildings shall be limited to four dwelling units.
(iii) If in the B-2 District, multiple family buildings shall be adequately served by a collector or arterial street.
(iv) If in the B-1, B-2 or CCD district, multiple family units shall be in the form of apartments or condominiums located above the first floor of the building, unless otherwise authorized to be on the first floor by a conditional use permit meeting the following additional standards:
1. The proposed site for residential use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Downtown Revitalization Plan.
2. The proposed site does not interrupt the flow of commercial pedestrian traffic in the “CCD” district.
3. Density for ground floor residential units shall not exceed one unit per 9,000 square feet of lot area, exclusive of land area utilized by, or required for, permitted uses on the property.
(v) Multiple family housing in the R-3, B-1, B-2 or CCD zoning districts shall be subject to the requirements found in Table 3-8 of Chapter 3.4 of this Ordinance.
(vi) Multiple family housing in the R-4 zoning district shall be subject to the requirements found in Table 3-9 of Chapter 3.4 of this Ordinance.
(3) Group Residential Facility
(a) Licensed day care facilities qualifying as group residential facilities shall adhere to the following:
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (C) Regulations for Residential Uses
Page 366 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) No overnight facilities are provided for the children served. Children are delivered and removed daily.
(ii) Adequate off-street parking and access is provided in compliance with Section 4.8 of this ordinance.
(iii) Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are provided in compliance with Section 4.9 of this ordinance.
(iv) The site and related parking and service shall be served by an arterial or collector street of sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic which will be generated.
(v) All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
(vi) All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured.
(b) Group Residential Facility, Multi-Family
(i) Group Residential Facility, Multi-Family shall require authorization through a conditional use permit following the provisions of Section 2.4(D) of this ordinance.
(4) Manufactured Homes / Manufactured Home Park
(a) Manufactured Homes in General
All manufactured homes within the City of Monticello shall be built in conformance with the manufactured home building code and comply with all provisions of this ordinance.
(b) Manufactured Home Parks
Development of new manufactured home parks shall be encouraged to use the planned unit development (PUD) process to allow the City to vary or modify the strict application and requirements for manufactured home parks to more readily accommodate this type of development. However, absent development through a PUD, the following requirements shall apply:
(i) In General:
1. The minimum total manufactured home park area shall be five acres.
2. Each designated mobile home site shall not be less than 2,500 sf.
3. Notwithstanding the type of development concept used, the maximum density shall be thirteen (13) manufactured homes per acre.
4. Manufactured homes shall be the only permitted dwelling type in a manufactured home park.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (C) Regulations for Residential Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 367
5. No tents shall be used for other than recreational purposes in a manufactured home park.
6. There shall be no outdoor camping anywhere in a manufactured home park.
7. Laundry and clothing shall be hung out to dry only on lines located in Council approved areas established and maintained exclusively for that purpose.
8. Adequate storm shelters for all residents of the manufactured home park shall be provided on-site.
9. No part of any manufactured home park shall be used for non-residential purposes, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park.
10. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored in a manner which meets shoreland district requirements (if within a shoreland district) and applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces.
(ii) Grading, Drainage and Groundcover:
1. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage, topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health and safety of the occupants.
2. The ground surface in all parts of every manufactured home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
3. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall be paved or covered with stone, screening or other solid material, or protected with a grass that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust.
4. No portion of a manufactured home park shall be subject to unpredictable or sudden flooding.
(iii) Setbacks and Lot Requirements
1. Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least fifteen feet.
2. An accessory structure such as an awning, cabana, storage cabinet, carport, windbreak, and porch which has an opaque top or roof, shall, for purposes of all separation requirements, be considered to be part of the manufactured home. However, applicable building code separation requirements shall still apply as applicable.
3. There shall be a minimum distance of twenty feet between the manufactured home stand and abutting park street;
4. All manufactured homes, off-street parking spaces, and structures shall be located at least thirty feet from any property boundary line Section 3.7(C): Floodplain District
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (C) Regulations for Residential Uses
Page 368 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
abutting upon a public street or highway and at least thirty feet from other property boundary lines;
5. Each manufactured home site shall have frontage on an approved roadway and the corner of each manufactured home site shall be marked and each site shall be numbered.
6. Dedicated storage area(s) and building(s) shall be for the sole use of the residents of the manufactured home park and are not available for use by non-residents.
(iv) Screening and Open Space
1. All manufactured home parks located adjacent to residential, recreational, commercial or industrial land uses shall provide screening such as fences, shrubs, trees along the property boundary line separating the park and such uses, and shall be maintained by the State license holder in a neat and orderly manner.
2. A minimum of 2,000 sf for every acre, or part thereof, in a manufactured home park shall be provided for definable play areas and open space. Such areas of open space and play area shall not be areas included within any setback nor shall they include any areas of less than twenty feet in length or width.
(v) Parking
Each manufactured home site shall be served by two (2) off-street parking spaces for automobiles.
(vi) Utilities
1. All manufactured homes shall be connected to a public water and sanitary sewer system or a private water and sewer system approved by the State Department of Health.
2. All installations for disposal of surface storm water must be approved by the City.
3. All utility connections shall be as approved by the City.
4. The source of fuel for cooking, heating, or other purposes at each manufactured home site shall be as approved by the City.
5. All utilities shall be underground; there shall be no overhead wires or supporting poles except those essential for street or other lighting purposes.
6. No obstruction shall be permitted that impedes the inspection of plumbing, electrical facilities, and related manufactured home equipment.
7. The method of garbage, waste, and trash disposal must be approved by the City.
8. Owner shall pay any required sewer and connection fees to the City.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (D) Regulations for Civic and Institutional Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 369
(vii) Lighting:
1. Artificial light shall be maintained during all hours of darkness in all buildings containing public toilets, laundry equipment, and the like.
2. The manufactured home park ground shall be lighted as approved by the City from sunset to sunrise.
(D) Regulations for Civic and Institutional Uses
(1) Active Park Facilities – Private
Private park facilities must be operated only for the enjoyment and convenience of the associated residents and their guests.
(2) Assisted Living Facilities
(a) The development must be contained on an independent parcel; 30% of the parcel must be preserved as open space at least 2/3rds of which shall be useable.
(b) To continue to qualify for the senior citizen housing classification, the owner or agent shall annually file with the Community Development Department a certified copy of a monthly resume of occupants of such a multiple dwelling, listing the number of tenants by age.
(c) One (1) off-street loading space shall be provided in compliance with Section 4.9, Off-Street Loading Spaces.
(d) Elevator service shall be provided to each floor level which contains senior housing units.
(e) The site of the main entrance of the principal use is served or is located within four hundred (400) feet of regular transit service.
(f) Efficiency units shall be a minimum floor area of 440 square feet, and shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total number of apartments in a multiple dwelling.
(g) One bedroom units shall be a minimum floor area of 520 square feet.
(3) Cemeteries
(a) New cemeteries shall be located on a site or parcel with an area of at least 2.5 acres.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (D) Regulations for Civic and Institutional Uses
Page 370 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) New cemeteries shall be located on a site or parcel that fronts an arterial or collector street.
(c) Cemeteries shall include adequate space for the parking and maneuvering of funeral processions.
(d) Interments shall take place at least 50 feet from any lot line.
(e) Cemeteries shall not be located within one-half mile of Interstate Highway 94.
(4) Hospitals
A hospital shall:
(a) Be located on a site of at least five acres.
(b) Be located on a parcel that fronts or has direct access to an arterial or collector street.
(c) Be served by public water and wastewater systems.
(5) Nursing or Convalescent Home
(a) Side yards shall be double the minimum requirements established for the applicable district.
(b) When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property shall be screened with an aesthetic buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “B”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(c) One (1) off-street loading space in compliance with Section 4.8 of this ordinance is installed.
(6) Places of Public Assembly
(a) Institutions on parcels exceeding 20,000 square feet in area shall be located with direct frontage on, and access to, a collector or arterial street.
(b) The buildings are set back from adjoining residential districts a distance no less than double the adjoining residential setback.
(c) When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property shall be screened with an aesthetic buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “B”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (D) Regulations for Civic and Institutional Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 371
(d) Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal use in compliance with Section 4.8 of this ordinance and that such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(e) Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are considered and satisfactorily provided.
(f) Public Assembly in the B-3 District:
(i) Shall only be allowed on properties of 10 acres in size or more.
(ii) Public Assembly uses in the B-3 District must occupy buildings of at least 20,000 gross square feet of area.
(iii) Public Assembly uses in the B-3 District shall provide off-street parking areas that are designed to meet their unique traffic patterns and parking accumulation ratios. For the B-3 district, the requirement shall be one parking space per 2.5 seats in the main assembly area, based on the building code calculation for maximum occupancy.
(iv) Proposed Public Assembly applications in the B-3 District will be required to provide a traffic study demonstrating peak traffic periods, and the ability to manage traffic loads without negatively impacting the adjoining public streets. Private and/or public street improvements may be required to ensure no negative impacts.
(v) CUP applications for Public Assembly uses in the B-3 District will require the identification of the principal use, and those other uses of the subject property that are proposed as accessory uses. All such uses must be allowed in the B-3 District.
(g) In the CCD, the following conditions shall apply:
(i) Building architecture shall be designed to reflect retail street-level architecture as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and detailed in the Comprehensive Plan Amendment entitled “Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan.”
(ii) Site planning shall minimize parking lot development adjacent to public area in the district, including streets, pathways, and open spaces.
(7) Public Buildings or Uses:
(a) When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property shall be screened with an aesthetic buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “B”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance. Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (D) Regulations for Civic and Institutional Uses
Page 372 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained and required setbacks and side yard requirements are met.
(8) Pre-K-12 Schools (public or private):
(a) Educational institutions on parcels exceeding 20,000 square feet in area shall be located with direct frontage on, and access to, a collector or arterial street.
(b) The buildings are set back from adjoining residential districts a distance no less than double the adjoining residential setback.
(c) When abutting a residential use in a residential use district, the property shall be screened with an aesthetic buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “B”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(d) Adequate off-street parking and access is provided on the site or on lots directly abutting or directly across a public street or alley to the principal use in compliance with Section 4.8 of this ordinance and that such parking is adequately screened and landscaped from surrounding and abutting residential uses in compliance with Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(e) Adequate off-street loading and service entrances are considered and satisfactorily provided in accordance with Section 4.9 of this ordinance.
(f) Exterior lighting standards outlined in Section 4.4 of this ordinance shall be met.
(g) If locating within an industrial zoning district:
(iii) A specified termination date is documented.
(iv) The proposed parcel has adequate improved parking to accommodate the student capacity.
(v) The proposed building is constructed or altered only in ways which do not interfere with future refitting for industrial use.
(h) Buildings and structures must comply with building code requirements as adopted by the City of Monticello.
(9) Utilities (major)
(a) An electrical power facility, substation, or transmission station as a principal use of property shall be set back at least 100 feet from all lot lines. Service or storage yards shall be prohibited.
(b) All commercial WECS systems shall adhere to the requirements of Section 4.12 in this ordinance. Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 373
(E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
(1) Reserved
(2) Auction House
(a) The architectural appearance and function plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of the lot.
(b) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with at least a semi-opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “C”) in accordance with Section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(c) Parking areas shall be landscaped and screened from view in compliance with Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(d) Off-street parking shall comply with Section 4.8 of this ordinance.
(e) Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict through traffic movements, and shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(f) All lighting shall be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(g) The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(h) All signing and information or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
(i) The use shall require authorization through a conditional use permit following the provisions of Section 2.4(D) of this ordinance.
(j) All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the
Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions.
(k) No pets or livestock may be sold at this auction sales facility.
(l) Provisions must be made to control and reduce noise when adjacent to a residential zoning district. Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping Section 4.8: Off-Street Parking Section 4.4: Exterior Lighting Section 4.5: Signs Section 2.4(D): Conditional Use Permits
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 374 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(m) All outside storage, if allowed, shall be effectively screened from public view in accordance with Section 4.1(I) and limited to 10% of the gross floor area of the principal use building.
(3) Auto Repair – Minor
(a) The use shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements.
(b) Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, is located behind the front building line of the principal structure, and is screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 4.3, Fences & Walls.
(c) If gasoline is sold on-site, the use shall also comply with the standards for Vehicle Fuel Sales as regulated by this ordinance.
(d) Vehicles not being repaired but used as a source of parts shall be prohibited unless full enclosed within a building.
(e) Vehicles that are repaired and are awaiting removal shall not be stored or parked for more than 30 consecutive days. In cases where a vehicle is abandoned by its lawful owner before or during the repair process, the vehicle may remain on site as long as is necessary after the 30 day period, provided the owner or operator of the establishment demonstrates steps have been taken to remove the vehicle from the premises using the appropriate legal means.
(4) Automotive Wash Facilities
(a) All automotive wash facilities shall adhere to the following standards:
(i) The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall be consistent with the existing buildings and area to avoid impairment in property values and blight within a reasonable distance of the lot.
(ii) Magazining or stacking space is constructed to accommodate that number of vehicles which can be washed during a maximum thirty (30) minute period and shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(iii) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with at least a semi-opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “C”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance. Section 4.1(I): Standards for Required Screening Section 4.3: Fences & Walls Section 5.2(F)(28): Vehicle Fuel Sales Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 375
(iv) All lighting shall be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(v) Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(vi) The entire area other than occupied by the buildings or plantings shall be surfaced with material which will control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(vii) The entire area shall have a drainage system which is subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(viii) Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement, and shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(ix) All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be in compliance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
(x) Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
(xi) Car wash facility shall have direct access to major thoroughfare via driveway or frontage road.
(xii) Intermittent sounds produced by car wash operation such as the sound of a vacuum or warning signal shall not be audible to adjoining residential properties.
(b) If the automotive wash facility is located in the CCD district, the following additional regulations shall apply:
(i) The car wash building and the principal building must meet the architectural requirements of the “CCD” district and design review is conducted by the Planning Commission.
(ii) The automobile stacking space area is screened from abutting property, both residential and commercial.
(iii) Noise generated by the use, including vacuums, is mitigated by location or architectural features from adjoining or nearby residential uses and pedestrian or outdoor commercial activities. Doors of car wash must be closed during drying operation. Mechanical interlock between door and dryer must be employed to assure compliance.
(iv) Lighting on the site shall be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(v) Signage meets the requirements of the CCD zoning district and is reviewed by the Planning Commission.
(vi) Drive through traffic does not interfere with pedestrian routes around and/or through the property. Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping Section 4.5: Signs
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 376 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(vii) A minimum of five stacking spaces for car wash customers is provided that avoids interference with other traffic on the site.
(viii) Site landscaping is provided to mitigate the amount of concrete and/or asphalt surfacing. The use of alternative paving surfaces is encouraged.
(ix) Measures are taken to avoid freezing and icing from washed vehicles prior to exiting the site to the public street.
(x) All other applicable requirements of the City’s Zoning Ordinance are considered and met.
(5) Bed and breakfast facilities:
(a) Bed and breakfast operations shall be limited to residential structures existing prior to the date of this ordinance.
(b) The property shall be landscaped with at least a basic buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “A”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(c) Food served on the premises may be served only to overnight guests of the bed and breakfast.
(d) The owner, operator, or manager of the bed and breakfast shall reside on the premises.
(e) Activities shall be limited to those customary to the operation of a bed and breakfast facility. Commercial use of the property for other activities not normally associated with the operation of a bed and breakfast such as wedding receptions, parties, etc., are not allowed.
(f) Operation of the bed and breakfast facility shall comply with all state regulations governing such facilities.
(6) Brew Pubs
(a) Brew Pubs shall be permitted in the CCD, B-3 and B-4 Districts provided that:
(i) The brew pub sells 85% or more of its beer on-site.
(ii) The beer is brewed primarily for sale in the restaurant and bar, and may be dispensed directly from the brewery’s storage tanks.
(iii) Brewpubs may also sell beer for off-sale consumption in growler containers provided the conditions in Section 3-18-5 are met. Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 377
(7) Commercial Lodging
(a) All hotels and motels shall adhere to the following:
(i) A hotel or motel shall have its principal frontage, access, and orientation direction on an arterial street or collector street.
(ii) Vehicular access from a local residential street is prohibited.
(iii) No more than one security or caretakers quarters may be provided on the site, and such quarters shall be integrated into the building’s design.
(b) In the CCD district, the following additional standards shall apply:
(i) The principal building lot coverage is no less than fifty (50) percent of the property, exclusive of easements devoted to public pedestrian use or other outdoor public spaces.
(ii) The building, site, and signage meet the standards for the “CCD” district and design review is conducted by the Planning Commission.
(iii) The proposed use demonstrates compatibility and consistency with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and the Downtown Revitalization Plan.
(8) Communications / Broadcasting
All communication antennas, antenna support structures and satellite dishes shall adhere to the applicable accessory use requirements for such outlined in Section 5.3 of this ordinance.
(9) Convenience Retail
In the B-1 zoning district, the following conditions shall apply:
(a) The site is adequately served by a collector street.
(b) Access point to the site shall be limited to a collector street.
(c) Conformity with the surrounding neighborhood is maintained.
(d) Adequate screening and landscaping from neighborhood residential districts is provided in accordance with this ordinance.
(e) Traffic generated by the proposed use does not exceed the capacity of surrounding streets and intersections to accommodate it.
(f) The site shall conform to parking requirements as provided in this ordinance.
(g) Building setback from residential uses must be 30 feet or greater. Section 5.3: Accessory Use Standards
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 378 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(h) Parking lot setback from residential uses must be 15 feet or greater.
(i) The site shall conform to signage requirements as recommended by the City. At no time shall the signage exceed the requirements as provided in this ordinance.
(j) The site shall conform to lighting requirements as provided in this ordinance. The lighting shall be restricted to be consistent with the hours of operation, within one half hour of open and close times.
(k) The hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., except as may be approved by conditional use permit.
(l) In addition to the above requirements, if in the CCD, the following conditions shall apply:
(i)Building architecture shall be designed to reflect retail street-level architecture as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and detailed in the Comprehensive Plan Amendment entitled “Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan.”
(ii)Site planning shall maximize building exposure to the street.
(iii)Drive-through facilities shall be located to minimize their exposure to the street.
(iv)Accessory structures, including canopies, menu boards, pay windows, and other structures supporting drive-through functions shall be constructed of materials to match those of the principal building.
(v)Site planning shall be designed to emphasize connections to pedestrian facilities.
(10) Country Club
(a) The principal use, function, or activity is open, outdoor in character.
(b) Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site be covered by buildings or structures.
(c) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with at least an aesthetic buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “B”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance. Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 379
(d) The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the districts.
(11) Day Care Center
(a) No overnight facilities shall be provided for children served by the daycare. Children must be delivered and removed from the facility daily.
(b) An outdoor recreational facility:
(i) Shall be appropriately separated from the parking lot and driving areas by a fence not less than 4 feet in height;
(ii) Shall be located continuous to the day-care facility;
(iii) Shall not be located in any yard abutting a major thoroughfare;
(iv) Shall not have an impervious surface for more than one-half of the playground area;
(v) Shall extend at least 60 feet from the wall of the building or to an adjacent property line, whichever is less, or shall be bound on not more than two sides by parking and driving areas; and
(vi) Shall be a minimum size of 2,000 sq. ft., or in the alternative 75 sq. ft. per child at licensed capacity, whichever is the greater figure.
(c) All state laws and statutes governing such use are strictly adhered to and all required operating permits are secured.
(d) In addition to items (a) through (c) above, day care centers in the I-1 district, shall adhere to the following additional requirements:
(i) Only be allowed as a secondary combination use which complements a primary business;
(ii) Only be conducted in the principal building, and not exceed 20% of the total principal building square footage;
(iii) Be physically separated from the other activities occurring in the principal building;
(iv) Not have a dedicated entrance (other than emergency exits) from the exterior of the principal building;
(v) Not have dedicated off-street parking or signage.
(12) Entertainment/Recreation – Indoor Commercial
(a) No auctions shall take place on the premises.
(b) Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 380 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Noise shall be controlled consistent with the standards of this ordinance.
(d) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with an aesthetic buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “B”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance
(13) Entertainment/Recreation – Outdoor Commercial
(a) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with at least a semi-opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “C”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(b) Adequate measures to contain the proposed activity on the subject site shall be provided
(c) Dust and noise are controlled consistent with City Ordinance.
(14) Event Centers
(a) Proximity to Residential Uses. Property upon which event centers are located shall not abut residentially zoned property, with the exception of R-3 and R-4 zoned properties.
(b) Parking. Off-street parking for event centers shall be provided in in accordance with Section 4.8 of this Ordinance.
(c) Event Size. Event Centers shall be allowed a maximum event size as specified by the conditional use permit.
(d) Number of Events.
(i) Event Centers in the B-3 and B-4 District are not restricted in the number of events allowed unless restricted by the conditional use permit.
(ii) Event centers in the B-2 District may be limited to certain days or number of events by the City Council per the conditional use permit.
(e) Hours of Operation. Event Center hours of operation shall be as established by the City Council per the Conditional Use Permit.
(f) Noise Regulations. Event centers shall be subject to the noise-related provisions of City Code.
(g) Food Regulations. Event centers may serve food and beverages as an accessory activity in accordance with all applicable Federal, State, and City regulations.
(h) Overnight accommodations. Overnight accommodations are not allowed.
Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 381
(i) Accessibility. All buildings used in conjunction with event centers shall meet applicable accessibility requirements imposed by State or Federal law.
(j) Code Compliance. The building(s) used for the event center shall meet any and all applicable Federal, State, and local codes, including those which apply to sanitary facilities.
(k) Outdoor Events. All events shall take place within the event center building(s), unless otherwise allowed in the zoning district or City Code.
(15) Financial Institutions
Drive-thru service, if approved as an accessory use to a financial institution, shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building whenever feasible.
(16) Funeral Services
(a) Funeral homes shall have its principal frontage, access, and orientation direction on an arterial or collector street.
(b) All structures shall be located so as not to require access from an interior residential street.
(17) Kennels (commercial):
(a) The kennel shall be sufficiently insulated so no unreasonable noise or odor can be detected off the premises.
(b) Any open runs or pens used to house animals shall be located at least 75 feet from any lot line.
(c) Accessory uses to a kennel may include retail sales and grooming services, as long as the accessory uses do not occupy more than 25 percent of the total gross floor area of the principal building.
(18) Landscaping / Nursery Business
(a) The business shall be located next to a collector or arterial street as identified in the comprehensive plan, or otherwise located so that access to the site will not conduct significant traffic on local residential streets.
(b) Exterior displays visible from adjacent properties or right-of-way shall be limited to plants unless otherwise approved by the City Council.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 382 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(19) Medical / Clinical Services
In the CCD, the following conditions shall apply:
(a) Building architecture shall be designed to reflect retail street-level architecture as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and detailed in the Comprehensive Plan Amendment entitled “Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan.”
(b) Street-level floor planning designed to accommodate use by or conversion to future use as retail land uses.
(20) Offices (Commercial)
Regulations for Office Use
(a) Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
(b) Buildings or structures with less than 51 percent of office space shall not be
classified as an office use and shall be regulated by the other use of the
structure.
(c) If in the B-1 district, the following shall apply:
(i) The traffic generated will not raise traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding area.
(ii) The architectural appearance of the building housing the office use shall reflect the building character of the area and shall not be so dissimilar as to cause impairment of property values or constitute a blighting influence within the neighborhood.
(iii) The provisions of this ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met.
(iv) The site shall conform to signage requirements provided under Section 4.5 of this Code.
(v) The site shall conform to lighting requirements as provided in this ordinance. The lighting shall be restricted to be consistent with the hours of operation, within one half hour of open and close times.
(d) In the CCD, the following conditions shall apply:
(i) Building architecture shall be designed to reflect retail street-level architecture as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and detailed in
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 383
the Comprehensive Plan Amendment entitled “Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan.”
(ii) Street-level floor planning designed to accommodate use by or conversion to future use as retail land uses.
(iii) Parking areas shall be situated so as to minimize their exposure to public areas, or shall be landscaped and screened to minimize large expanses of open pavement.
(21) Offices (Professional) Including Financial Institutions
(a) Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.
(b) Buildings or structures with less than 51 percent of office space shall not be
classified as an office use and shall be regulated by the other use of the
structure.
(c) If in the B-1 district, the following shall apply:
(i) The traffic generated will not raise traffic volumes beyond the capacity of the surrounding area.
(ii) The architectural appearance of the building housing the office use shall reflect the building character of the area and shall not be so dissimilar as to cause impairment of property values or constitute a blighting influence within the neighborhood.
(iii) The provisions of this ordinance are considered and satisfactorily met.
(iv) The site shall conform to signage requirements provided under Section 4.5 of this Code.
(v) The site shall conform to lighting requirements as provided in this ordinance. The lighting shall be restricted to be consistent with the hours of operation, within one half hour of open and close times.
In the CCD, the following conditions shall apply:
(d) Building architecture shall be designed to reflect retail street-level architecture as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and detailed in the Comprehensive Plan Amendment entitled “Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan.”
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 384 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(e) Street-level floor planning designed to accommodate use by or conversion to future use as retail land uses.
(f) Parking areas shall be situated so as to minimize their exposure to public areas, or shall be landscaped and screened to minimize large expanses of open pavement.
(g) Parking supply shall be calculated at the same rate as retail sales.
(22) Personal Services
(a) In the B-1 district, the following shall apply:
(i) Outdoor lighting shall be restricted to be consistent with the hours of operation, within one half hour of open and close times.
(ii) Hours of operation shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(b) Establishments engaged in dry cleaning shall be held to the following
requirements:
(i) Dry cleaning processing shall be restricted to the B-4 district.
(ii) Dry cleaning operations shall be self-contained in terms of noise and fumes with no venting to outside of building.
(iii) Dry cleaning facilities shall have direct access to major thoroughfare via driveway or frontage road.
(c) Tattoo facilities and providers shall be required to comply with the
requirements of the Minnesota Department of Health licensing requirements and regulations, and display evidence of such compliance in a conspicuous location within the establishment.
(23) Production Breweries and Micro-Distilleries with Accessory Taproom or Cocktail Room
Production Breweries and Micro-Distilleries with Accessory Taproom or Cocktail Room shall be allowed by conditional use permit in the CCD, B-3 and B-4 Districts, provided that:
(a) The owner of the brewery qualifies for and receives a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license from the State of Minnesota, according to Minn. Statutes Section 340A.301.
(b) The Brewery or Micro-Distillery includes an accessory brewer's taproom or cocktail room for the on-sale of products produced on-site, and such room shall require the applicable license from the City of Monticello, according to City Code Section 3-1-13.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 385
(c) On-site sale of beer in the form of growlers shall require a Brewery License for Off-Sale of Malt Liquor, according to City Code Section 3-1-13. Off-sale hours of sale must conform to hours of sale for retail off-sale licensees in the City of Monticello.
(d) Total production of malt liquor may not exceed 10,000 barrels annually. Of the 10,000 barrel production limit, onsite taproom retail sales shall not exceed 3,500 barrels annually, 500 barrels of which may be sold off-sale as growlers. The brewer shall annually submit production reports with the request to renew a brewer taproom or off-sale malt liquor license.
(e) A micro-distillery may be issued a license for off-sale of distilled spirits. The license may allow the sale of one 375 milliliter bottle per customer per day of product manufactured on-site, subject to the following requirements:
(i) Off-sale hours of sale must conform to hours of sale for retail off-sale licensees in the City of Monticello.
(ii) No brand may be sold at the micro-distillery unless it is also available for distribution by wholesalers.
(f) Total production of liquor may not exceed 40,000 proof gallons annually. Of the 40,000 proof gallon production limit, onsite cocktail retail sales shall not exceed 3,500 proof gallons annually, 500 proof gallons of which may be sold off-sale in 375 milliliter bottles. The distiller shall annually submit production reports with the request to renew a cocktail room or off-sale liquor license.
(g) The brewery or micro-distillery facility provides adequate space for off-street loading and unloading of all trucks greater than twenty-two (22) feet in length. In the absence of off-street loading, the City may impose limits on deliveries or shipments using the public right of ways, including regulating the number of trucks per day and the hours that deliveries are permitted.
(h) Loading docks shall be located and designed so they are not visible from adjoining public streets or adjoining residential zoning.
(i) No outdoor storage is permitted on the site, with the exception that waste handling (refuse and/or recycling) may occur in an enclosure that is fully screened from adjoining streets and residential zoning.
(j) No odors from the business may be perceptible beyond the property line.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 386 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(k) The business must be housed in a building that utilizes building design similar to, or compatible with, common commercial architecture, and shall avoid large wall expanses which contribute to an industrial environment.
(l) The brewer must demonstrate the capacity for producing, processing and storing malt liquor on the commercial site through the provision of a building floor plan illustrating production, bottling, and storage areas.
(m) All exterior lighting shall be compliant with Chapter 4.4 of the Monticello Zoning Code.
(24) Recreational Vehicle Camp Site
(a) The land area of the property containing such use or activity meets the minimum established for the district.
(b) The site shall be served by a major or arterial street capable of accommodating traffic which will be generated.
(c) All driveways and parking areas shall be surfaced with a dustless material.
(d) Plans for utilities and waste disposal shall be subject to approval by the Community Development Department, and all applicable requirements of the State Pollution Control Agency are complied with.
(e) Not more than five (5) percent of the land area of the site shall be covered by buildings or structures.
(f) The locations of such use shall be at minimum one hundred (100) feet from any abutting residential use district.
(25) Repair Establishments
(a) Outdoor storage shall be prohibited in the B-1, B-2 and CCD districts.
(b) No process involved in a repair operation shall produce noise, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emission which will disturb or endanger neighboring properties.
(26) Restaurants
(a) For all restaurants, if the establishment (building) or outdoor seating area is located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district, the following standards shall apply:
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 387
(i) The use shall require authorization through a conditional use permit.
(ii) Primary access from local residential streets shall be prohibited.
(b) Restaurants having outdoor seating (including, but not limited to, seating for dining or listening to live or recorded acoustic or amplified entertainment outside of the building) shall comply with the following standards:
(i) The outdoor portions of the restaurant shall not operate after 10:00 P.M. unless a Special Event Permit for such events has been approved by the City Council. Such a permit supersedes the provisions of City Code 6-1-10(B).
(ii) The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use.
(iii) The outdoor portions of the restaurant shall not operate after 10:00 P.M. unless a Special Event Permit for such events has been approved by the City Council. Such a permit supersedes the provisions of City Code 6-1-10(B).
(iv) The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use.
(c) Restaurants having drive-through facilities shall require a conditional use permit and comply with the following standards:
(i) All requirements for an accessory drive-through facility shall be met.
(ii) The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing buildings or area as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within a reasonable distance of lot.
(iii) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with at least a semi-opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “C”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(iv) Each light standard island and all islands in the parking lot landscaped or covered.
(v) Parking areas shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(vi) Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movements, and shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(vii) If in the CCD District, the following standards shall also apply:
1. The design of the site promotes pedestrian access adjacent to and along the property. Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 388 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
2. Site lighting shall utilize fixtures similar in style to that designated by the City for use in public areas of the “CCD” district.
3. The building, site, and signage meet the standards for the “CCD” district and design review is conducted by the Planning Commission.
4. Drive through facilities comply with the requirements of Section 5.3(D)(14).
5. The proposed use demonstrates compatibility and consistency with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and the Downtown Revitalization Plan.
(27) Retail Commercial Uses (Other)
(a) If the retail sales includes consignment sales, the following standards shall apply:
(i) Sales and storage shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in area.
(ii) At least 80% of the sales shall be of consigned merchandise.
(iii) No auctions shall take place on the premises.
(iv) There shall be no outside storage.
(b) In the CCD, F-2 sub-district, the following conditions shall apply to retail sales in buildings having a retail floor area greater than 10,000 square feet:
(i) Building architecture shall be designed to vary façade height, fenestration, and other details to provide the appearance of several smaller retail buildings, rather than a single large structure.
(ii) Parking shall be oriented to wrap around buildings, rather than be located entirely in the front of the building.
(c) In the CCD, F-2 sub-district, the following conditions shall apply to retail sales accessory services:
(i) Accessory service shall occupy no more than 40 percent of the main floor of any building.
(ii) Service may include activities that support the retail sales of goods on the premises, including repair, fabrication, rental, assembly, shipping, or similar activities.
(iii) Service activities may occur as an entity separate from retail sales, but shall meet the requirements of this section. Section 5.3(D)(14): Drive Through Service
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 389
(28) Specialty Eating Establishments
(a) Drive through service, if approved as an accessory use within the applicable district, shall be located to the side or rear of the building whenever feasible.
(b) For all specialty eating establishments, if the establishment (building) or outdoor seating area is located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district, the following standards shall apply:
(i) The use shall require authorization through a conditional use permit.
(c) Restaurants having outdoor seating (including, but not limited to, seating for dining or listening to live or recorded acoustic or amplified entertainment outside of the building) shall comply with the following standards:
(i) The outdoor portions of the restaurant shall not operate after 10:00 P.M.
(ii) The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use.
(d) In addition to the above requirements, if in the CCD, the following conditions shall apply:
(i) Building architecture shall be designed to reflect retail street-level architecture as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and detailed in the Comprehensive Plan Amendment entitled “Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan.”
(ii) Site planning shall maximize building exposure to the street.
(iii) Drive-through facilities shall be located to minimize their exposure to the street.
(iv) Accessory structures, including canopies, menu boards, pay windows, and other structures supporting drive-through functions shall be constructed of materials to match those of the principal building.
(v) Site planning shall be designed to emphasize connections to pedestrian facilities.
(29) Vehicle Fuel Sales:
(a) Regardless of whether the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels and/or oil is incidental to the conduct of the use or business, the standards and requirements imposed by this ordinance for motor fuel stations shall apply. These standards and requirements are, however, in addition to other requirements which are imposed for other uses of the property.
(b) Wherever fuel pumps are to be installed, pump islands shall be installed.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 390 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be minimized and shall be in compliance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
(d) Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
(e) If in the CCD District, the following standards shall also apply:
(i) The design of the site promotes pedestrian access adjacent to and along the property.
(ii) No more than two (2) curb cuts of twenty-four (24) feet in width or less shall be permitted.
(iii) Site lighting shall utilize fixtures similar in style to that designated by the City for use in public areas of the “CCD” district.
(iv) The building, site, and signage meet the standards for the “CCD” district and design review is conducted by the Planning Commission.
(v) The proposed use demonstrates compatibility and consistency with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and the Downtown Revitalization Plan.
(30) Vehicle Sales or Rental
(a) The minimum building size for any vehicle sales or rental use shall comply with the standards in Table 5-3.
(b) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with an opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “D”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(c) All lighting shall be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(d) The outside sales and display area shall be hard surfaced.
(e) The outside sales and display area does not utilize parking spaces which are required for conformance with this ordinance. Section 4.5: Signs TABLE 5-3: MINIMUM BUILDING SIZE FOR VEHICLE SALES/RENTAL USES Parcel Size Lot Coverage Percent * Minimum Building Size *
Less than 2 acres
5%
2,500 square feet
2 acres to less than 4 acres
7%
10,000 square feet
4 acres to less than 8 acres
9%
20,000 square feet
8 acres or more
9%
40,000 square feet * Whichever requires the larger building Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 391
(f) Vehicular access points shall create a minimum of conflict with through traffic movement and shall be subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(g) There is a minimum lot area of twenty-two thousand five hundred (22,500) square feet and minimum lot dimensions of one hundred fifty (150) feet by one hundred thirty (130) feet.
A drainage system subject to the approval of the Community Development Department shall be installed.
(31) Veterinary Facilities
(a) Treatment shall be limited to small household pets unless the facility is conditionally permitted as a rural veterinary facility.
(b) In the CCD district, animals shall only be housed overnight if they are undergoing medical treatment or observation. Overnight boarding for non-medical reasons shall be prohibited.
(c) The site shall be designed to prevent animal waste from being exposed to stormwater or entering the stormwater system, streams, lakes, or conveyances. If an area is provided for animals walking, it shall not be exposed to stormwater and the waste shall immediately be picked up and disposed of properly.
(d) Animals shall not be kept outdoors or be allowed to remain outside unsupervised.
(e) All animals must be leashed.
(f) No outside storage of carcasses.
(g) The facility shall be subject to an annual inspection by a City Health Officer at owner's expense.
(h) In the CCD, F-1 sub-district, the following additional standards shall apply:
(i) Building architecture shall be designed to reflect retail street-level architecture as defined in the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and detailed in the Comprehensive Plan Amendment entitled “Downtown Monticello Small Area Plan.”
(ii) Street level floor planning designed to accommodate use by or conversion to future use as retail uses.
(iii) Overnight animal boarding shall only be allowed as an accessory use to clinic services, and shall be situated so as to prohibit exposure, noise, or other nuisance conditions.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (E) Regulations for Commercial Uses
Page 392 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(this page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 393
(F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
(1) Automobile repair - major
(a) Door opening to service area garage must not face street frontage.
(b) Vehicle storage area limited to 50% of floor space of the structure housing the auto body shop.
(c) All vehicles being serviced and all vehicle parts must be stored inside or in vehicle storage area.
(d) Vehicle storage area shall be enclosed by enclosure intended to screen the view of vehicles in storage from the outside. Enclosure shall consist of a six-foot high, 100% opaque fence designed to blend with the auto body shop structure and consisting of materials treated to resist discoloration.
(e) The floor of the vehicle storage area shall consist of asphalt or concrete paving.
(f) All work on vehicles or vehicle parts shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
(g) The advertising wall facing the public right-of-way shall consist of no more than 50% metal material.
(h) The secondary or non-advertising wall facing a public right-of-way shall utilize a combination of colors or materials that serve to break up the monotony of a single color flat surface.
(i) No conditional use permit shall be granted for an auto body shop located within 600 feet of a residential zone existing at the time the conditional use permit is granted.
(2) Bulk Fuel Sales and Storage
(a) Gas storage shall be limited to quantities not exceeding 500,000 cubic feet and not located within 100 feet from any lot line.
(b) Gas storage with quantities not exceeding 200 cubic feet, if the pressure is greater than 100 pounds per square inch, shall not be located within 50 feet of any lot line.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
Page 394 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Commercial Self-Storage Facilities
(a) Site Layout
(i) The minimum lot area shall be at least two acres.
(ii) If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum separation of ten feet between buildings.
(b) Operation
(i) The only commercial uses permitted on-site shall be the rental of storage bays and the pickup and deposit of goods or property in cold storage. Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate, or process goods, to service or repair vehicles, small engines or electrical equipment, or conduct similar repair activities, to conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind, or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activity on the site.
(ii) Individual storage bays or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility use shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal address.
(iii) No more than one security or caretaker quarters may be developed on the site, and shall be integrated into the building’s design.
(iv) Except as otherwise authorized in this subsection, all property stored on the site shall be enclosed entirely within enclosed buildings.
(v) If buildings or driving lanes are within 200 feet of a residential dwelling, the hours of public access to the self-storage use shall be restricted to the hours between 6:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
(c) Parking and Circulation
(i) The one- or two-way traffic flow patterns in aisleways shall be clearly marked. Marking shall consist, at a minimum, of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows.
(ii) Appropriate access and circulation by vehicles and emergency equipment shall be ensured through the design of internal turning radii of aisleways.
(iii) All access ways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable paving materials.
(d) Building Appearance
(i) Garage doors serving individual storage units shall be perpendicular to a public or private street so as to not be visible from adjacent streets.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 395
(ii) Outdoor lighting shall be the minimum necessary to discourage vandalism and theft, and shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.4, Exterior Lighting.
(iii) The exterior facades of all structures facing a public street shall adhere to Section 4.11, Building Materials.
(iv) Windows may not exceed 20 percent of any street-facing façade and shall not be reflective.
(v) A maximum of two colors (excluding roof colors) shall be used on wall facades visible from off-site areas. Colors shall be neutral, and shall not be used to call attention to the use.
(vi) Perimeter or exterior walls visible from a public street or detached residential dwelling shall not include metal as a primary material.
(vii) All mechanical equipment and dumpsters shall be fully screened from off-site views.
(e) Fencing
All areas adjacent to a street frontage not occupied by a building shall include fencing designed in accordance with the following standards:
(i) Fences shall be no shorter than six feet or taller than eight feet.
(ii) Fencing shall be masonry, wrought iron, steel, or aluminum and shall be painted or vinyl coated with colors that complement the buildings.
(iii) Chain link fencing is prohibited except where the use abuts lots with a business zoning designation, but in no instance shall chain link fencing be visible from a public street.
(iv) Metal fences shall include brick pilasters or supports located with consistent on-center spacing.
(v) Wooden or chain link entry gates into the use are prohibited.
(f) Open Storage
Open storage of recreational vehicles and travel trailers of the type customarily maintained by persons for their personal use shall be permitted within a self-service storage facility use, provided that the following standards are met:
(i) No outdoor storage shall be visible from off-site views.
(ii) The storage shall occur only within a designated area, which shall be clearly delineated.
(iii) The size of the storage area shall not exceed 25 percent of the buildable area of the site. Section 4.11: Building Materials Section 4.4: Exterior Lighting
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
Page 396 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iv) Outdoor storage areas shall be located to the rear of the principal structure and be screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall at least eight feet high.
(v) Storage shall not occur within the areas set aside for minimum building setbacks.
(vi) No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on-site.
(vii) Vehicles shall be allowed on the premises for storage only.
(4) Contractors Yard – Temporary
(a) Temporary Contractor's Yards shall be allowed only by Interim Use Permit, subject to the standards of Section 2.4(E) of this ordinance.
(b) Temporary Contractor's Yards shall be accommodated only in association with the construction of public infrastructure projects on public property, rights of way, or public easements.
(c) Temporary Contractor's Yards shall be located only on property directly abutting a State or Federal highway, and shall minimize use of local streets.
(d) Such yards shall provide haul routes for approval by the City Engineer.
(e) Such yards shall provide adequate securities, as determined by the City Council, for the restoration of any municipal infrastructure damaged due to the operation of the yard.
(f) Such yards shall provide, as a condition of their permit, for adequate stormwater management, dust control, traffic control, and other requirements of the City Engineer.
(g) Interim Use Permits for Temporary Contractor's Yards shall include a restoration plan ensuring the restoration of the property to a condition meeting the zoning and nuisance standards of the City.
(5) Extraction of Materials
(a) All regulations in Title 8, Chapter 2 of City Code regarding excavations shall be met.
(b) Plans shall be provided to illustrate how the land will be left in a useable condition upon cessation of extraction activities, shall prove that the finished grade will not adversely affect the surrounding land or future development of Section 2.4(E): Interim Use Permits Title 8, Chapter 2 of City Code: Excavations
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 397
the site on which the mining is being conducted, and the route of trucks moving to and from the site.
(c) The interim use permit authorizing the extraction of materials shall regulate:
(i) The type(s) of material being mined on the site;
(ii) A program for rodent control;
(iii) A plan for fire control and general maintenance of the site;
(iv) Controls for vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of material disbursed from wind or hauling of material to or from the site;
(v) A calendar of specific dates when mining operations will be conducted, including specific beginning and ending dates; and
(vi) The submission of a surety by the applicant in an amount determined by the Community Development Department to be equal to 100% of the value of the cost of restoring land whereupon mining is to occur and repairing the degradation of roadways used to transport soils.
(d) On-site sales may be allowed as part of the interim use permit subject to all conditions established by the City Council to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of those visiting the site and of surrounding property owners.
(6) General Warehousing
(a) The use shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center.
(b) The use shall not locate storage areas within a required setback or perimeter buffer;
(c) The use shall locate outdoor storage areas to the rear of the principal structure. All such outdoor storage shall be screened from view of adjacent properties in conformance with the requirements of Section 4.1(I).
(d) The use shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements.
(e) The use shall have direct access onto an arterial or collector roadway.
(7) Heavy Manufacturing
(a) The use shall be located at least 500 feet from any residential district, school, or day care center. Section 4.1(I): Standards for Required Screening
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
Page 398 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) The use shall locate outdoor storage areas to the rear of the principal structure and be screened with a fence or wall in accordance with Section 4.1(I). The height of materials and equipment stored shall not exceed the height of the screening fence or wall.
(c) The use shall be designed to ensure property functioning of the on-site transportation circulation system.
(d) The use shall have direct access onto an arterial or collector roadway.
(8) Industrial Self-Storage Facilities
(a) Such facilities shall occupy no less than 2,000 square feet per individual storage unit in any complex or building.
(b) All individual units shall have overhead door access and service access separate from other units, and no common access shall be permitted.
(c) Such use shall be authorized by Conditional Use Permit.
(d) Site Layout
(iii) The minimum lot area shall be at least two acres.
(iv) If separate buildings are constructed, there shall be a minimum separation of ten feet between buildings.
(e) Operation
(vi) The only commercial uses permitted on-site shall be the rental of storage bays and the pickup and deposit of goods or property in cold storage. Storage bays shall not be used to manufacture, fabricate, or process goods, to service or repair vehicles, small engines or electrical equipment, or conduct similar repair activities, to conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind, or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activity on the site.
(vii) Individual storage bays or private postal boxes within a self-service storage facility use shall not be considered premises for the purpose of assigning a legal address.
(viii) No more than one security or caretaker quarters may be developed on the site, and shall be integrated into the building’s design.
(ix) Except as otherwise authorized in this subsection, all property stored on the site shall be enclosed entirely within enclosed buildings. Section 4.1(I): Standards for Required Screening
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 399
(x) If buildings or driving lanes are within 200 feet of a residential dwelling, the hours of public access to the self-storage use shall be restricted to the hours between 6:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
(f) Parking and Circulation
(iv) The one- or two-way traffic flow patterns in aisleways shall be clearly marked. Marking shall consist, at a minimum, of standard directional signage and painted lane markings with arrows.
(v) Appropriate access and circulation by vehicles and emergency equipment shall be ensured through the design of internal turning radii of aisleways.
(vi) All access ways shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, or comparable paving materials.
(g) Building Appearance
(viii) Garage doors serving individual storage units shall be perpendicular to a public or private street so as to not be visible from adjacent streets.
(ix) Outdoor lighting shall be the minimum necessary to discourage vandalism and theft, and shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.4, Exterior
Lighting.
(x) The exterior facades of all structures facing a public street shall adhere to Section 4.11, Building Materials.
(xi) Windows may not exceed 20 percent of any street-facing façade and shall not be reflective.
(xii) A maximum of two colors (excluding roof colors) shall be used on wall facades visible from off-site areas. Colors shall be neutral, and shall not be used to call attention to the use.
(xiii) Perimeter or exterior walls visible from a public street or detached residential dwelling shall not include metal as a primary material.
(xiv) All mechanical equipment and dumpsters shall be fully screened from off-site views.
(h) Fencing
All areas adjacent to a street frontage not occupied by a building shall include fencing designed in accordance with the following standards:
(vi) Fences shall be no shorter than six feet or taller than eight feet.
(vii) Fencing shall be masonry, wrought iron, steel, or aluminum and shall be painted or vinyl coated with colors that complement the buildings. Section 4.4: Exterior Lighting Section 4.11: Building Materials
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
Page 400 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(viii) Chain link fencing is prohibited except where the use abuts lots with a business zoning designation, but in no instance shall chain link fencing be visible from a public street.
(ix) Metal fences shall include brick pilasters or supports located with consistent on-center spacing.
(x) Wooden or chain link entry gates into the use are prohibited.
(i) Open Storage
Open storage of recreational vehicles and travel trailers of the type customarily maintained by persons for their personal use shall be permitted within a self-service storage facility use, provided that the following standards are met:
(viii) No outdoor storage shall be visible from off-site views.
(ix) The storage shall occur only within a designated area, which shall be clearly delineated.
(x) The size of the storage area shall not exceed 25 percent of the buildable area of the site.
(xi) Outdoor storage areas shall be located to the rear of the principal structure and be screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall at least eight feet high.
(xii) Storage shall not occur within the areas set aside for minimum building setbacks.
(xiii) No dry stacking of boats shall be permitted on-site.
(xiv) Vehicles shall be allowed on the premises for storage only.
(9) Land Reclamation
The conditional use permit authorizing land reclamation shall regulate:
(a) A finished grade plan which will not adversely affect the adjacent land;
(b) The type of fill permitted;
(c) A program for rodent control;
(d) A plan for fire control and general maintenance of the site;
(e) Controls for vehicular ingress and egress, and for control of material disbursed from wind or hauling of material to or from the site;
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 401
(f) A calendar of specific dates when land reclamation operations will be conducted, including specific beginning and ending dates; and
(g) The submission of a surety by the applicant in an amount determined by the Community Development Department to be equal to 100% of the value of the cost of restoring land whereupon land reclamation is to occur and repairing the degradation of roadways used to transport soils.
(10) Light Manufacturing
Light manufacturing uses may include a commercial component provided the following standards are met:
(a) The commercial component is directly related to the products being created by the light manufacturing use.
(b) The commercial component shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor area of the principal use.
(11) Machinery/Trucking Repair & Sales and Industrial Services
(a) The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(b) A drainage system subject to the approval of the Community Development Department shall be installed.
(c) The lighting shall be accomplished in such a way as to have no direct source of light visible from adjacent land in residential use or from the public right-of-way and shall be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(d) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with an opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “D”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(e) Parking or car magazine storage space shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 4.1(F) of this ordinance.
(f) All signing and informational or visual communication devices shall be minimized and shall be in compliance with Section 4.5 of this ordinance.
(g) Provisions are made to control and reduce noise. Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers Section 4.1(F): Standards for Vehicular Use Area Landscaping
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
Page 402 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(h) No outside storage except as permitted or conditionally permitted in compliance with Section 5.3(D)(26) of this ordinance.
(i) All conditions pertaining to a specific site are subject to change when the Council, upon investigation in relation to a formal request, finds that the general welfare and public betterment can be served as well or better by modifying the conditions.
(j) If the business repairs semi-trucks or other large machinery, a specific area shall be designated for the exterior storage of the things being repaired and/or other vehicles and equipment accessory and incidental to the vehicle or machinery being repaired or serviced.
(12) Production Breweries and Micro-Distilleries
Production Breweries and Micro-Distilleries shall be allowed as a permitted use in the I-1 and I-2 District, provided that:
(a) The owner of the brewery qualifies for and receives a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license from the State of Minnesota, according to Minn. Statutes Section 340A.301.
(b) Total production of malt liquor may not exceed 250,000 barrels annually.
(13) Production Breweries and Micro-Distilleries with Accessory Taproom or Cocktail Room
Production Breweries and Micro-Distilleries with Accessory Taproom or Cocktail Room shall be allowed by conditional use permit in the IBC, I-1 and I-2 Districts, provided that:
(a) The facility is located in an area that includes and/or serves commercial traffic.
(b) The facility is not located within 500 feet of a residential zoning district.
(c) The owner of the brewery qualifies for and receives a brewer license and a malt liquor wholesale license from the State of Minnesota, according to Minn. Statutes Section 340A.301.
(d) Total production of malt liquor may not exceed 250,000 barrels annually.
(14) Recycling and Salvage Center
(a) The center shall be on a parcel with an area of at least four acres. Section 5.3(D)(26): Outdoor Storage
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 403
(b) The center shall be located at least 250 feet from any residential district, school, or day care.
(c) Except for a freestanding office, no part of the center shall be located within 15 feet of any property line, or the minimum buffer yard setbacks required in Section 4.1(G), whichever requires the greater setback.
(d) All recycling activities and storage areas shall be effectively screened from view by walls, fences, or buildings. Such screening shall be designed and installed to ensure that no part of recycling activities or a storage area can be seen from rights-of-way or adjacent lots.
(e) All outdoor storage areas shall be surrounded by a solid fence or wall that is at least eight feet high, located no less than 30 feet from any public right-of-way, and located no less than 15 feet from any adjacent property.
(f) Recyclable materials shall be contained within a leak-proof bin or trailer, and not stored on the ground. In the alternative, the outdoor storage of recyclable materials may occur on the ground, provided that the ground is surfaced with a suitable material acceptable to the City to control dust and drainage in a manner that is consistent with the City’s stormwater management requirements, and is fenced and screened to ensure that no storage is taller in elevation than the height of the screening.
(g) The facility shall at all times comply with the terms of the MCPA permitting for the site, and shall promptly comply with any order of mitigation or correction issued by the MPCA when an inconsistency or violation is found. The City may require additional improvements to protect the City’s stormwater management system resulting from operation of the facility, including but not limited to, additional stormwater treatment, reporting, and notifications as appropriate.
(h) There shall be no collection or storage of biodegradable wastes (as defined by the PCA) on the site. The storage of hazardous wastes shall be, at all times, found to be in compliance with the requirements and permitting of the MPCA as applicable to the site and the material in question.
(i) Space shall be provided to park each commercial vehicle operated by the center.
(j) The facility shall be administered by on-site persons during the hours the facility is open.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
Page 404 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(k) The site shall be maintained free of fluids, odors, litter, rubbish, and any other non-recyclable materials. The site shall be cleaned of debris on a daily basis and shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present.
(l) Noise levels shall be controlled in accordance with Section 5.2(A)(2)(e).
(m) Signage shall include the name and phone number of the facility operator and indicate any materials not accepted by the center.
(n) Access to the center shall be from a collector or arterial street.
(o) No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level shall be detectable on abutting properties.
(15) Truck or Freight Terminal
(a) The architectural appearance and functional plan of the building and site shall not be so dissimilar to the existing, conforming buildings or areas as to cause impairment in property values or constitute a blighting influence within the district in which the proposed use is located.
(b) Parking areas shall be screened from view of abutting residential districts in compliance with Section 4.1(I) of this ordinance.
(c) The entire site, other than that taken up by a building, structure, or plantings, shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage, which is subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(d) The site shall meet minimum lot dimension requirements of the District.
(e) No outside storage except as permitted or conditionally permitted in compliance with Section 5.3(D)(26) of this ordinance.
(f) Parking areas accessible to the public, including customers and employees shall be paved.
(g) No more than six thousand (6,000) square feet of the site shall be devoted to the storage, parking, and/or circulation of semi-tractors and trailers, as illustrated on a site plan submitted in connection with an application for a conditional use permit.
(h) All service activities shall occur within the principal building or approved accessory buildings. Section 5.2(A)(2)(e): Noise Section 4.1(I): Standards for Required Screening Section 5.3(D)(26): Outdoor Storage
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.2 Use-Specific Standards
Subsection (F) Regulations for Industrial Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 405
(16) Waste Disposal and Incineration
(a) Disposal must be in accordance with Minnesota Pollution Control Agency regulations.
(b) The facility must secure applicable local, county, state, and/or federal permits.
(17) Wrecker Services
(a) No portion of any salvage yard or junkyard shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residence district;
(b) All outside storage in such yards shall be enclosed by a sight-obscuring fence of at least eight (8) feet in height, which fence and the materials used to construct it shall be approved of by the City;
(c) No vehicles or junk shall be dismantled or stored within the 100-year flood plain.
(d) Upon receiving a motor vehicle which will not be repaired, the battery shall be removed and the engine lubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid and engine coolant shall be drained into watertight, covered containers and shall be recycled or disposed of according to all applicable Federal and State laws, rules, and regulations. No discharge of any fluids from any motor vehicle shall be permitted into or onto the ground.
(e) To reduce noise, all dismantling of motor vehicles shall take place during timeframes deemed reasonable by the City;
(f) No vehicle or junk shall be dismantled or stored within three hundred (300) feet of any water body or inland wetland, regardless of size;
(g) No vehicles or junk shall be stored within three hundred (300) feet from the property line of any school, church, public playground, public park or cemetery or within ordinary view from the public facility.
(h) No vehicles or junk shall be dismantled or stored within three hundred (300) feet of a well that serves as a public or private water supply unless such well serves the business;
(i) No vehicles, junk or parts of other items shall be stored closer than one (100) feet of any property line. City Code Title 7, Chapter 6: Garbage and Refuse
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (B) General Standards and Limitations for Accessory Uses and Structures
Page 406 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
5.3 Accessory Use Standards
(A) Purpose
This section authorizes the establishment of accessory uses that are incidental and customarily subordinate to principal uses. The purpose of this section is to allow a broad range of accessory uses, so long as such uses are located on the same site as the principal use, and so long as they comply with the standards set forth in this section in order to reduce potentially adverse impacts on surrounding lands.
(B) General Standards and Limitations for Accessory Uses and Structures
(1) Compliance with Ordinance Requirements
All accessory uses and accessory structures shall conform to all applicable requirements of this Ordinance. The provisions of this Section establish additional standards and restrictions for particular accessory uses and structures.
(2) General Standards
All accessory uses and accessory structures shall meet the following standards:
(a) Directly serve the principal use or structure;
(b) Be customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use and structure;
(c) Be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal use or structure;
(d) Be owned or operated by the same person as the principal use or structure;
(e) Be located on the same lot as the principal use or structure, subject to the Public Improvement Project Exception as regulated by Section 6.2 (D)(1);
(f) Not be constructed or established prior to the time the principal use or structure is constructed or established, subject to the Public Improvement Project Exception as regulated by Section 6.2 (D)(1);
(g) Together with the principal use or structure, not violate any standards of this Ordinance;
(h) Not be located within platted or recorded easements or over underground public utilities;
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (B) General Standards and Limitations for Accessory Uses and Structures
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 407
(i) An accessory building shall be considered an integral part of the principal building if it is connected to the principal building either directly or by an enclosed passageway. Such accessory buildings shall adhere to requirements for the principal building.
(j) If a principal building is proposed to be removed with no immediate replacement, all accessory structures shall also be removed.
(k) Not constitute a combination use, which is the combination of two principal uses (combination uses will not meet the above standards in terms of being subordinate or providing service to the principal use).
(3) Location of Accessory Uses or Structures
Except for fences and walls, the following standards shall apply to all accessory structures:
(a) All accessory structures, except as may be specifically denoted, shall be located at least six (6) feet from all lot lines, and at least the minimum distance from public rights-of-way as denoted in the individual zoning district regulations. All such structures must meet applicable building codes related to fire separation distance.
(i) A side yard setback of twenty (20) feet shall be maintained from property lines abutting public streets.
(b) Detached accessory buildings shall be six (6) feet or more from any other building or structure on the same lot.
(c) Detached accessory structures shall not be located beyond the front building line established by the principal structure, with the exception of commercial canopies and signs, which must adhere to regulations of this ordinance.
(4) Maximum Height
(a) Detached accessory buildings shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height except in the I-1 and I-2 districts.
(b) No accessory structure shall exceed the height of the principal structure unless specifically allowed by this ordinance.
(5) Maximum Number of Accessory Structures
In all residential zoning districts, the following limitations on accessory structures shall apply:
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (C) Table of Permitted Accessory Uses
Page 408 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) No more than one (1) private, detached major accessory building may be erected for each dwelling;
(b) No more than one (1) private, detached minor accessory building may be erected for each dwelling;
(c) Additional major or minor accessory buildings may be erected if approved via a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 2.4(D).
(6) Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings Opt Out
The City of Monticello opts-out of the requirements of Minnesota Statute §462.3593, which defines and regulates Temporary Family Health Care Dwellings.
(C) Table of Permitted Accessory Uses
(1) Listed Accessory Uses
Table 5-4, lists the allowed types of accessory uses and structures within each zoning district. If a specific accessory use is allowed in a district, the column underneath the district is marked with a "P." If a specific accessory use is conditionally permitted in a district, the column underneath the district is marked with a "C." If the accessory use or structure is not allowed in a district, the column is shaded. If there is a reference contained in the column entitled "Additional Requirements", refer to the cited section(s) for additional standards that apply to the specific accessory use.
(2) Interpretation of Unidentified Accessory Uses
1. The Community Development Department shall evaluate applications for accessory uses that are not identified in Table 5-4 on a case-by-case basis using the following standards:
a. The definition of “accessory use” (see Section 8.4 – Definitions) and the general accessory use standards and limitations established in Section 5.3(B);
b. The additional regulations for specific accessory uses established in Section 5.3(D), Specific Standards for Certain Accessory uses;
c. The purpose and intent of the base and overlay districts in which the accessory use or structure is located; Section 2.4(D): Conditional Use Permits Section 8.4: Definition of “accessory” Section 8.4: Definition of “use” Section 5.3(B): General Standards and Limitations for Accessory Uses and Structures
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (C) Table of Permitted Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 409
d. Any potential adverse impacts the accessory use or structure may have on other lands in the area as compared to other accessory uses permitted in the district; and
e. The compatibility of the accessory use or structure, including the structure in which it is housed (if applicable), with other principal and accessory uses permitted in the district.
2. The decision of the Community Development Department to permit or deny an unlisted use or structure is final, but may be appealed pursuant to Section 2.4(H).
Section 5.3(D): Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses Section 2.4(H): Appeal of Administrative Decisions
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (C) Table of Permitted Accessory Uses
Page 410 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Table of Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures TABLE 5-4: ACCESSORY USES BY DISTRICT Use Types “P” = Permitted “C” = Conditionally Permitted “I” = Interim Permitted Base Zoning Districts Additional Requirements A O R A R 1 R 2 T N R 3 R 4 M H B 1 B 2 B 3 B 4 C C D I B C I 1 I 2
Accessory Building – minor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(1)
Accessory Building – major
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(2)
Adult Use – accessory
C
5.3(D)(3)
Agricultural Buildings
P
5.3(D)(4)
Air Conditioning Units
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.1(I)
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(5)
Automobile Repair – Major
C
5.3(D)(6)
Automobile Repair – Minor
C
C
5.3(D)(7)
Boarder(s)
P
P
P
5.3(D)(8)
Bulk Fuel Sales/Storage
P
P
P
C
C
C
5.3(D)(9)
Cocktail Room (Retail Sales Accessory to Micro-Distillery)
C
C
C
C
C
C
5.3(D)(10)
Co-located Wireless Telecommunications Antennae
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
4.13(E)
Columbarium (Accessory use to Cemeteries)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(11)
Commercial Canopies
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(12)
Commercial Transmission/ Reception Antennae/ Structures
C
C
C
C
C
C
4.13(D)
Donation Drop-off Containers
P
P
5.3(D)(13)
Drive-Through Services
P
P
P
C
P
P
P
5.3(D)(14)
Entertainment/Recreation – Outdoor Commercial
C
C
C
C
5.3(D)(15)
Fences or Walls
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.3
Greenhouse/Conservatory (non-commercial)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(16)
Heliports
C
C
C
C
C
5.3(D)(17)
Home Occupations
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(18)
Indoor Food / Convenience Sales
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(19)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (C) Table of Permitted Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 411
TABLE 5-4: ACCESSORY USES BY DISTRICT (cont.) Use Types “P” = Permitted “C” = Conditionally Permitted “I” = Interim Permitted Base Zoning Districts Additional Requirements A O R A R 1 R 2 T N R 3 R 4 M H B 1 B 2 B 3 B 4 C C D I B C I 1 I 2
Indoor Storage
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(20)
Incidental Light Manufacturing
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(21)
Machinery/Trucking Repair & Sales
C
5.3(D)(22)
Office
P
P
P
P
P
P
none
Off-street Loading Space
P
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.9
Off-street Parking
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.8
Open Sales
P
C
C
C
5.3(D)(23)
Operation and storage of agricultural vehicles, equipment, and machinery
P
5.3(D)(24)
Outdoor Seating – Accessory to restaurant, bar, production brewery with taproom, microdistillery
with cocktail room, and/or brewpubs
P\C
P\C
P\C
P\C
5.3(D)(25)
Outdoor Sidewalk Sales & Display (businesses)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(26)
Outdoor Storage
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Residential
5.3(D)(27)(a)
Industrial
5.3(D)(27)(b)
Park Facility Buildings & Structures (public)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(28)
Private Amateur Radio
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.13(B)
Private Receiving Antennae and Antenna Support Structures
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
4.13(C)
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 412 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
TABLE 5-4: ACCESSORY USES BY DISTRICT (cont.) Use Types “P” = Permitted “C” = Conditionally Permitted “I” = Interim Permitted Base Zoning Districts Additional Requirements A O R A R 1 R 2 T N R 3 R 4 M H B 1 B 2 B 3 B 4 C C D I B C I 1 I 2
Retail Sales of Goods (as part of an office or industrial use)
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
5.3(D)(29)
Shelters (Storm or Fallout)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(30)
Sign(s)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(31)
Solar Energy System
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(32)
Swimming Pool
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(33)
Taproom (Retail Sales Accessory to Production Brewery)
C
C
C
C
C
C
5.3(D)(34)
Large Trash Handling and Recycling Collection Area
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.3(D)(35)
Wind Energy Conversion System, Commercial
C
C
C
C
C
5.3(D)(36)
Wind Energy Conversion System, Non-commercial
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
5.3(D)(37)
Wireless Telecommunications Support Structures
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
4.3(E)
4.3(F)
(D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
(1) Accessory Building – Minor
(a) Minor accessory buildings do not require a building permit, but shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations.
(b) In the M-H district, one minor accessory building for storage of equipment and refuse is permitted for each manufactured home provided the accessory building can meet all required setbacks, and is designed of weather resistant material that will enhance the general appearance of the lot.
(2) Accessory Building – Major
(a) In all residential districts except M-H, the following shall apply:
(i) Size
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 413
1. Except by Conditional Use Permit issued pursuant to Section 5.3(D)(3)(a)(i)(2) below, no detached accessory building shall exceed ten percent (10%) of the rear yard of the parcel on which it is located, nor shall any combination of attached garage and detached accessory building exceed the following maximum area, whichever is less:
a. 1,200 square feet; or
b. The gross square footage of the principal building footprint.
2. The size limitations for accessory building area listed in Section 5.3(D)(3)(a)(i)(1) above may be increased, up to a maximum square footage of 1,500 square feet, by the issuance of a Conditional Use permit when the following conditions are found to exist:
a. Accessory building space is to be utilized solely for the storage of residential personal property of the occupant of the principal dwelling, and no accessory building space is to be utilized for commercial purposes.
b. The parcel on which the accessory building is to be located is of sufficient size such that the building will not crowd the open space on the lot.
c. The accessory building will not be so large as to have an adverse effect on the architectural character or reasonable residential use of the surrounding property.
d. The accessory buildings shall be constructed to be similar to the principal building in architectural style and building materials.
(ii) Private Garages
1. Private garages shall be used by the family or families residing upon the premises, except as follows:
a. One-half of the private garage spaces on the premises can be rented to non-residents of the property for private passenger vehicles and/or non-commercial vehicles, trailers, or equipment if sufficient off-street parking in full compliance with this ordinance is provided elsewhere on the property.
b. All of the private garage spaces on the premises can be rented to non-residents of the property for private passenger vehicles and/or non-commercial vehicles, trailers, or equipment if the available garage space does not exceed two spaces.
2. No business, service, or industry shall be carried on within a private garage;
3. Private garages shall not be used for the storage of more than one (1) commercial vehicle owned or operated by a resident per dwelling unit.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 414 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) In the M-H district, the following shall apply:
(i)Accessory storage buildings in manufactured home parks, if not reviewed and approved as part of a PUD, shall be conditionally permitted subject to the following additional requirements:
1. The storage building and any accompanying outdoor storage area shall be for the sole use of the residents of the manufactured home park and shall not be used by non-residents.
2. Accompanying outdoor storage areas shall be fully screened from surrounding manufactured home units and adjacent properties.
(c) In all business and industrial districts, commercial or business buildings and structures for a use accessory to the principal use is permitted provided that:
(i) In all districts except I-2, such use shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the gross floor space of the principal use.
(ii) In the I-2 district, such use shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the gross floor space of the principal use.
(3) Adult Use/Accessory Activities provided that:
(a) Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statute 617.241 are not permitted and are prohibited.
(b) An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use shall be classified as an adult use/principal.
(c) Adult use/accessory activities shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes.
(d) Adult use/accessory activities shall comprise no more than ten (10) percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located or shall comprise an area no greater than 100 sq ft of floor area in which it is located, whichever is smaller.
(e) Adult use/accessory activities shall be restricted and prohibited from access to minors by the physical separation of such items from areas of general public access:
(i) Movie Rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view and shall be located within a separate room, the access of which is in clear view and under the control of the persons responsible for the operation.
(ii) Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the publication title. MN Statute 617.241
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 415
(iii) Other Use. Adult use/accessory activities not specifically cited shall comply with the intent of this section subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
(f) Adult use/accessory activities shall be prohibited in establishments where liquor is served.
(g) Adult use/accessory activities shall be prohibited at any public show, movie, caravan, circus, carnival, theatrical, or other performance or exhibition presented to the general public where minors are admitted.
(4) Agricultural Buildings
Agricultural buildings shall adhere to overlay and base zoning district requirements for maximum height, but may exceed the height of the principal structure in the A-O zoning district.
(5) Automated Teller Machines
Drive-up or drive-through ATMs shall be located in a manner that will not result in stacking of vehicles in a public right-of-way.
(6) Automobile Repair – Major
(a) Door opening to service area garage must not face street frontage.
(b) All vehicles being serviced and all vehicle parts must be stored inside or in designated vehicle storage area.
(c) Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building.
(d) Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, is located behind the front building line of the principal structure, and is screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 4.3, Fences & Walls.
(e) The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(f) No conditional use permit shall be granted for an auto repair shop-major located within 300 feet of a residential zone existing at the time the conditional use permit is granted.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 416 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(7) Automobile Repair -- Minor
(a) The use shall be designed to ensure proper functioning of the site as related to vehicle stacking, circulation, and turning movements.
(b) Repair of all vehicles shall occur within an enclosed building. Temporary outdoor vehicle storage may be allowed in an outdoor storage area that is no larger than 25 percent of the buildable area of the lot, is located behind the front building line of the principal structure, and is screened with a wooden fence or masonry wall in accordance with Section 4.3, Fences & Walls.
(c) Vehicles not being repaired but used as a source of parts shall be prohibited unless fully enclosed within a building or fully screened in accordance with (b) above.
(d) Vehicles that are repaired and are awaiting removal shall not be stored or parked for more than 30 consecutive days. In cases where a vehicle is abandoned by its lawful owner before or during the repair process, the vehicle may remain on site as long as is necessary after the 30 day period, provided the owner or operator of the establishment demonstrates steps have been taken to remove the vehicle from the premises using the appropriate legal means.
(8) Boarders
(a) Within the A-O zoning district, the boarding or renting of rooms shall be limited to two (2) persons per dwelling unit.
(b) Within the R-1 zoning district, the boarding or renting of rooms shall be limited to one (1) person per dwelling unit.
(9) Bulk Fuel Sales & Storage
(a) All accessory use bulk fuel storage must be associated with the principal activity on the site. In Industrial Districts, accessory fuel dispensing shall not be available for sale to the public.
(b) Accessory use bulk fuel storage tank containers shall be limited to 1000 gallons.
(c) Accessory use bulk fuel storage may not be located within the required front yard setback.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 417
(d) Accessory use bulk fuels storage facilities shall include 1 shrub landscaping planting per every 10 feet of bulk fuel facility perimeter, planted in accordance with required safety clearances.
(e) Accessory use bulk fuel storage shall be setback 10’ from all property lines and 20’ from any public right of way.
(f) Accessory use bulk fuel storage must include a containment structure and bollards for tank protection per applicable fire code or other regulations.
(g) Accessory use bulk fuel storage facilities shall comply with all MPCA and State Fire Marshal requirements, all other permit, testing and listing requirements, and all applicable codes and standards such as NFPA 58.
(h) Accessory use bulk fuel storage facilities located within the Drinking Water Supply Management Area (DWSMA) must comply with the City Engineer’s recommendations for site and containment arrangement.
(10) Cocktail Rooms
Cocktail rooms shall be conditionally permitted as accessory uses only to a Micro-Distillery as a principal use and subject to those conditions found in Chapter 5, Section 2 for Micro-Distillery.
(11) Columbarium
Accessory use to Cemeteries only. Subject to the following:
(a) Columbarium Structures shall set back a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet from all lot lines and public right of way.
(b) The principal use cemetery shall comply with all other applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance, with the exception of the requirement for distance from I-94.
(c) No portion of the Columbarium shall exceed height requirements for accessory buildings in the district in which the structure is located.
(d) The Columbarium shall be constructed of masonry materials for all exterior surfaces, with architectural metals and glass for details and openings only.
(12) Commercial Canopies
(a) Canopies shall not be internally illuminated.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 418 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Lighting shall be recessed and down directional.
(13) Donation Drop-off Containers
(a) No more than one (1) container shall be located on a parcel.
(b) Be limited to one sign no more than four (4) feet high and sixteen (16) square feet in area that displays the name and telephone number of the party responsible for the donation container.
(c) The container shall not block access to required parking spaces or parking lot aisles.
(d) The container shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of a dwelling.
(14) Drive-Through Service
(a) In general, all drive through service lanes shall adhere to the following:
(i) Service provided by the drive through facility is accessory to an interior on-site service within the same building.
(ii) Drive-through facilities shall be located at least 200 feet from all residential zoning districts except R-3 and R-4.
(iii) Drive-through lanes shall be designed to avoid disruption of pedestrian and vehicular traffic flow, both on- and off-site.
(iv) Drive-through lanes shall not be located between the restaurant entrance and customer parking spaces whenever possible.
(v) Landscaping and other site improvements are included which screen automobile stacking space from the public street.
(vi) Voice amplifiers used in conjunction with drive-thru services shall not be audible to adjoining residential areas.
(vii) Minimum stacking space shall be provided per the requirements of Table 5-5:
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 419
(b) Drive through service within the CCD district shall adhere to the following additional standards:
(i) The principal building occupies no less than forty (40) percent of the property, exclusive of easements devoted to public pedestrian use or other outdoor public spaces.
(ii) The building, site, and signage meet the standards for the “CCD” district, and design review is conducted by the Planning Commission.
(iii) The proposed use demonstrates compatibility and consistency with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and Downtown Revitalization Plan.
(15) Entertainment/Recreation – Outdoor Commercial
(a) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with at least a semi-opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “C”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(b) Adequate measures to contain the proposed activity on the subject site shall be provided.
(c) Dust and noise are controlled consistent with City Ordinance.
TABLE 5-5: REQUIRED STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE THROUGHS Use or Activity [1] Minimum Number of Stacking Spaces (per lane) Measured From [2]
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)
3
Teller machine
Financial Institution
3
Teller window
Personal Services (e.g. dry-cleaning)
4
Window
Restaurants
5
Pick-up Window
Retail Commercial Uses (e.g. pharmacy)
4
Window
Other
Uses not specifically listed shall have their stacking space minimums determined by the Community Development Department based on standards for comparable uses listed above.
[1]: See Table 5-1: Uses By District, and/or Table 5-4: Accessory Uses by District
[2]: Distance shall be measured from window where products are delivered when more than one window is used for the drive through service. Section 4.1(G): Standards for Perimeter Buffers
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 420 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(16) Greenhouse / Conservatory (non-commercial)
Greenhouses or conservatories accessory to residential units shall not be used for commercial purposes.
(17) Heliports
Heliports shall be limited to hospitals which require such for responding to medical emergencies.
(18) Home Occupations
(a) Purpose
The purpose of this section is to prevent competition with business districts and to provide a means through the establishment of specific standards and procedures by which home occupations can be conducted in residential neighborhoods without jeopardizing the health, safety, and general welfare of the surrounding neighborhood. In addition, this section is intended to provide a mechanism enabling the distinction between permitted home occupations and special or customarily "more sensitive" home occupations so that permitted home occupations may be allowed through an administrative process rather than a legislative hearing process.
(b) Application
Subject to the non-conforming use provision of this ordinance, all occupations conducted in the home shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.3(D)(18). This section shall not be construed, however, to apply to home occupations accessory to farming.
(c) Exempted Home Occupations
Daycare home facilities shall be governed by the regulations for “group residential facilities” which are subject to the standards in Section 5.2(C)(3).
(d) General Provisions Applicable to all Home Occupations
All home occupations shall comply with the following general provisions:
(i) All home occupations shall comply with the provisions of the City code.
(ii) Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on nearby residential neighborhoods.
(iii) No equipment shall be used in the home occupation which will create electrical interference to surrounding properties.
(iv) Any home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential use of the premises, should not change the residential character Section 5.2(C)(3): Group Residential Facilities
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 421
thereof and shall result in no incompatibility or disturbance to the surrounding residential uses.
(v) No home occupation shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features not customarily found in dwellings except where required to comply with local and state fire and police recommendations.
(vi) There shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation, except personal automobiles used in the home occupation may be parked on the site.
(vii) The home occupation shall meet all applicable fire and building codes.
(viii) All signage on the property shall conform to requirements for residential signs in Section 4.5.
(ix) No home occupation shall be conducted between the hours of 10 p.m. and 7 a.m. unless said occupation is contained entirely within the principal building and will not require any on-street parking facilities.
(x) No home occupation shall generate more traffic than one (1) car for off-street parking at any given point in time.
(xi) If located in the CCD district, the home occupation must meet all requirements for a “permitted home occupation” enumerated in subsection 5.3(D)(18)(e) below.
(e) Specific Requirements for Permitted Home Occupations
Permitted home occupations may be conducted without any City approvals provided the provisions applicable to all home occupations [Section 5.3(D)(18)(d)] and the following additional provisions are all met:
(i) Employees of the business who do not reside on the premises shall be prohibited from conducting any business activities whatsoever on the premises.
(ii) All permitted home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal building and may not be conducted in an accessory building.
(iii) No customer visits to the premises shall be permitted.
(iv) No deliveries other than those routinely made in a residential district (U.S. Mail, United Parcel Service, etc) shall be permitted.
(v) The home occupation shall not be used as a work staging area whereby employees report to the home occupation site to receive work assignments for working elsewhere.
(f) Specific Requirements for Administrative Home Occupations Section 4.5: Signs
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 422 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) Administrative home occupations may be established only after securing an administrative Home Occupation Permit from the Community Development Department. Examples of home occupations allowed by permit include: art studio, dressmaking, secretarial services, foster care, professional offices and teaching with musical, dancing, and other instructions which consist of no more than one pupil at a time and similar uses.
(ii) Administrative home occupation shall not involve any of the following: repair service or manufacturing which requires equipment other than that which is typically found in a dwelling; teaching which customarily consists of more than one pupil at a time; over-the-counter sale of merchandise produced off the premises, except for brand name products that are not marketed and sold in a wholesale or retail outlet.
(iii) All administrative home occupations shall comply with the provisions applicable to all home occupations [Section 5.3(D)(18)(d)] and the following additional provisions in order to obtain a permit:
1. No person other than a resident shall conduct the home occupation, except where the applicant can satisfactorily prove unusual or unique conditions or need for non-resident assistance from no more than one person, and that this exception would not compromise the intent outlined in Section 5.3(D)(18)(a).
2. All administrative home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the principal building and may not be conducted in an accessory building.
3. Customer visits to the home occupation shall be arranged by appointment with no more than one (1) customer scheduled to be on the premises at any given point in time.
4. No deliveries other than those routinely made in a residential district (U.S. Mail, United 0Parcel Service, etc) shall be permitted.
5. The home occupation shall not be used as a work staging area whereby employees report to the home occupation site to receive work assignments for working elsewhere.
(g) Specific Requirements for Conditionally Permitted Home Occupations
(i) Conditionally permitted home occupations may be established only after securing a conditional use permit subject to the requirements of Section 2.4(D) of this ordinance. Examples of conditionally permitted home occupations include: barber and beauty services, photography studio, group lessons, saw sharpening, skate sharpening, small appliances and small engine repair and the like. Section 2.4(D): Conditional Use Permits
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 423
(ii) All conditionally permitted home occupations shall comply with the provisions applicable to all home occupations [Section 5.3(D)(18)(d)] and the following additional provisions in order to obtain a permit:
1. No person other than a resident shall conduct the home occupation, except where the applicant can satisfactorily prove unusual or unique conditions or need for non-resident assistance from no more than four people, and that this exception would not compromise the intent of Section 5.3(D)(18).
2. The home occupations shall not create a parking demand in excess of that which can be accommodated on the premises as regulated by Section 4.8 of this ordinance, or five vehicles, whichever is less.
3. No vehicle on the premises shall be parked closer than fifteen (15) feet from the curb line.
4. Areas for stock-in-trade incidental to the performance of the service and equipment other than that which is typically found in a dwelling shall be identified on a site plan, and the applicant shall need to successfully demonstrate how such can be accommodated out of view from neighboring properties.
(h) Inspection
The City hereby reserves the right upon issuing any home occupation permit to inspect the premises in which the occupation is being conducted to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section or any conditions additionally imposed.
(19) Indoor Food / Convenience Sales
Indoor food/convenience sales occurring as an accessory use shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Size
The square footage used by food sales operations, including preparation, sales, and storage, but not including dining, shall not exceed 30 percent of the principal use.
(b) Location
(i) To the maximum extent practicable, food sales areas shall be internal to the principal use they serve.
(ii) In residence districts, such accessory uses shall be limited to schools, colleges, universities, hospitals, airports, bus stations, and other similar institutions permitted in the district.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 424 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Entrances
Entrance to the food sales area shall be via the principal use it serves and shall not have dedicated off-street parking areas or signage.
(20) Indoor Storage
(a) The area used for storage shall not exceed 35% of gross floor area square footage of the principal use.
(b) Storage shall be related to the products being sold or offered by the principal use.
(c) If located within the CCD, storage accessory uses may be located on an adjacent or adjoining parcel within the CCD, subject to above regulations.
(21) Incidental Light Manufacturing
(a) Light manufacturing or assembly are permitted accessory uses in all industrial zoning districts subject to the restrictions for the primary use outlined in this ordinance.
(b) Light manufacturing or assembly of products in commercial zoning districts shall only be conducted if:
(i) The manufacturing or assembly is related to the products being sold or offered by the Principal Use;
(ii) No less that 40% of the goods manufactured or assembled as part of the accessory use shall be sold in a retail outlet for the principal use.
(iii) The retail outlet for the principal use shall be used for display, consumption, sale and other retail activity related to the goods produced by the accessory use, and such retail activity (whether display, consumption and/or sale) must constitute a minimum of 50% of the gross floor area of the principle use.
(iv) The area used for light manufacturing or assembly activity shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor area of the principal use.
(v) The light manufacturing or assembly shall be compatible with adjacent property owners, tenants, and civic institutions as well as proposed uses as found in the comprehensive plan.
(vi) The light manufacturing or assembly shall be very specific, and only be allowed in conjunction with a specific business activity (i.e. authorization for manufacturing monuments shall only be allowed as an accessory use
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 425
to a monument shop. If the principal use changes to cell phone sales, the accessory use of manufacturing monuments shall cease).
(22) Machinery/Trucking Repair and Sales and Industrial Services
(a) The entire site other than that taken up by a building, structure, or plantings shall be surfaced with a material to control dust and drainage which is subject to the approval of the Community Development Department.
(b) A drainage system subject to the approval of the Community Development Department shall be installed.
(c) When abutting a residential use, the property shall be screened with an opaque buffer (Table 4-2, Buffer Type “D”) in accordance with section 4.1(G) of this ordinance.
(d) Provisions are made to control and reduce noise.
(e) No other outside storage except as permitted or conditionally permitted in compliance with Section 5.3(D)(26) of this ordinance.
(f) If the business repairs semi-trucks or other large machinery, a specific area shall be designated for the exterior storage of the things being repaired and/or other vehicles and equipment accessory and incidental to the vehicle or machinery being repaired or serviced.
(23) Open Sales
In commercial and industrial districts where open sales is conditionally permitted, the following standards shall apply:
(i) Outside services, sales and equipment rental connected with the principal uses is limited to thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. This percentage may be increased through issuance of the conditional use permit.
(ii) Outside sales areas are fenced or screened from view of residentially zoned areas and public right-of-way in compliance with Section 4.1(I) of this ordinance.
(iii) All lighting shall be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(iv) Sales area is grassed or surfaced to control dust.
(v) Does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this ordinance.
Section 4.1(I): Standards for Required Screening Section 4.4: Exterior Lighting
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 426 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(24) Operation and Storage of Agricultural Vehicles, Equipment, and Machinery
Vehicles, equipment, and machinery being stored shall be incidental to a permitted or conditionally permitted uses.
(25) Outdoor Seating – Accessory to restaurant, bar, production brewery with taproom, micro-distillery with cocktail room, and/or brewpubs
(a) For all restaurants, restaurant/bars, production brewery with taproom, microdistillery with cocktail room, and/or brewpubs, if the establishment (building) or outdoor seating area is located within 300 feet of a residential zoning district, the following standards shall apply:
(i) The use shall require authorization through a conditional use permit.
(ii) Primary access from local residential streets shall be prohibited.
(b) Restaurants, restaurant/bars, production brewery with taproom, microdistillery with cocktail room, and/or brewpubs having outdoor seating (including, but not limited to, seating for dining or listening to live or recorded acoustic or amplified entertainment outside of the building) shall comply with the following standards:
(i) The outdoor portions of the facility shall not operate after 10:00 P.M. unless a Special Event Permit for such event has been approved by the City Council. Such a permit supersedes the provisions of City Code 6-1- 10(B).
(ii) No noise or music shall be generated in any outdoor seating area adjacent to residential property after 9:00 p.m.
(iii) The outdoor seating area shall not obstruct the movement of pedestrians along sidewalks or through areas intended for public use.
(iv) Outdoor seating shall be fenced and enclosed to control access to the area, with service only from the inside of the facility.
(v) No outdoor seating area shall be located within one hundred feet (100’) of any property containing single family, two family, or townhouse residential units.
(vi) Any outdoor seating area adjacent to residential property shall be fenced and fully screened from view of said residential property.
(vii) All lighting shall be hooded and light glare or reflection shall not be visible from adjoining residential property.
(viii) Fences are permitted for outdoor seating areas, provided such fence maintains 50% opacity within front yard areas.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 427
(26) Outdoor Sidewalk Sales and Display
Outdoor sidewalk sales and display areas associated with legally permitted retail uses shall:
(a) Not encroach into areas necessary for the safe ingress and egress into the retail structure;
(b) Maintain a minimum pedestrian walkway of at least five feet in width along the front of the display;
(c) Take place only on an improved dustless surface;
(d) May not take up required parking;
(e) The area of the site devoted to sidewalk sales and display under this section shall not exceed five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use. Sidewalk sales and display which exceed five (5) percent of the gross floor area of the principal use may be allowed by conditional use permit.
(27) Outdoor Storage
(a) In all zoning districts, all materials and equipment, except as specifically denoted in this ordinance, shall be stored within a building or fully screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties except for the following:
(i) Clothes line pole and wire.
(ii) Recreational equipment and vehicles, subject to off-street parking regulations in Section 4.8 of this ordinance.
(iii) Construction and landscaping material currently being used on the premises.
(iv) Off-street parking of passenger vehicles, emergency vehicles and small commercial vehicles in residential areas, unless otherwise required to be screened according to Section 4.8 of this ordinance.
(v) Propane tanks, fuel oil tanks, and other similar residential heating fuel storage tanks which do not exceed 1,000 gallons in capacity and shall not be located within five (5) feet of any property line.
(vi) Wood piles in which wood is stored for fuel provided that not more than 10 cords shall be stored on any property. A cord shall be 4'x4'x8'.
(vii) All wood piles shall be five (5) feet or more from the rear and side yard property lines and shall be stored behind the appropriate setback line in front yards.
(viii) Solar energy systems.
(ix) Wind energy conversion systems.
(b) In the I-1 and I-2 districts, the following shall apply: Section 4.8: Off-Street Parking
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 428 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(i) When abutting a zoning district or use other than industrial, the outdoor storage use shall require authorization through a conditional use permit following the provisions of Section 2.4(D) of this ordinance.
(ii) The storage area shall be located within the rear yard, except that an outdoor storage area may also include that area between the front building line and the rear yard along the interior lot side. Storage may not be located beyond the side building line on the street side of a corner lot. On a double-fronting lot, outdoor storage may be located in the side yard only.
(iii) In the I-1 District, outdoor storage shall be limited to 50% of the gross square footage of the principal building. Storage may be increased up to 100% of the gross square footage of the principal building by conditional use permit.
(iv) In the I-2 District, outdoor storage shall be limited to an area not to exceed the gross square footage of the principal building.
(v) In the I-1 District, outdoor storage areas shall meet the minimum building setback from all side and rear property lines per the requirements of this ordinance and when adjacent to zoning districts or uses other than industrial, shall be located a minimum of 50’ feet from the adjacent property line.
(vi) In the I-2 District, outdoor storage shall be setback 10’ from all side and rear property lines and when adjacent to zoning districts or uses other than industrial, shall be located a minimum of 50’ feet from the adjacent property line.
(vii) The area is fenced and screened from view of neighboring uses and from the public right of way in compliance with this section.
a. In the I-1 district, screening shall consist of masonry walls or fencing constructed of wood or vinyl and shall provide for 100% opacity. Such fences or walls shall meet all other requirements of Section 4.3 of this ordinance.
b. In the I-2 District, metal fences may be permitted when the materials have been recycled and reprocessed to resemble new building materials and are designed for use as a fencing material, and when such materials are designed to resemble allowed materials as listed in section 4.3(J)(1).
c. Additional landscaping of one evergreen tree per 6’ of linear fenceline is required to be planted along the exterior of outdoor storage area in conformance with Section 4.1 of this ordinance. Trees may be staggered along fenceline.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 429
d. Fences and walls shall not exceed 15’ in height as measured from the existing grade to the top of the fence panel.
e. Height of storage may not exceed the screening wall or fence, or the height of required landscaping.
(viii) Outdoor storage shall be allowed only on improved surface of asphalt or concrete.
(ix) Storage in shipping containers shall be prohibited unless such storage occurs within the screened outdoor storage area.
(x) There shall be no storage of hazardous waste, as defined by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
(xi) Exterior storage areas shall comply with all applicable fire codes and no portion of the outdoor storage shall block access to hydrants, fire sprinklers, or other fire-fighting equipment.
(xii) Noise shall be controlled consistent with the standards of this ordinance.
(xiii) All lighting shall be in compliance with Section 4.4 of this ordinance.
(xiv) Does not take up parking space as required for conformity to this ordinance.
(xv) Outdoor storage areas shall comply with all requirements for grading, drainage, stormwater management and erosion control per Section 4.10 of this ordinance.
(28) Park Facility Buildings and Structures
Limitations on number and size for accessory buildings and structures shall not apply to active or passive public park facilities.
(29) Retail Sales of Goods (as part of an office or industrial use)
(a) Location:
(i) All sales are conducted indoors within a clearly defined area of the principal building reserved exclusively for retail sales. Said sales area must be physically segregated from other principal activities in the building.
(ii) The retail sales area must be located on the ground floor of the principal building.
(b) Sales Area. The retail sales activity shall not occupy more than fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the building.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 430 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Access. The building where such use is located is one having direct access to a collector or arterial level street without the necessity of using residential streets.
(d) Hours. Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. The provisions of this section are considered and satisfactorily met.
(30) Shelters (Storm or Fallout)
Storm and fallout shelters shall not alter the character of the premises with respect to the primary use as permitted in the district.
(31) Sign(s)
All signs within the City shall comply with the finishing standards contained in Section 4.5, Signs.
(32) Solar Energy Systems
(a) All Solar Energy Systems
(i)All solar energy systems shall be operable and maintained in good repair.
(ii)Solar energy systems shall meet all required setbacks and height requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(iii)Solar energy systems shall be an integral part of the structure to which they are attached.
(iv)As a means of evidencing existing solar access conditions prior to installation, the owner of a solar energy system may file notarized photographs of the subject area with the Community Development Department prior to installation of said system.
(v)Solar energy systems shall be allowed on roofs of principal and accessory buildings, provided other requirements of this section are met.
(vi)Solar energy systems shall be designed to minimize glare with adequate screening and/or coatings, as appropriate.
(vii)Solar energy systems shall be located in such a way as to be screened from visibility of the public right of way, or shall be integrated into the architecture of the structure so as to be visually inconspicuous.
(viii)Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be located only in the rear yard of residential property, and shall not occupy an area more than 20% of the size of the perimeter foundation of the principal building.
(b) Solar Energy Systems in Business (B) and Industrial (I) districts and the CCD District. Section 4.5: Signs
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 431
(i) Solar Energy Systems in the B, I, and CCD Districts shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.3(D)(31)(a) (i) through (vi).
(ii) Roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems in these districts shall be allowed as permitted accessory uses on principal and accessory buildings, provided such systems do not extend more than six (6) feet above the height of the roof where they are mounted.
(iii) Ground mounted Solar Energy Systems in these districts shall be allowed by Conditional Use Permit, and together with accessory buildings, shall not exceed an area of any parcel greater than that allowed for accessory buildings in the applicable zone.
(iv) Ground mounted Solar Energy Systems in these districts shall be allowed only when the property owner can show that roof-mounted systems are not feasible due to building structural issues.
(33) Swimming Pools
(a) All swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, and other water tanks exceeding 24 inches in depth must be fenced in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.3(D)(32)(b) below.
(b) Residential swimming pool fences shall be constructed as follows:
(i)Residential swimming pool fences must be at least 48 inches in height. The fence must not permit the passage of a 4-inch sphere through openings in the fence. Fences must be constructed of durable, corrosion- and decay- resistive materials. Openings below the fence to grade must not exceed 4 inches.
(ii)Where an above-ground pool structure has walls that are at least 4 feet in height, the pool wall may serve to meet the fencing requirements; however, the access to the pool must provide equivalent protection to prevent unauthorized entry.
(iii)Fences for swimming pools must include a self-closing, self-latching device on all gates. Latches must be installed at least 3 feet 6 inches above grade. Gates must not exceed 4 feet in width and must meet the same construction requirements as fences. You must provide temporary fencing during installation if your yard is not fenced. Building permits are required for fences exceeding six (6) feet in height.
(c) Commercial swimming pool fences shall be not less than 5 feet in height and constructed as required by the Minnesota Department of Health.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.3 Accessory Use Standards
Subsection (D) Additional Specific Standards for Certain Accessory Uses
Page 432 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(d) In addition to the requirements above, all swimming pools shall adhere to the City Code requirements for swimming pools outlined in Title 4, Chapter 3 of City Code.
(34) Taprooms
Taprooms shall be conditionally permitted as accessory uses only to Production Brewery as a principal use and subject to those conditions found in Chapter 5, Section 2 for Production Brewery.
(35) Trash Handling and Recycling Collection Area
(a) Multiple-family structures with more than four dwelling units shall adhere to the following:
(i)All large trash handling and recycling collection area(s) shall be:
1. Located within the principal structure and be totally screened from public view by the principal building; or
2. Be stored within an accessory structure constructed of building materials compatible with the principal structure, enclosed by a roof, and readily served through swinging doors.
(ii)Compactors that are attached to the principal structure shall be totally screened from eye level view from public streets and adjacent properties by a screening wall constructed of the same building material as the principal structure.
(b) Trash handling and recycling collection area(s) serving commercial and industrial uses shall be subject to the following standards:
(i)Depicted on Site Plans
The location and configuration of screening for large trash handling and recycling collection areas shall be depicted on all required landscaping plans.
(ii)Screening Configuration
1. Large trash handling and recycling collection areas shall be fully screened from adjacent properties.
2. In cases where access to large trash handling and recycling face a public right-of-way, the access way shall be screened with an opaque gate. Chain link shall not be used for such gates.
3. Compactors that are attached to the principal structure shall be totally screened from eye level view from public streets and adjacent non-industrial properties by a screening wall constructed of the same building material as the principal structure. City Code Title 4, Chapter 3: Swimming Pool Regulations
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (A) Purpose
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 433
(iii)Setbacks
1. Large trash handling and recycling shall meet the required setbacks for structures as required in the underlying zoning district.
2. In all cases, large trash handling and recycling collection areas shall be at least six feet from a side or rear lot line, and shall not be located within front yards or corner side yards.
(iv)Design Materials
If a wall or detached accessory structure is used to screen or define a large trash handling and recycling collection area, the building materials used for the wall or accessory structure shall be compatible with the principal structure and be readily served through swinging doors.
(v)Ground Surface Requirements
Areas intended for large trash handling and recycling collection areas shall be surfaced with concrete that meets or exceeds minimum City standards.
(vi)Drainage
Eating establishments and other uses that produce significant amounts of liquid waste shall configure areas intended for large trash handling and recycling collection areas to drain to the sanitary sewer system through grease traps or similar devices as required by the Community Development Department.
(36) Wind Energy Conversion System – Commercial
All commercial WECS systems shall adhere to the requirements of Section 4.12 in this ordinance.
(37) Wind Energy Conversion System – Non-commercial
(a) Non-commercial WECS systems shall have a total height of less than 200 feet.
(b) All non-commercial WECS systems shall adhere to the requirements of Section 4.12 in this ordinance. 5.4 Temporary Uses
(A) Purpose
This section allows for the establishment of certain temporary uses of limited duration and special events, provided that such uses comply with the standards in this subsection and are discontinued upon the expiration of a set time period. Temporary uses and Section 4.12: Wind Energy Conversion Systems
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (D) Table of Allowed Temporary Uses and Structures
Page 434 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
special events shall not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent building or structure.
(B) Permit Required
Temporary uses and structures that require a permit shall be reviewed in accordance with the process outlined in Section 2.4(L), Temporary Use Permits; and if a building permit is also necessary, in accordance with Section 2.4(I), Building Permits.
(C) General Standards for Temporary Uses
Temporary uses, structures, or events shall comply with the following:
(1) Obtain the appropriate permits (as required);
(2) Not be detrimental to property or improvements in the surrounding area or to the public health, safety, or general welfare;
(3) Be compatible with the principal uses taking place on the site;
(4) Not have substantial adverse effects or noise impacts on nearby residential neighborhoods;
(5) Not include permanent alterations to the site;
(6) Meet all the setbacks of the underlying base and overlay zoning districts, unless expressly stated otherwise in this ordinance.
(7) Temporary signs permitted under the Code and associated with the use or structure shall be removed when the temporary activity ceases.
(8) Not violate the applicable conditions of approval that apply to a site or use on the site;
(9) Not interfere with the normal operations of any permanent use located on the property; and
(10) Contain sufficient land area to allow the temporary use, structure, or special event to occur, as well as adequate land to accommodate the parking and traffic movement associated with the temporary use, without disturbing environmentally sensitive lands.
(D) Table of Allowed Temporary Uses and Structures
Table 5-6 summarizes allowed temporary uses and structures and any general or specific standards that apply. Temporary uses or structures not listed in the table are prohibited.
Section 2.4(L): Temporary Use Permits Section 2.4(I): Building Permits
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 435
TABLE 5-6: TEMPORARY USES & STRUCTURES Temporary Use or Structure Allowable Duration (per site) Permit(s) Required Additional Requirements Temporary Structure (cont.)
Construction Dumpster (on public ROW/property)
Until issuance of certificate of occupancy or two days following expiration or finaling of a building permit
Yes
Sec 5.4(E)(1)(a)
Construction Dumpster (on private property)
30 days without a building permit
No
Sec 5.4(E)(1)(b)
Construction Trailer
Until issuance of certificate of occupancy
Yes
Sec 5.4(E)(2)
Mobile Food Units
See Title 3, Chapter 20, City Code
Recreational Vehicle Use
1 month
Yes
Sec 5.4(E)(3)
Real Estate Office / Model Sales Home
Until 85% occupancy of the phase is reached
Yes + Building Permit
Sec 5.4(E)(4)
Temporary Mobile Cell Site
30 days
Yes + Building Permit
Sec 5.4(E)(5)
Temporary Sign
120 days per year
Yes
Sec 4.5(I)
Temporary Storage in a Portable Container
See Section 5.4(E)(6)
Yes
Sec 5.4(E)(6)
Tents, Canopies, Tarp Garages, and Hoop Buildings
30 days per year
Yes
Sec 5.4(E)(7) Temporary Sale
Farmer’s Market
Continuous; up to 5 months per year on a single site
Yes
Sec 5.4(E)(8)
Garage/Yard Sale
4 days per event; 3 events total per calendar year
No
Sec 5.4(E)(9)
Seasonal Sales
60 days per permit; 120 days per calendar year maximum term
Yes
Sec 5.4(E)(7) & Sec 5.4(E)(11)
Temporary Merchant
See Title 3, Chapter 10 of City Code
Wayside Stands
See Title 3, Chapter 10 of City Code Special Events
Special Events
See Title 3, Chapter 10 of City Code
(E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
(1) Construction Dumpster
(a) The placement of a temporary construction dumpster or other trash receptacle within a public right-of-way or other site owned by the City shall be subject to standards in the Monticello City code as may be applicable.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
Page 436 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(b) Temporary trash receptacles or dumpsters located outside public rights-of way are not required to obtain a temporary use permit, but shall comply with the following standards:
(i) Be located to the side or the rear of the site, to the maximum extent practicable;
(ii) Be located as far as possible from lots containing existing development;
(iii) Not be located within a floodplain or otherwise obstruct drainage flow;
(iv) Not be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant or within a required landscaping area; and
(v) Be located outside of any required tree protection fencing and the dripline of existing trees.
(vi) Be secured with a cover to prevent litter and debris from escaping the dumpster.
(2) Construction Trailer
(a) Construction trailers may be permitted on a construction site provided that the trailer is:
(i) Approved by the Community Development Department for location, safety, and compatibility with adjacent properties;
(ii) Located on the same site or in the same development as the related construction;
(iii) Not located within a required landscape area; and
(iv) Associated with development for which a valid Building Permit has been or will be issued.
(b) The applicant shall be required to restore the trailer site to its previous condition if the trailer is located off the construction site.
(3) Recreational Vehicle Use
(a) A recreational vehicle owned by a non-resident, guest, or visitor may be parked or occupied by the guest or visitor on private property containing a permanent dwelling unit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days while visiting the resident of the property.
(b) The recreation vehicle shall have self-contained sanitary facilities or standard on-site facilities as required by the Community Development Department.
(c) The parking location of a recreational vehicle shall adhere to the requirements of Section 4.8, Off-Street Parking. Section 4.8 Off Street Parking Regulations
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 437
(4) Real Estate Sales Office/Model Sales Home
One temporary real estate sales office or model sales home per builder or developer shall be permitted in a section or phase of a new residential or nonresidential development provided the office or model home:
(a) Is aesthetically compatible with the character of surrounding development in terms of exterior color, predominant exterior building materials, and landscape;
(b) Complies with the applicable standards in the approved development plan (if applicable);
(c) Is operated by a developer or builder active in the same phase or section where the use is located; and
(d) Is removed or the model home is converted into a permanent residential use once 85 percent occupancy in the section or phase of the development is reached.
(5) Temporary Mobile Cell Site
(a) A temporary mobile cell site may be erected after issuance of a building permit in the case of equipment failure or testing, or for an interim period (limited to 30 days) after a conditional use permit for a permanent cell site is approved.
(b) Temporary mobile cell sites shall be removed within 72 hours following completion of testing, the installation of the permanent tower, or resolution of equipment failure.
(6) Temporary Storage in a Portable Shipping Container
Temporary storage in a portable shipping container shall be permitted to serve an existing use subject to the following standards.
(a) For residential uses, a portable shipping container shall not be located:
(i) On a lot without prior approval from the Community Development Department.
(ii) In a required front yard;
(iii) Within ten feet of any lot line or structure;
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
Page 438 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(iv) In a manner that impedes ingress, egress, or emergency access; and
(v) On an individual parcel or site for more than 30 total days over any one-year period.
(b) For commercial, industrial or civic uses, portable shipping containers shall not be located:
(i) On a lot without prior approval from the Community Development Department.
(ii) Within ten feet of any lot line or structure;
(iii) In a manner that impedes ingress, egress, or emergency access; and
(iv) On an individual parcel or site for more than 30 total days over any one-year period unless associated within an active building permit. Successive 30 day permits without additional fee may be authorized until a certificate of occupancy is issued.
(7) Tents, Canopies, Tarp Garages, and Hoop Buildings
Tents, canopies, tarp garages, and hoop buildings or similar membrane structures shall:
(a) Obtain a building permit from the Community Development Department;
(b) Maintain a minimum clearance of 20 feet from all other structures and tents;
(c) Not exceed more than two on a single parcel (the Community Development Department may approve more than two as a part of a special event on a single parcel of 20 or more acres in size);
(d) Not be erected for more than a total of 30 days in any calendar year with the exception of those uses with valid permits issued under 5.4(E)(8-11);
(e) Be limited to a maximum of three occurrences per parcel per year;
(f) Not be placed within required landscape areas;
(g) Not obstruct emergency vehicle access to adjacent lots or disrupt pedestrian circulation; and
(h) The lot or site shall be restored to its original condition within two days of removal of the tent, canopy, tarp garage, or hoop building.
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 439
(8) Farmer’s Market
Farmer’s markets shall:
(a) Be limited to the retail sale of agriculture, horticulture, or floricultural products;
(b) Provide adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas;
(c) Not reduce minimum parking areas below the minimum required for the property under the City Code;
(d) Not be located with any right-of-way;
(e) Renew all applicable temporary use permits annually.
(f) Be subject to the sign standards in Section 4.5, Signs.
(9) Garage/Yard Sales
(a) Garage or yard sales shall:
(i) Be limited to a maximum of three per dwelling per year.
(ii) Not exceed a maximum duration of four consecutive days per sale;
(iii) Occur only between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M.;
(iv) Not place items for sale, signs or other advertising within the public right-of-way, or impede the passage of traffic on streets in the area of the sale;
(v) Conduct vehicle parking in accordance with the standards in this ordinance and any other applicable City requirements;
(vi) Not negatively affect neighboring properties in terms of noise, trash, parking, or impede the flow of traffic on nearby streets;
(vii) Not permit loud or boisterous conduct on the premises; and
(viii) Not allow unsold items or other sale-related materials to remain in public view following conclusion of the sale.
(ix) Remove all sale related signage immediately upon conclusion of the sale.
(b) The owner and/or tenant of the premises on which a sale is conducted, shall be responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of the sale.
(10) Wayside Stands
A wayside stand shall:
CHAPTER 5: USE STANDARDS
Section 5.4 Temporary Uses
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
Page 440 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(a) Be limited to the retail sale of agriculture, horticulture, or floricultural products;
(b) Not exceed 750 square feet in area;
(c) Not be located with any right-of-way;
(d) Be authorized in writing by the landowner if conducted on property not owned by the operator of the wayside stand;
(e) Not operate for more than three (3) days per site in any given week;
(f) Not reduce available parking areas below that which is required by code;
(g) Provide adequate ingress, egress, and off-street parking areas; and
(h) Be subject to the sign standards in Section 4.5, Signs.
(11) Seasonal Sales
Seasonal sales shall:
(a) Be authorized in writing by the property owner if conducted on property not owned by the seasonal sale operator;
(b) Not be located within any right-of-way;
(c) Not reduce available parking areas below that which is required by code;
(d) Provide adequate ingress, egress and off-street parking areas; and
(e) Be subject to the sign standards in Section 4.
Section 4.5: Signs
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES
Section 6.2 Authority to Continue
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 441
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES 6.1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation of non-conforming buildings, structures, and uses and to specify those requirements, circumstances, and conditions under which non-conforming buildings, structures, and uses will be operated and maintained. The zoning ordinance establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of uses which are permitted in that district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of these districts that non-conforming buildings, structures, and uses not be permitted to continue without restriction. Furthermore, it is the intent of this chapter that all non-conforming uses shall be eventually brought into conformity. 6.2 Authority to Continue
(A) Legally conforming existing structures and uses in existence on the effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4 which become non-conforming to this ordinance shall be considered legally non-conforming and shall be treated as follows:
(1) A use which is no longer permitted due to a change in zoning shall be considered a legally non-conforming use subject to all conditions for such use as outlined in this ordinance, and shall not be expanded, except that legally non-conforming owner-occupied residential uses may be expanded to improve livability, provided the expansion meets all other applicable conditions of the zoning district in which the residential use is located and does not increase any existing non-conforming condition on the property, including the number of residential units in a building.
(2) A structure which becomes non-conforming to a required setback or setbacks shall be viewed as a legally non-conforming structure.
(B) With the exception of structures and uses that meet the requirements of Section 6.3(A), any structure or use lawfully existing upon the effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4 may not be expanded, but may be continued—including through repair, replacement, restoration, maintenance, or improvement—unless:
(1) The nonconformity or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than one year; or
Section 1.4: Effective Date MN Statute 462.357 subd 1e
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES
Section 6.2 Authority to Continue
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
Page 442 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) Any nonconforming use is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, and no building permit has been applied for within 180 days of when the property is damaged. In this case, a municipality may impose reasonable conditions upon a zoning or building permit in order to mitigate any newly created impact on adjacent property or water body. When a nonconforming structure in the shoreland district with less than 50 percent of the required setback from the water is destroyed by fire or other peril to greater than 50 percent of its estimated market value, as indicated in the records of the county assessor at the time of damage, the structure setback may be increased if practicable and reasonable conditions are placed upon a zoning or building permit to mitigate created impacts on the adjacent property or water body.
(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2) above, any nonconforming use located in the floodplain overlay district that is destroyed by fire or other peril to the extent of greater than fifty (50) percent of its market value, as determined by the Community Development Department, shall be regulated to the extent necessary to maintain eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program, and in no case shall be continued or re-established in a manner that results in potential flood damage or obstructs flood flows in the floodway.
(C) Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the placing of a structure in safe condition when said structure is declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
(D) No non-conforming building, structure, or use shall be moved to another lot or to any other part of the parcel of land upon which the same was constructed or was conducted at the time of this ordinance adoption unless such movement shall bring the non-conformance into compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
(1) Public Improvement Project Exception. When a condition of private property is rendered non-conforming by the action and/or project of a municipal, county, or state agency, such that as a part of said project, the agency acquires land or property rights affecting the use or conformity of any previously approved condition, the Community Development Department may conduct a Site Plan Review of the resulting property. Where the property under review is subject to a Conditional Use Permit or Variance, or where the property would otherwise require a variance as a result of the review, the City shall provide written notice to abutting property owners no less than ten days prior to final approval. Upon such review, the Community Development Department may issue an approval for the affected private improvements or the relocation of private improvements to another part of the subject property, or another abutting parcel under the control of the affected
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES
Section 6.2 Authority to Continue
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 443
property owner, without requiring review as a variance, Conditional Use Permit, or other zoning review and approval of either the Board of Adjustment and Appeals or the City Council. In such cases, the following requirements shall apply:
(a) The Community Development Department finds that no reasonable alternative exists to accommodate the continuation of the use on the property without the use of this exception clause.
(b) If private improvements are relocated to an abutting parcel, the owner shall execute and record an easement between the two parcels authorizing the use. In this case, the prohibition against an accessory use on a parcel without a principal use is specifically waived for this purpose.
(c) In cases other than those affected by the public improvement and approved under this section, the relocated private improvements, whether relocated to the same parcel or an abutting parcel, shall be constructed according to all applicable zoning regulations.
(d) The affected private improvements or relocated private improvements shall be considered conforming as of the date of the relocation or acquisition of land or property rights. Said private improvements shall be subject to non-conformity regulations as any other conforming condition if subsequent alterations to the zoning regulations affect such improvements.
(e) The Community Development Department shall cause a description of the Site Plan Approval to be recorded against the applicable property or properties, certifying the approval of the condition in question.
(E) A lawful non-conforming use of a structure or parcel of land may be changed to lessen the non-conformity of use. Once a non-conforming structure or parcel of land has been changed, it shall not thereafter be so altered to increase the non-conformity.
(F) Normal maintenance of a building or other structure containing or related to a lawful non-conforming use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations which do not physically extend or intensify the non-conforming use.
(G) Normal maintenance, necessary non-structural repairs, and incidental alteration of a lawful non-conforming sign includes repair or maintenance of existing lettering done without changing the form or design of the lawful non-conforming sign.
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES
Section 6.5 Building Permits and Ordinance Amendments
Subsection (E) Specific Standards for Temporary Uses
Page 444 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(H) Alterations may be made to a building containing or related to a lawful non-conforming residential unit when said alteration will improve the livability thereof, provided the alteration will not increase the number of dwelling units. In the B-4 zone, alterations or expansion may be made to a building containing or related to a lawful non-conforming residential unit when said alteration or expansion will improve the livability thereof, provided the alteration or expansion will not increase the number of dwelling units and provided that such alteration or expansion shall not constitute more than 50 percent of estimated market value. Said value shall be determined by City or County Assessor. All adjoining property owners and the Monticello EDA shall be provided notice of plans to expand non-conforming residential structure. Expansion may occur only after completion of a 30-day notice period. 6.3 Discontinuance
(A) A nonconforming use shall not be reestablished after discontinuance of the use for a period of one year or more.
(B) Efforts to renovate or repair the use as allowed in Section 6.3 are not considered discontinuance, provided all appropriate permits and/or development approvals are obtained, and provided the renovation or repair is completed within one year from commencement of repair or renovation, and the use is re-established within one month from the time the renovation or repairs are completed. Failure to complete the repairs or renovation within one year or to reestablish the use within one month following repairs or renovation shall constitute discontinuance, and a nonconforming use shall not be re-established. 6.4 Change in Use
When any lawful non-conforming use of any structure or land in any district has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to any non-conforming use. 6.5 Building Permits and Ordinance Amendments
Any proposed structure which will, due to an ordinance amendment, become non-conforming but for which a building permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of a new ordinance taking effect, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans provided construction is started within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the applicable ordinance, is not abandoned for a period of more than one hundred twenty (120) days, and continues to completion within two (2) years. Such structure and use shall thereafter be a legally non-conforming structure and use.
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES
Section 6.6 Existing Nonconforming Lots
Subsection (B) Vacant or Redeveloped Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 445
6.6 Existing Nonconforming Lots
(A) Required Merger of Common Ownership Lots
(1) Except as may otherwise be provided for in this ordinance, when a group of two (2) or more contiguous lots or parcels of land are owned or controlled by the same person, the following shall apply:
(a) If all lots are conforming to lot width, area and frontage requirements, all lots may remain separate parcels;
(b) If one or more of the contiguous lots or parcels of land do not conform to either lot width, area, or frontage requirements, than:
(i) Such nonconforming lots shall not be sold or developed as a separate parcel of land; and
(ii) Such nonconforming lots shall be combined with adjacent lots or parcels under the same ownership or control so that the combination of lots or parcels will equal one (1) or more lots each meeting the full lot requirements of this ordinance or will lessen the existing nonconformity.
(2) The combination of lots shall be in accordance with Title 11 of the City Code.
(B) Vacant or Redeveloped Lots
With the exclusion of parcels within the Floodplain Overlay District established in Section 3.7(C) of this ordinance, legal, nonconforming, vacant lots of record may be developed for single-family detached dwellings upon approval of a building permit under the following conditions:
(1) Legally Established
The lot in question was legally established in accordance with requirements of this code existing at the time of its creation and is a separate, distinct tax parcel.
(2) Allowed Use
Single-family residential dwellings are an allowed use within the base zoning district.
(3) Minimum Lot Size
(f) Sewered Lots: A legal nonconforming lot having direct access to municipal sewer, as determined by the Community Development Department, shall be City Code Title 11: Subdivision Code Section 3.7(C): Floodplain District
CHAPTER 6: NONCONFORMITIES
Section 6.6 Existing Nonconforming Lots
Subsection (C) Developed Lots
Page 446 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
considered buildable provided measurements for lot area and lot width either meet minimum requirements or are within sixty six percent (66%) of the requirement of the base zoning district.
(g) Unsewered Lots: A legal nonconforming lot not having access to municipal sewer shall be considered unbuildable.
(4) Access
The lot in question has frontage on and will directly access an improved public street.
(5) Health Concerns
Public health concerns (potable water and sanitary sewer) can be adequately addressed.
(6) Setback and Yard Requirements
The setback and yard requirements of the base zoning district can be achieved.
(7) Shoreland Requirements
If the parcel is located within the Shoreland Overlay District, development of the lot shall not result in more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot being covered with impervious surfaces.
(C) Developed Lots
An existing conforming use on a lot of substandard size and/or width may be expanded or enlarged if such expansion or enlargement meets all other provisions of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT
Section 7.3 Violations
Subsection (A) Failure to Comply with This Ordinance or Term or Any Condition of Approval Constitutes a Violation
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 447
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT 7.1 Purpose
This article establishes procedures through which the City seeks to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and obtain corrections for ordinance violations. It also sets forth the remedies and penalties that apply to violations of this ordinance. The provisions of this chapter are intended to encourage the voluntary correction of violations whenever possible. 7.2 Compliance Required
(A) In General
Compliance with all the procedures, standards, and other provisions of this ordinance shall be required by all persons owning, developing, managing, using, or occupying land or structures in the City.
(B) Approvals Required
All persons shall obtain all necessary building permits and/or development approvals required by this ordinance prior to development. 7.3 Violations
(A) Failure to Comply with This Ordinance or Term or Any Condition of Approval Constitutes a Violation
Any failure to comply with a standard, requirement, prohibition, or limitation imposed by this ordnance, or the terms or conditions of any permit or other development approval or authorization granted in accordance with this ordinance shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. Examples of violations include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) Develop land without first obtaining all appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with all applicable terms and conditions.
(2) Occupy or use land or a structure without first obtaining all appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with all applicable terms and conditions.
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT
Section 7.4 Responsible Persons
Subsection (B) Development Shall Adhere to Approved Plans
Page 448 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(3) Engage in any development or other activity of any nature in any way inconsistent with a permit or development approval, or other form of authorization granted for such activity by the City.
(4) Violate, by act or omission, any term, condition, or qualification placed by the City upon a required permit, certificate or other form of authorization granted by the City to allow the development or other activity upon land.
(5) To alter, maintain, or use any building or structure or to use any land in violation of any provision of this Ordinance.
(6) Install, create, erect, alter, or maintain any sign without first obtaining the appropriate permits or development approvals, and complying with their terms and conditions.
(7) Create, expand, replace, or change any nonconformity, except in accordance with this Ordinance.
(8) Reduce or diminish the requirements of use, development, or dimensional standards below the minimum required by this Ordinance.
(9) Through any act or omission, fail to comply with any other provisions, procedures, or standards, as required by this Ordinance.
(10) To continue any of the above-stated violations.
(B) Development Shall Adhere to Approved Plans
Permits or development approvals issued by a decision-making body authorize only the use, density or intensity, location, design, and/or development set forth on the plans reviewed in issuing such permits or development approvals. Development that differs from that which was approved by a decision-making body in a permit or development approval is a violation of this ordinance. 7.4 Responsible Persons
The owner, tenant, or occupant of any land or structure, or an architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, or any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or maintains a situation that constitutes a violation of this ordinance may be held responsible for the violation and subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in this chapter.
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT
Section 7.5 Enforcement Generally
Subsection (B) General Inspections
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 449
7.5 Enforcement Generally
(A) Responsibility for Enforcement
The Community Development Department shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this ordinance.
(B) General Inspections
(1) Any member of the Community Development Department may enter upon land or inspect any structure to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance provided permission has been granted by one of the following:
(a) An owner of the property in question;
(b) A licensee of the business being inspected;
(c) A resident of a dwelling on the property being inspected; or
(d) Any other person in control of the premises.
(2) If the owner, licensee, resident, or other person in control of a premises objects to the inspection of or entrance to the property, the Community Development Department may petition a court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant to authorize entrance to the property. Such a warrant shall only be used to determine whether the provisions of this ordinance are being complied with and to enforce this ordinance. No criminal charges shall be made as a result of the warrant. No warrant shall be issued unless there is probable cause to issue the warrant. Probable cause occurs if the search is reasonable. Probable cause does not depend on specific knowledge of the condition of a particular property.
(3) Every owner, licensee, resident, or other person in control of a premises within the City shall permit at reasonable times inspections of or entrance to the property by the Community Development Department to determine whether the provisions of this ordinance are being complied with and to enforce this ordinance. Unreasonable refusal to permit the inspection of or entrance to the property shall be grounds for termination of any and all permits, licenses or City service to the property. Mailed notice shall be given to the owner, licensee, resident or other person in control of the property, stating the grounds for the termination, the scheduled date of termination, and the right to appeal in accordance with Section 2.4(H), Appeal of Administrative Decisions. Section 2.4(H): Administrative Appeals
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT
Section 7.5 Enforcement Generally
Subsection (E) Notice of Violations
Page 450 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the City to enter private property in urgent emergency situations where there is an imminent danger in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(C) Complaints Regarding Violations
Any person may notify the Community Development Department of a suspected violation of this ordinance. In registering a complaint, the complaining party shall state fully the cause and/or basis of the alleged violation. The identity of individuals registering complaints shall remain confidential as required by MN State Statute Section 13.44.
(D) Investigation of Complaints
Upon learning there is a potential violation of this ordinance, a member of the Community Development Department may conduct a general inspection to determine whether a violation of this ordinance exists.
(E) Notice of Violations
(1) On finding that a violation of this Ordinance exists, the Community Development Department shall provide written notification of the violation to the owner of the property on which the violation exists and the person causing or maintaining the violation. The notification shall be delivered by personal service or by certified mail with a return receipt requested. The notice of violation shall:
(a) Describe the location and nature of the violation;
(b) State the actions necessary to abate the violation;
(c) Order that the violation be corrected within a specified reasonable time period not to exceed 30 days after receipt of the notice of violation;
(d) State what course of action is intended if the violation is not corrected with the specified time limit; and advise the alleged violator(s) of their right to appeal the notice of violation to the Board of Adjustment and Appeals in accordance with Section 2.4(H).
(2) On receiving a written request for extension of the time limit for correction specified in the notice of violation, the Community Development Department may, for good cause shown, grant a single extension of the time for up to 30 days.
(3) If the owner of the property cannot be located or determined, the Community Development Department shall post a copy of the notice of violation on the MN Statute 13.44 Section 2.4(H): Administrative Appeals
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT
Section 7.6 Remedies and Penalties
Subsection (G) Emergency Enforcement without Notice
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 451
building, structure, sign, or site that is the subject of the violation. In such a case, the time limit for correction of the violation shall be deemed to begin five days after the notice is posted.
(F) Application of Penalties
(1) On determining that the violator has failed to correct the violation by the time limit set forth in the notice of violation, or any granted extension thereof, or has failed to timely appeal the notice of violation, the Community Development Department shall take appropriate action, as provided in Section 7.6, to correct and abate the violation and to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
(2) Each day a violation continues is a separate offense.
(G) Emergency Enforcement without Notice
On determining that delay in correcting the violation would pose a danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, the Community Development Department may seek immediate enforcement without prior written notice by invoking any of the remedies or penalties listed in Section 7.6. 7.6 Remedies and Penalties
(A) If the responsible person to whom the notice of violation was directed fails to comply with the applicable provisions of this ordinance, that person is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense or imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days or both.
(B) The City may also enforce any provision of this ordinance by mandamus, injunction, or any other appropriate remedy in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(C) A person who knowingly makes or submits a false statement or document in connection with an application or procedure required by this ordinance is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(D) A person who violates, fails to comply with or assists, directs or permits the violation of a performance standard required by this ordinance must reimburse the City or its agent for the actual costs of the tests, measurements or other procedures necessary to demonstrate that violation.
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT
Section 7.6 Remedies and Penalties
Subsection (G) Emergency Enforcement without Notice
Page 452 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(this page is intentionally blank)
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.1 General Rules for Interpretation
Subsection (D) Computation of Time
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 453
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS 8.1 General Rules for Interpretation
The language set forth in the text of this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction:
(A) Meanings and Intent
All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions contained in this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with the general purposes set forth in Section 1.3, Ordinance Purpose, and the specific purpose statements set forth throughout this ordinance. When a specific section of these regulations gives a different meaning than the general definition provided in this article, the specific section’s meaning and application of the term shall control.
(B) Headings, Illustrations, and Text
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between the text of this ordinance and any heading, caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control. Graphics and other illustrations are provided for informational purposes only and should not be relied upon as a complete and accurate description of all applicable regulations or requirements.
(C) Lists and Examples
Unless otherwise specifically indicated, lists of items or examples that use terms such as “for example,” “including,” and “such as,” or similar language are intended to provide examples and are not exhaustive lists of all possibilities.
(D) Computation of Time
The time in which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the City, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the City. References to days are calendar days unless otherwise stated.
Section 1.3: Ordinance Purpose
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.1 General Rules for Interpretation
Subsection (K) Tenses, Plurals, and Gender
Page 454 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(E) References to Other Regulations/Publications
Whenever reference is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most recent edition of such regulation, resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, or document, unless otherwise specifically stated.
(F) Delegation of Authority
Any act authorized by this ordinance to be carried out by a specific official or department of the City may be carried out by a professional-level designee of such official or department.
(G) Technical and Non-Technical Terms
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases that may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
(H) Public Officials and Agencies
All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Monticello, unless otherwise indicated.
(I) Mandatory and Discretionary Terms
The words “shall,” “must,” and “will” are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. The words “may” and “should” are permissive in nature.
(J) Conjunctions
Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary, conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) “And” indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions or events apply; and
(2) “Or” indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events apply.
(K) Tenses, Plurals, and Gender
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 455
(2) Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise.
(3) Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.
(L) Terms Not Defined
If a term used in this Ordinance is not defined in Section 8.4, the Community Development Department shall have the authority to provide a definition based upon the definitions used in accepted sources including but not limited to: A Planners Dictionary; A Glossary of Zoning, Development, and Planning Terms; A Survey of Zoning Definitions; or any standard dictionary. 8.2 Rules of Measurement
(A) Measurements, Generally
(1) Purpose
The purpose of this section is to clarify the rules of measurement and exemptions that apply to all principal and accessory uses allowed in this ordinance. These standards may be modified by other applicable sections of this ordinance.
(2) Distance Measurements, Generally
Unless otherwise expressly stated, distances specified in this ordinance are to be measured as the length of an imaginary straight line joining those points.
(B) Lots
(1) Definitions/Measurement
(a) Average Lot Size (see Figure 8-1)
The mean lot size for all lots being platted.
(b) Average Lot Width (see Figure 8-1)
The mean lot width for all lots being platted.
Section 8.4: Definitions
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 456 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(c) Lot Area (see Figure 8-7)
The amount of land area, measured horizontally, included within the lines of a lot. Lands located within any private easements shall be included within the lot area. Public rights-of-way and areas below the ordinary high-water (OHW) mark for water features are not to be included in calculating lot area, except where specifically allowed by this ordinance. The terms “lot size” and “lot area” shall be interchangeable.
(d) Lot Coverage (see Figure 8-7)
Lot coverage shall be calculated as the total horizontal surface area of impervious surface on a given lot.
Figure 8-6: Coverage & Area Measurements Figure 8-6: Coverage & Area Measurements
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 457
(e) Lot Depth
Lot depth shall be determined by a straight line connecting the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line, or to the rear most point of the lot when there is no rear lot line (see Figure 8-2 for examples).
(f) Lot or Street Frontage
In the case of a building lot abutting upon only one street, the frontage line is the line parallel to and common with the right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the building lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be considered the frontage line. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and double frontage lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as required in this ordinance.
(g) Lot Line (see Figure 8-3)
(i) Corner Side Lot Line
The corner side lot line is a side lot line that abuts a street or other right-of-way.
(ii) Front Lot Line
The front lot line is the line connecting the two side lot lines along the street right-of-way having the least width.
(iii) Rear Lot Line
The rear lot line is the line connecting the two side lot lines along the edge of the lot opposite from the front line.
(iv) Side Lot Line Figure 8-2: Measuring Depth Figure 8-3: Lot Lines & Building Lines
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 458 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
The side lot line is the lot line connecting the front and rear lot lines regardless of whether it abuts a right-of-way or another lot line.
(h) Lot Types (see Figure 8-4)
(i) Base Lot
A contiguous parcel of land in identical ownership throughout, bounded by other lots or streets, and used or set aside and available for use as the site of one or more buildings or other definite purpose. References to “lot” within this ordinance are synonymous with “base lot.”
(ii) Corner Lot
A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets (other than alleys), regardless of whether or not such streets intersect at right angles.
(iii) Cul-de-Sac Lot
A lot located on the head or turn around of a cul-de-sac with side lot lines on a tangent to the arc of the right-of-way.
(iv) Double Frontage Lot Figure 8-4: Lot Types
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 459
A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street other than an alley.
(v) Flag Lot
A lot that does not abut or front a street where access is obtained by a narrow private right-of-way.
(vi) Interior Lot
A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street other than an alley.
(vii) Unit Lot
A specialized lot created within a base lot simply for the purpose of defining ownership for certain multi family dwelling types.
(i) Lot Width (see figure 8-5)
(i) Lot width shall be determined by a straight line connecting the endpoints determined by the intersection of the side lot lines and the required front yard setback.
(ii) The width of a corner lot shall be calculated from the side with the least frontage on a right-of-way.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 460 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(2) General Lot Requirements
(a) Erection of More Than One Principal Structure on a Platted Lot
Whenever any land is subdivided, a building permit for the construction of a building or other principal structure (excluding buildings under common ownership or unified control) shall not be issued unless the land is subdivided in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Ordinance.
(b) Lots Divided By Zoning District Lines
Whenever a single lot is located within two or more different zoning districts, each portion of that lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable to the district in which it is located.
(3) Required Yards
(a) Definitions/Measurement
(i) Accessory Structure Yard
The minimum yard requirement between a lot line and an allowable accessory structure. Detached accessory structures may not be placed within front yards or corner side yards.
(ii) Building Line (see Figure 8-3)
A line formed by the face of a building which is used to establish the yards around a building or structure.
(iii) Build-to Line
A line with which the majority of an exterior wall of a building is required to coincide.
(iv) Right-of-Way (ROW)
Land dedicated, deeded, used, or to be used for a street, road, alley, pedestrian way, crosswalk, bikeway, drainage facility, or other public
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 461
uses, wherein the owner gives up rights to the land so long as it is being or will be used for the dedicated purpose.
(v) Setback Line
A line located at the inside edge of a required front, side, or rear yard. Exterior building walls may not encroach into the required yard beyond the building setback line. Portions of a building, (e.g., an overhang, eave, entry stairs, bay windows, foundation planters, etc.) may encroach into a required yard as allowed in Section 3.3(D)(2), Allowable Yard Encroachments.
(vi) Yard
A required open area unoccupied and unobstructed by any building or by any structure or portion of a structure except as allowed by this ordinance. Fences, walls, and incidental structures (e.g., flagpoles, birdhouses or feeders, clothesline posts, etc.) may be permitted within a yard provided the structures do not interfere with corner visibility.
(vii) Yard Types (see Figure 8-3)
1. Corner Side Yard
A side yard extending between the front and rear lot lines parallel to an abutting street or right-of-way.
2. Front Yard
A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a lot between the front lot line and the front building line.
3. Rear Yard
A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear building line. In the case of double frontage lots, there is no rear yard, and the requirements for the front yard shall apply to the front and rear.
4. Side Yard
A yard extending from the front building line to rear building line. In the case of double frontage lots, the side yard extends from the front building line to the opposing building line associated with the other yard.
5. Zero Side Lot Line
A condition where no side yard is provided between two or more distinct dwelling units sharing a party wall (e.g., townhouse, duplex, attached residential, etc.).
Sec 3.3(D)(2): Allowable Yard Encroachments
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 462 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(4) Bulk
(a) Definitions/Measurement
(i) Building Coverage
Building coverage is a measure of intensity of a use of land that represents the portion of a site that is covered by building footprint, as well as attached porches, decks, and balconies. Building coverage does not include driveways, streets, sidewalks, and any other areas covered by an impervious surface material, including areas of outdoor storage (see Figure 8-7).
(ii) Building Size
Building size is the total floor area located inside exterior walls and covered by a roof.
(iii) District Size
The minimum size, in acres, of a base or overlay zoning district, including streets, rights-of-way, and open space areas, but excluding unbuildable lands.
(iv) Floor Area
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, and excluding the following:
1. Attic areas with a headroom of less than seven feet;
2. Unenclosed stairs or fire escapes;
3. Elevator structures;
4. Cooling towers;
5. Areas devoted to machinery and equipment for air conditioning, ventilation, heating, and other similar building service needs;
6. Structured parking; and
7. Basement space not used for retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or for business or professional offices.
(v) Floor Area Ratio
The total floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the lot area.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.2 Rules of Measurement
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 463
(5) Height
(a) Definitions/Measurement
(ii) Building Height
A distance to be measured from the mean ground level to the top of a flat roof, to the mean distance of the highest gable on a pitched or hip roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, to the uppermost point on all other roof types.
(iii) Building Story
1. The space between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; or if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor surface and the top of the ceiling joists or roof rafters above it. Typically, story height in a residential structure is nine feet per story, and story height in a non-residential structure is twelve feet per story.
2. If the finished floor level directly above a basement or cellar or unused under-floor space is more than six (6) feet above the grade as defined herein for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement, cellar, or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story.
(iv) Fence and Wall Height
Fence and wall heights are to be measured from the adjoining average grade. In the case of grade separation such as the division of properties by a retaining wall, the height shall be determined on the basis of measurement from the average point between the highest and lowest grade.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.3 Glossary of Abbreviations
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 464 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(v) Fence and Wall Height in Residential Side and Rear Yards
Where a fence is constructed of posts and panels down a slope in a side or rear yard of residential property, and the top rail of said fence or wall maintains a horizontal alignment, the height of said fence shall be measured as follows:
The maximum fence height identified in the ordinance applicable to said fence shall be measured from existing grade to the top of the fence panel nearest to the uphill post. The height of the top edge of the fence panel may exceed the maximum required height by up to two (2) feet when measured at the downhill post. Any fencing used to enclose the gap below the fence panel shall match the panel in material, color, and style, or may be retaining wall constructed of stone, brick or concrete masonry units designed and sold explicitly for such purpose.
(vi) Grade
Grade means the level of the finished ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 8.3 Glossary of Abbreviations
The following is a glossary of acronyms or abbreviations used within this Ordinance.
A
ACI ........................ Aggregate Caliper Inch(es)
ADA ....................... Americans with Disabilities Act
APA ....................... American Planning Association
ATM ...................... Automated Teller Machine
C
CBD ....................... Central Business District
CDBG .................... Community Dev. Block Grants
COW ...................... Cellular On Wheels
CR .......................... County Road
CUP........................ Conditional Use Permit
D
DA.......................... Development Agreement
DNR ....................... Department of Natural Resources
DOT ....................... Department of Transportation
DU.......................... Dwelling Unit
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.3 Glossary of Abbreviations
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 465
DU/A ...................... Dwelling Units/Acre
E
EA .......................... Environmental Assessment
EIS ......................... Environmental Impact Statement
EPA ........................ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
F
FEMA .................... Federal Emergency Management Agency
G
GIS ......................... Geographic Information System
GVW ...................... Gross Vehicle Weight
H
HWY ...................... Highway
K
K ............................ 1 Thousand, 1,000, kilo, kilometer
L
LB .......................... Pound(s), 16 ounces
LOS ........................ Level of Service (Highways & Streets)
M
MI .......................... Mile, 5,280 Feet
MnDOT .................. MN Department of Transportation
O
OHW ...................... Ordinary High Water Mark
OZ .......................... Ounce(s)
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.3 Glossary of Abbreviations
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 466 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
P
PCA........................ Pollution Control Agency
PUD ....................... Planned Unit Development
R
ROW ...................... Right of Way
S
SF ........................... Square Foot (feet)
SM.......................... Square Mile, 640 Acres
SQ .......................... Square
T
Ton ......................... 2,000 Pounds
TWP ....................... Township, 36 square miles (statutory)
U
UBC ....................... Uniform Building Code
V
V/CR ...................... Volume to Capacity Ratio
W
WECS .................... Wind Energy Conversion System
Z
ZO .......................... Zoning Ordinance
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 467
8.4 Definitions
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this ordinance, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
ACCESSORY: A use, activity, structure, or part of a structure that is subordinate and incidental to the main activity or structure on the site.
ACCESSORY BUILDING -- MAJOR: A building which is accessory to a principal structure and is required to be constructed with a building permit per MN Rule 1300.0120.
ACCESSORY BUILDING -- MINOR: A building which is accessory to a principal structure and exempt from a building permit per MN Rule 1300.0120.
ADULT USES: Adult uses include adult bookstores, adult motion picture theatres, adult mini-motion picture theatres, adult massage parlors, adult steamroom/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult cabarets, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses, or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" which are capable of being seen by members of the public. Activities classified as obscene as defined by Minnesota Statute 5617.241 are not included.
Specified Anatomical Areas:
(A) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(B) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities:
(A) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty.
(B) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 468 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(C) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation.
(D) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast.
(E) Situations involving a person or persons, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments, or in sexually revealing costumes; and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding, or other physical restraint of any such persons.
(F) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being.
(G) Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal, or anal irrigation.
ADULT USE / ACCESSORY: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses on a limited scale and which are incidental to the primary activity and goods and/or services offered by the establishment. Examples of such items include adult magazines, adult movies, adult novelties, and the like.
ADULT USE / PRINCIPAL: The offering of goods and/or services which are classified as adult uses as a primary or sole activity of a business or establishment and include, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) Adult Use Body Painting Studio - An establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or non-transparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of "specified anatomical areas."
(B) Adult Use Bookstore - A building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental, or sale of items consisting of printed matter, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, videotape, or motion picture film if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public excluding any minor by reason of age, or if a substantial or significant portion of such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(C) Adult Use Cabaret - A building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such dancing or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(D) Adult Use Companionship Establishment - A companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 469
(E) Adult Use Conversation/Rap Parlor - A conversation/rap parlor which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(F) Adult Use Health/Sport Club - A health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(G) Adult Use Hotel/Motel - Adult hotel/motel means a hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(H) Adult Use Massage Parlor/Health Club - A massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(I) Adult Use Mini-Motion Picture Theatre - A building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
(J) Adult Use Modeling Studio - An establishment whose major business is the provision to customers of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in "specified sexual activities" or display "specified anatomical areas" while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers.
(K) Adult Use Motion Picture Arcade - Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled or operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(L) Adult Use Motion Picture Theatre - A building or portion of a building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such material is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 470 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
(M) Adult Use Novelty Business - A business which has, as a principal activity, the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designed for sexual stimulation.
(N) Adult Sauna - A sauna which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxation, or reducing; utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if the service provided by the sauna is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
(O) Adult Steam Room/Bathhouse Facility - A building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing; utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing, or reducing agent, if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."
AGRICULTURE: Those commonly associated with the growing of produce on farms. These include: field crop farming; pasture for hay; fruit growing; tree, plant, shrub, or flower nursery without building; truck gardening and livestock raising and feeding, but not including fur farms, commercial animal feed lots, and kennels.
AGRICULTURAL BUILDING means a structure on agricultural zoned land designed, constructed, and used to house farm implements or agricultural produce or products used by the owner, lessee, or sub-lessee or their immediate families, their employees, and persons engaged in the pick up or delivery of agricultural produce or products grown or raised on the premises. The term “agricultural building” shall not include dwellings.
AGRICULTURAL SALES shall mean the retail sale of fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs, trees, or other agricultural, floricultural, or horticultural products. The operation may be indoors or outdoors, include pick-your-own or cut-your-own opportunities, and may involve the ancillary sale of items considered accessory to the agricultural products being sold or accessory sales of unprocessed foodstuffs; home processed food products such as jams, jellies, pickles, sauces; or baked goods and home-made handicrafts. The floor area devoted to the sale of accessory items shall not exceed 25 percent of the total floor area. No commercially packaged handicrafts or commercially processed or packaged foodstuffs shall be sold as accessory items. No activities other than the sale of goods as outlined above shall be allowed as part of the agricultural sales business.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way less than thirty (30) feet in width which affords secondary access to abutting property.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 471
ANTENNA, COMMERCIAL TRANSMISSION AND RECEPTION: Shall mean commercial and industrial communications equipment accessory to business operations of one meter in width or greater, but not personal wireless telecommunications service equipment.
ANTENNA, PRIVATE AMATEUR RADIO: Shall mean equipment, including antennae, antennae support structures, and other related material, necessary to conduct Ham and Short Wave Radio reception and transmissions, only for use by those persons properly licensed by the Federal Communications Commission for such reception and transmissions, and who are in full compliance with all licensing requirements.
ANTENNA, PRIVATE RECEIVING: shall mean television and other electronic reception antennae for private use.
ANTENNA, TELECOMMUNICATION: A device used for the transmission and/or reception of wireless communications, usually arranged on an antenna support structure or building, and consisting of a wire, a set of wires, or electromagnetically reflective or conductive rods, elements, arrays, or surfaces, inclusive of the following: Private Amateur Radio Antenna(s), Private Receiving Antenna(s), Commercial Transmission And Reception Antenna(s), and Wireless Telecommunications Service Antenna(s).
ANTENNA, WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Shall mean any equipment necessary to provide or support all types of wireless electronic communications, including, but not necessarily limited to, wireless “cellular” telephone, radio, and internet transmission and reception communications between mobile communications providers and users, including public safety communications.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod, or other structure which supports an antenna. Such structure may be freestanding or attached to a building or other device that conforms to this ordinance.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms which is designed for, intended for, or occupied as a residence by a single family or an individual and is equipped with cooking facilities. Includes dwelling unit and efficiency unit. An apartment is offered only as a rented or leased residence, as distinguished from condominiums and townhouses, which allow for separate ownership.
APPURTENANCES: The visible, functional, or ornamental objects accessory to, and part of a building, such as chimneys, fire escapes, open decks, stoops, steps, bay windows, roof overhangs, awnings, solar energy systems and similar features.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 472 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
ARTIFICIAL OBSTRUCTION: Means any obstruction which is not a natural obstruction (see Obstruction).
AS-BUILT PLANS: Record drawings of as-constructed improvements.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A multiple-family structure that includes a special combination of housing, supportive services, personalized assistance, and health care designed to respond to the individual needs of people who need help with activities of daily living, but where the emphasis of the facility remains residential. Residents of assisted living facilities do not require hospitalization or skilled or intermediate nursing care associated with nursing home facilities, but do, because of their advanced age, require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an emergency, or medication prescribed for self-administration.
ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE: Any device whose primary purpose is to attract public attention to a use of land (but which is not a building or the use of land itself), whether two or three dimensional, and whether through graphics, light, movement, shapes or other method. Such device may be either permanent or temporary, and would be regulated as a sign under the appropriate sections of this ordinance.
AUCTION HOUSE: A building, area, or areas within a building used for the public sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or equipment to the highest bidder.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM): A facility to provide banking and other electronic services that is operated by the customer.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MAJOR: General repair, rebuilding or reconditioning engines, motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint job; vehicle steam cleaning. This business performs structural and cosmetic repairs to autos, light trucks, and equipment of 9,000 pounds GVW and less. Allowed: Body repair and painting, frame and/or unibody straightening and repair, glass replacement, sandblasting and/or steam cleaning, undercoating or rust proofing, upholstery work, washing, cleaning, and polishing.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR - MINOR: A business that performs mechanical and electrical repairs to autos, light trucks, and equipment 9,000 pounds GVW and less. Allowed activities include minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, minor painting and upholstering, tune ups and adjustments, replacement of parts (excluding body and frame), rebuilding of parts or components when installation is available, wheel alignment and balancing, tire repair, radiator repair, washing, cleaning, and polishing, but specifically excluding any operation specified or implied under the definition of "Automobile Repair - Major."
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 473
AUTOMOTIVE WASH FACILITY: An area or structure equipped with automatic or self-service facilities for primarily washing automobiles.
BANNERS AND PENNANTS: Attention-getting devices which resemble flags and are of a paper, cloth, or plastic-like consistency.
BASEMENT: Means any area of a structure, including crawl spaces, having its floor or base subgrade (below ground level) on all four sides, regardless of the depth of excavation below ground level.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A private residence, generally a single-family residence, engaged in renting one or more dwelling rooms on a daily basis to tourists, vacationers, and business people, where provision of meals is limited to breakfast for guests only.
BERM: An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Erosion and sediment control and water quality management practices that are the most effective and practicable means of controlling, preventing, and minimizing degradation of surface water, including, but not limited to, avoidance of impacts, construction-phasing, minimizing the length of time soil areas are exposed, or prohibitions or other management practices published by state or designated area-wide planning agencies.
BLUFF: A topographic feature such as a hill, cliff, or embankment having the following characteristics (an area with an average slope of less than 18 percent over a distance for 50 feet or more shall not be considered part of the bluff):
(A) Part or all of the feature is located in a shoreland area;
(B) The slope rises at least 25 feet above the ordinary high water level of the waterbody;
(C) The grade of the slope from the toe of the bluff to a point 25 feet or more above the ordinary high water level averages 30 percent or greater; and
(D) The slope must drain toward the waterbody.
BLUFF IMPACT ZONE: A bluff and land located within 20 feet from the top of a bluff.
BOARDER: A person who regularly receives lodging with or without meals at another’s home for pay or services
BOATHOUSE: A structure designed and used solely for the storage of boats or boating equipment.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 474 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
BODY ART: Establishments that engage in providing "Body art" or "body art procedures" including physical body adornment using, but not limited to, tattooing and body piercing. Body art does not include practices and procedures that are performed by a licensed medical or dental professional if the procedure is within the professional's scope of practice.
BREW PUB: A restaurant-brewery that sells 85% or more of its beer on-site. The beer is brewed primarily for sale in the restaurant and bar, and may be dispensed directly from the brewery’s storage tanks. Brewpubs may also sell beer for off-sale consumption in growler containers.
BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided.
BUILDING: A structure with a roof, intended for shelter, housing, business, or enclosure.
BUILDING, FRONT FAÇADE: A building elevation which fronts on a public street, public parking lot, private parking lot available to the general public, or pedestrian walk where customer access to a structure is available.
BUILDING HEIGHT [see section 8.2(B)(5)]
BUILDING LINE [see section 8.2(B)(3)]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot.
BULK FUEL SALES & STORAGE: The commercial storage of gasses and fuels in above ground containers.
BUSINESS: Any establishment, occupation, employment, or enterprise where merchandise is manufactured, exhibited, or sold, or where services are offered for compensation.
BUSINESS DAY: A day on which City Hall is open.
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES: Establishments that engage primarily in rendering services to businesses including but not limited to copy shops, printing services, package and postal services, photo processing, janitorial services, and similar operations.
CALIPER: A horticultural method of measuring the diameter of a tree trunk for the purpose of determining size. The caliper inches of a tree shall be determined by measuring the tree’s diameter 4 feet, 6 inches from the ground.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 475
CANOPY: A roof-like cover, often of fabric, plastic, metal, or glass on a support, which provides shelter over a doorway.
CANOPY TREE: A tree that has an expected height at maturity of 30 feet or more.
CELLAR (see “BASEMENT”)
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial depression of perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct water either continuously or periodically.
CEMETERY: Land used or intended to be used for burying the remains of human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of the cemetery.
CHURCH (see “PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY”)
CITY ENGINEER: A person who has received training and is given authority by the City of Monticello to design, review, authorize, approve, inspect, and maintain erosion and sediment control plans and practices. The City Engineer is part of the Community Development Department.
CIVIC INTEREST GROUP: A civic interest group is a non-governmental organization which has a public or quasi-public service purpose as its central function, but may include additional uses and activities related to its public function or provided to its membership. A civic interest group may or may not have a specific site location or building which it occupies whether owned or leased. Examples of such groups may include religious institutions, local or national service clubs and organizations, private museums, historical facilities or similar entities.
CLEARING: Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
CLEAR-CUTTING: The removal of an entire stand of trees.
CLINIC/MEDICAL SERVICES: A structure intended for providing medical and dental examinations and service available to the public. This service is provided without overnight care available.
CHARITABLE, FRATERNAL, OR SOCIAL CLUB / LODGE (see “PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY”)
COCKTAIL ROOM: A room that is ancillary to the production of liquor at a production distillery where the public can purchase and /or consume only the liquor produced on site.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 476 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
COMBINATION USE: The combination of two principal uses.
COMMERCIAL LODGING: Commercial Lodging means a building or group of buildings in which sleeping accommodations are offered to the public and intended primarily for rental for temporary occupation by persons on an overnight basis, not including bed and breakfast establishments or a rooming house. Such uses may include microwaves and refrigerators for each guest unit.
COMMERCIAL OFFICES: A commercial use involving predominantly administrative, clerical, or professional operations. Commercial offices may include professional and administrative training, but shall not include direct retail commercial transaction activities. Professional training may include classes and training offered by professional or administrative entities to consumers of professional services.
COMMERCIAL SELF-STORAGE: A land use characterized by a variety of sized spaces available to the general public for rent on short-term periods, and for which size of individual spaces are less than 1,000 square feet in area. Commercial Self-Storage facilities are limited to storage use only, with no separate business activities permitted as part of the use.
COMMUNICATION ANTENNAS AND ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURES (see “ANTENNA, TELECOMMUNICATION”)
COMMUNICATIONS/BROADCASTING: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms. Antennas, antenna support structures and satellite dishes are included in this definition. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound recording facilities.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT: Those departments assigned by the City Administrator to oversee the various aspects of development within the City. Such departments may include but are not limited to planning, building safety, code enforcement, and engineering.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: A public or private facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables or ornamental plants by more than one (1) person or group.
CONDITIONAL USE: A permitted use that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may only be allowed in a particular zoning district after review by the City and granting of conditional use permit which imposes conditions deemed necessary to make the
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 477
use compatible with other uses permitted in the same zone or vicinity. Conditional uses that cannot be adequately controlled through conditions shall be prohibited. Approved conditional uses and their conditions run with the land and are not specific to property owners.
CONDOMINIUM: A form of property ownership providing for individual ownership of space in a structure together with an individual interest in the land or other parts of the structure in common with other owners. Residential condominium dwelling units are subject to the provisions of the Minnesota Condominium Law, Minnesota Statutes, Sections 515.01 to 515.29.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: A conservation easement is legal land preservation agreement between a landowner and a municipality or a qualified land protection organization. The easement confers the transfer of usage rights from one party to another.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: A disturbance to the land that results in a change in the topography, or the existing soil cover (both vegetative and non-vegetative). Examples of construction activity may include clearing, grading, filling and excavating.
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER: Trailers used as temporary offices to meet a short-term need while the permanent facilities are being expanded. A temporary use permit is required for such office trailers.
CONTRACTOR: The party who signs the permit, application, construction contract, or development agreement with the city to construct a project. Where the construction project involves more than one contractor, the general contractor shall be the contractor that is responsible pursuant to the obligations set forth in this ordinance.
CONVENIENCE RETAIL: A retail store not more than 4,000 square feet in area that generally carries a reduced inventory of a variety of items such as dairy products, minor automobile related items, groceries, novelties, magazines, etc. A convenience store may be combined with vehicle fuel sales where permitted.
COOPERATIVE (HOUSING): A multiple family attached dwelling owned and maintained by the residents. The entire structure and real property is under common ownership as contrasted to a condominium dwelling where individual units are under separate individual occupant ownership.
COUNTRY CLUB: A membership club or business organized and operated primarily to provide recreational activities such as golf, swimming, tennis, and other outdoor recreation to its members and their guests which includes facilities such as a club house, banquet areas, locker rooms, and pro shop.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 478 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
COURT: An unoccupied open space other than a yard which is bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of the buildings.
CREMATORY: A facility containing furnaces for the reduction of dead bodies to ashes by fire.
DAY CARE - HOME: (see definitions for “Group Residential Facility”).
DAY CARE CENTER: A service provided to the public in which children of school or preschool age are cared for during established business hours, and which does not qualify as a group residential facility.
DECIDUOUS TREE: A tree that generally loses all of its leaves for part of the year.
DECK: A horizontal, unenclosed platform with or without attached railings, seats, trellises, or other features, attached or functionally related to a principal use or site at any point extending above grade.
DENSITY, BASE: The number of dwelling units allowed per net acre of land.
DENSITY, MAXIMUM: The number of dwelling units potentially allowed per net acre of land if certain conditions are met through either performance standards or the planned unit development process.
DEPARTMENT STORE [see “RETAIL COMMERCIAL USES (OTHER)”]
DEPOSIT: Any rock, soil, gravel, sand, or other material deposited naturally or by man into a water body, watercourse, flood plain, or wetland.
DEWATERING: The removal of water for construction activity such as the removal of temporary sediment basin water or appropriated surface or groundwater to dry and/or solidify a construction site.
DISTRICT: An area delineated on the official zoning map that sets forth standards and guidelines for all development within the prescribed zoning district.
DONATION DROP-OFF CONTAINER: A receptacle designed with a door, slot, or other opening that is intended to accept and store donated items.
DRAINING: The removal of surface water or groundwater from land.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 479
DREDGING: To enlarge or clean out a water body, watercourse, or wetland.
DRIPLINE: A vertical line that extends from the outermost branches of a tree’s canopy to the ground around the circumference of the tree.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE: A building opening, including windows, doors, or mechanical devices, through which occupants of a motor vehicle receive or obtain a product or service.
DUMPSTER: A container that has a hooking mechanism that permits it to be raised and dumped into a sanitation truck or be hauled away for emptying.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designated exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family, and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, and boarding houses.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A structure intended for occupancy by more than one family, including duplexes, townhomes, multi-family dwellings, apartments, and condominiums. Accessory dwelling units as defined and permitted by this ordinance are incidental to a principal dwelling unit and are not considered to be attached dwellings.
DWELLING, DUPLEX OR TWO-FAMILY: Any building that contains two separate dwelling units with separation either horizontal or vertical on one lot that is used, intended, or designed to be built, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or occupied for living purposes.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED: Any building that contains one dwelling unit used, intended, or designed to be guilt, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or occupied for living purposes by one (1) family.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY: A building designed with three (3) or more dwelling units exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other but sharing hallways and main entrances and exits.
DWELLING UNIT: An area within a structure designed and constructed to be occupied by one family which includes permanent provisions for living, cooking, and sanitation. Dwelling unit does not include hotels, motels, group residential facilities, correctional facilities, nursing/convalescent home, rehabilitation centers, or other structures designed for transient residence.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 480 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT: A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal room exclusive of bathroom, hallway, closets, or dining alcove, and has limited provisions for cooking (kitchenette).
ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR COMMERCIAL: An establishment providing completely enclosed recreation or entertainment activities. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving of food or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Examples of indoor commercial entertainment businesses include bowling alleys, roller and ice-skating rinks, billiards halls, swimming pools, motion picture theaters, and similar amusements. Indoor commercial entertainment uses do not include event centers or adult uses.
ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL: An establishment providing recreation or entertainment activities primarily occurring outdoors. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving of food, the sale of equipment related to the outdoor uses, and complementary indoor entertainment facilities. Examples of outdoor commercial entertainment businesses include, but are not limited to, golf driving ranges, sand volleyball courts, go-carts, and miniature golf courses. Outdoor commercial entertainment uses do not include projectile weapon ranges (archery or shooting), sports stadiums or drive-in movie theaters.
ERECT: Activity of constructing, building, raising, assembling, placing, affixing, attaching, creating, painting, drawing or any other way of bringing into being or establishing.
EROSION: The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, ice and/or land disturbance activities.
EROSION CONTROL: A measure that prevents erosion including but not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
EROSION PREVENTION: Measures employed to prevent erosion. Examples include, but are not limited to: soil stabilization practices, limited grading, mulch, temporary or permanent cover, and construction phasing.
EROSION CONTROL INSPECTOR: A designated agent given authority by the City of Monticello to inspect and maintain erosion and sediment control practices.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: Public or private utility systems for gas, electricity, steam, sewer and water; voice, television, and digital communications systems; and waste disposal and recycling services. These services include underground, surface, and overhead systems and all accessories thereto such as poles, towers, wires, mains, drains, vaults, culverts, laterals,
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 481
sewers, pipes, catch basins, water storage tanks, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, pumps, lift stations, hydrants, and other similar features necessary for the function of the essential service. Wireless radio frequency reception and transmission antennas and support structures shall not be considered an essential service. Essential Services do not include buildings or uses that include human occupancy or activity beyond occasional service or maintenance.
EXTRACTION OF MATERIALS: the development or extraction of a natural resource in excess of four hundred (400) cubic yards from its natural occurrences on affected land without processing.
EXTRACTIVE USE: The use of land for surface or subsurface removal of sand, gravel, rock, industrial minerals, other nonmetallic minerals, and peat not regulated under Minnesota Statutes, sections 93.44 to 93.51.
EVENT CENTER: A multi-purpose commercial venue (public or privately-owned) used for the purposes of performances, trade shows, corporate functions, sporting events, private receptions or parties, holiday gatherings or similar attractions. Common characteristics of event centers, which differentiate such uses from places of public assembly, often include but are not limited to, the following:
1. Varied and/or irregular activity schedules
2. The display and/or sale of retail commercial goods
3. The generation of high traffic volumes at varied time periods
4. Commercial activities and uses in coordination with the events
5. Locations in commercial districts
6. Alcohol service as licensed
Accessory uses may include food preparation facilities, concessions, offices, museums, parks, athletic training or practice facilities, stores, restaurants, structured parking facilities, and patron transportation facilities. Event centers do not include adult uses and places of public assembly.
EVERGREEN TREE: A tree that retains some or most of its leaves or needles throughout the year.
EXISTING TREE CANOPY: The crowns of all healthy self-supporting canopy trees with a diameter at breast height (DBH) of ten inches or greater and understory trees with a caliper size of four inches or greater at breast height.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 482 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
FAMILY: An individual or group that maintains a common household and use of common cooking and kitchen facilities and common entrances to a single dwelling unit, where the group consists of:
(A) Two (2) or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, domestic partnership, adoption, legal guardianship (including foster children); or,
(B) Not more than four (4) unrelated persons.
FARMERS MARKET: An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or in a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts items, and food and beverages (but not to include second-hand goods) dispensed from booths located on-site.
FENCE: A tangible barrier constructed of any allowable material erected for the purpose of providing a boundary or as a means of protection, or to prevent uncontrolled access, or for decorative purposes (such as an ornamental gate or ornamental gates), or to screen from viewers in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and operations conducted behind it
FILLING: The act of depositing any rock, soil, gravel, sand, or other material so as to change the natural grade of the land; and/or to fill or partly fill a water body, watercourse, or wetland.
FINAL GRADE: Excavation or fill of material to final plan elevation. Final grade completed as part of individual site development.
FINAL STABILIZATION:
(A) All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70 percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed;
(B) For individual lots in residential construction by the contractor, the contractor must either: (A) complete final stabilization as specified above, or (B) establish temporary stabilization including perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to occupation of the structure. If the contractor chooses (B), it must inform the owner in writing of the requirements for final stabilization;
(C) For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land) final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 483
waters and drainage systems and areas which are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization criteria in subparts (a) or (b) above;
(D) The contractor must clean out all sediment from conveyances and from temporary sedimentation basins that are to be used as permanent water quality management basins. Sediment must be stabilized to prevent it from washing back into the basin, conveyances or drainage ways discharging off-site or to surface waters. The cleanout of permanent basins must be sufficient to return the basin to design capacity. All drainage ditches constructed to drain water from the site after construction is complete must be stabilized to preclude erosion; and
(E) All temporary synthetic and structural erosion prevention and sediment control BMPs (such as silt fence) must be removed as part of the final stabilization on the site.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: An establishment that provides retail banking services, mortgage lending, or similar financial services to individuals and businesses. Financial institutions include those establishments engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money and check-cashing facilities, but shall not include bail bond brokers. Financial institutions may also provide Automated Teller Machine (ATM) services, located within a fully enclosed space or building, along an exterior building wall intended to serve walk-up customers only, or in a City authorized drive-thru lane.
FINISHING STANDARD: Criterion established to control and limit the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The term “finishing standard” shall be synonymous with “performance standard.”
FLAG: Any fabric or similar lightweight material attached at one end of the material, usually to a staff or pole, so as to allow movement of the material by atmospheric changes and which contains distinctive colors, patterns, symbols, emblems, insignia, or other symbolic devices.
FLOOD: A temporary increase in the flow or stage of a stream or in the stage of a wetland or lake that results in the inundation of normally dry areas.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: The frequency for which it is expected that a specific flood stage or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the flood plain outside of the floodway. Flood fringe is synonymous with the term "floodway fringe" used in the Flood Insurance Study for the City of Monticello.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 484 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
FLOOD PLAIN: The beds proper and the areas adjoining a wetland, lake, or watercourse which have been or hereafter may be covered by the regional flood.
FLOOD PROFILE: A graph or a longitudinal plot of water surface elevations of a flood event along a reach of a stream or river.
FLOOD-PROOFING: A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustment to properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of flood damages.
FLOODWAY: The bed of wetland or lake and the channel of a watercourse and those portions of the adjoining flood plain which are reasonably required to carry or store the regional flood discharge.
FLOOR AREA [see section 8.2(B)(4)]
FLOOR AREA - FINISHABLE: Area within a building—exclusive of mechanical, garage, or unfinished storage space—that could meet all requirements of “finished floor area” after improvements are completed.
FLOOR AREA - FINISHED: To qualify as finished floor area, the space shall be at or above the finished exterior grade, or in the case of lower levels, no less than 42 inches below such grade; must have heat; flooring such as carpet, vinyl, tile, wood or other similar floor covering; a ceiling and walls covered with gypsum board, plaster, or wood which is stained, painted or covered with other residential wall/ceiling covering prior to occupancy. Basements that are neither “look out” or “walk out” levels may be finished, but shall not be counted towards a minimum finished square footage calculation.
FOREST LAND CONVERSION: The clear cutting of forested lands to prepare for a new land use other than reestablishment of a subsequent forest stand.
FREEWAY CORRIDOR (SIGN) AREA: A special signing area encompassing land located within eight hundred (800) feet either side (north or south) of the centerline of Interstate 94, in addition to certain areas along Trunk Highway 25 south of Interstate 94 north of Dundas Road, East of Sandberg Road, and West of Cedar Street as shown on the City’s official Freeway Bonus Sign District Map.
FUNERAL SERVICES: An establishment that provides human funeral services, including embalming and memorial services. Crematories are accessory uses to a funeral home.
GARAGE: An attached or detached accessory structure for the purpose of parking vehicles.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 485
GARAGE SALE: The sale of miscellaneous used items commonly associated with residential use. Garage sales shall not be for the sale of primarily a single commodity. The term “garage sale” includes “sidewalk sale,” “yard sale,” “basement sale,” and “estate sale.”
GENERAL WAREHOUSING: Structures used for the storage or distribution of goods where there is no sale of items to retailers or the general public unless permitted as an accessory use to the warehouse.
GRADING: Excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof.
GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL PERMIT : A permit issued by the municipality for the construction or alteration of the ground and for the improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff, and grading. Herein after referred to as “Grading Permit”.
GRADING, DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL PLANS: A set of plans prepared by or under the direction of a licensed professional engineer. Plans are required to indicate the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control grading, sediment and erosion on a development site during and after construction as detailed in the City of Monticello “Plan Requirements and Design Guidelines”.
GREENHOUSE/CONSERVATORY: A structure, primarily of glass, in which temperature and humidity can be controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants
GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY, SINGLE FAMILY: A state-licensed facility, public or private, which regularly provides a planned combination of living conditions, services, and resources for the treatment, rehabilitation, training, supervision, or care of persons residing on the premises which falls into one of the following categories: 1) a state licensed residential facility serving six or fewer persons; 2) registered housing with services establishment serving six or fewer persons; 3) a licensed day care facility serving 12 or fewer persons, or 4) a group family day care facility licensed to serve 14 or fewer children. This term does not include any type of residential or non-residential facility for persons convicted of crimes, or for persons accused of crimes who are diverted to the facility before conviction; nor does it include a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses.
GROUP RESIDENTIAL FACILITY, MULTIFAMILY: A state-licensed facility, public or private, which regularly provides a planned combination of living conditions, services, and resources for the treatment, rehabilitation, training, supervision, or care of persons residing on
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 486 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
the premises which falls into one of the following categories: 1) a state licensed residential facility serving between seven (7) and sixteen (16) persons, or 2) a licensed day care facility serving between thirteen (13) and sixteen (16) persons. This term does not include any type of residential or non-residential facility for persons convicted of crimes, or for persons accused of crimes who are diverted to the facility before conviction; nor does it include a residential facility whose primary purpose is to treat juveniles who have violated criminal statutes relating to sex offenses or have been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of conduct in violation of criminal statutes relating to sex offenses.
GROWLER: A 64 fluid ounce (1.89 liter) container of beer that is made available for purchase at the brewery where it’s produced. Said container is available for off-sale consumption only.
HELIPORT: An area used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters, and may include any or all of the areas of buildings appropriate to accomplish these functions
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL USE (see “HEAVY MANUFACTURING”)
HIGH RISK TREE: Any tree with structural defects sufficient to render the tree or part of the tree likely to fail and cause damage to persons, property, or other significant vegetation, as determined by a qualified arborist or other tree professional.
HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by the resident thereof; provided that the use is limited in extent and incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof.
HOOP BUILDING (see also “tarp garage”): A portable or permanently anchored structure defined mainly by a steel or PVC frame over which a cover made from plastic, tarp, or other similar type fabrics or materials is placed.
HOSPITAL: A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient basis, including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, and administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A constructed hard surface that either prevents or retards the entry of water into the soil and causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities and at an increased rate of flow than existed prior to development. Examples include rooftops, sidewalks, patios, parking lots, storage areas and concrete, asphalt, or gravel driveways or roads.
Hoop Building
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 487
INDOOR FOOD/CONVENIENCE SALES: A small retail establishment located within or associated with another use that offers for sale prepared food or convenience goods such as prepackaged food items, tobacco, periodicals, and other household goods.
INDUSTRIAL SELF-STORAGE: A land use characterized by larger spaces available to occupants for the purposes of storage of commercial, industrial, or personal goods, as well as business, industrial, or hobby activities accessory to such storage as may be permitted within the zoning district, provided that no such space is subdivided to a total area that is less than 2,000 square feet in area.
INDUSTRIAL SERVICES (GENERAL): Businesses that are engaged in the repair or servicing of industrial, business, or consumer machinery, equipment, products, or by-products; or providing other related services primarily for industrial businesses. Industrial service firms that service consumer goods do so by mainly providing centralized services for separate retail outlets. Also includes firms such as contractors and building maintenance services and similar establishments engaged in performance of services off-site. Few customers, especially the general public, come to the site. Accessory activities may include retail sales, offices, parking and storage.
INTENSIVE VEGETATION CLEARING: The complete removal of trees or shrubs in a contiguous patch, strip, row, or block.
KENNEL (COMMERCIAL): A facility for the boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, selling, training or other animal husbandry activities for dogs, cats or other animals for financial or other compensation.
LAKE, GENERAL DEVELOPMENT: Lakes that usually have more than 225 acres of water per mile of shoreline and 25 dwellings per mile of shoreline, and are more than 15 feet deep.
LAKE, NATURAL ENVIRONMENT: Lakes that usually have less than 150 total acres, less than 60 acres per mile of shoreline, and less than three dwellings per mile of shoreline. They may have some winter kill of fish; may have shallow, swampy shoreline; and are less than 15 feet deep.
LAKE, RECREATIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Lakes that usually have between 60 and 225 acres of water per mile of shoreline, between 3 and 25 dwellings per mile of shoreline, and are more than 15 feet deep.
LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any land change that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into or upon waters or lands within the city’s
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 488 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling.
LAND RECLAMATION: The reclaiming of land by the importation, depositing, or grading of soils in excess of 400 cubic yards so as to elevate the grade.
LANDSCAPE STRIP, PERIMETER: Vegetative material associated with the perimeter landscaping required for a vehicular use area.
LANDSCAPING / NURSERY BUSINESS: A retail business devoted to the growth, display, and/or sale of plants, shrubs, trees; and/or landscaping materials and services.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL USE: (see “MANUFACTURING, LIGHT”)
LOT (OF RECORD): A parcel of land, whether subdivided or otherwise legally described, as of the effective date of this ordinance, or approved by the City as a lot subsequent to such date and which is occupied by or intended for occupancy by one (1) principal building or principal use together with any accessory buildings and such open spaces as required by this ordinance and having its principal frontage upon a street.
LOT: Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this zoning regulation, having not less than the minimum area required by this zoning ordinance for a building site in the district in which such lot is situated and having its principal frontage on a street or a proposed street approved by the Council.
 LOT Related Definitions (e.g. lot depth, lot area, lot corner, etc): [see section 8.2(B)]
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership, except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-of-way.
MACHINERY/TRUCK REPAIR: This business performs mechanical, electrical, structural, and cosmetic repairs to trucks and heavy equipment. Allowed: Tune ups and adjustment, replacement of parts, rebuilding of parts or components when installation is available, body repair, collision service and painting, frame straightening and repair, steam cleaning and/or sandblasting, undercoating and rust proofing, radiator repair, tire repair, wheel alignment and balancing, washing, cleaning, and polishing.
MANUFACTURED (MOBILE) HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections which in the traveling mode is 8 body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length,
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 489
or, when erected on a side, is 760 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in it, and which complies with the manufactured home building code (MN State Statute 327.31).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: A contiguous parcel of land which has been developed for the placement of manufactured homes and is owned by an individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private association, or corporation.
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: The manufacturing of products from raw or unprocessed materials, where the finished product may be combustible or explosive. This category shall also include any establishment or facility using large unscreened outdoor structures such as conveyor belt systems, cooling towers, cranes, storage silos, or similar equipment that cannot be integrated into the building design, or engaging in large-scale outdoor storage. Any industrial use that generates noise, odor, vibration, illumination, or particulate that may be offensive or obnoxious to adjacent land uses, or requires a significant amount of on-site hazardous chemical storage shall be classified under this land use. This use shall include any packaging of the product being manufactured on-site. Examples include but are not limited to the production of the following: large-scale food and beverage operations, lumber, milling, and planning facilities; aggregate, concrete and asphalt plants; foundries, forge shops, open air welding, and other intensive metal fabrication facilities; chemical blending, mixing, or production, and plastic processing and production.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: The mechanical transformation of predominantly previously prepared materials into new products, including assembly of component parts and the creation of products for sale to the wholesale or retail markets or directly to consumers. Such uses are wholly confined within an enclosed building, do not include processing of hazardous gases and chemicals, and do not emit noxious noise, smoke, vapors, fumes, dust, glare, odor, or vibration. Examples include, but are not limited to: production or repair of small machines or electronic parts and equipment; woodworking and cabinet building; publishing and lithography; computer design and development; research, development, testing facilities and laboratories; apparel production; sign making; assembly of pre-fabricated parts, manufacture of electric, electronic, or optical instruments or devices; manufacture and assembly of artificial limbs, dentures, hearing aids, and surgical instruments or parts; manufacture, processing, and packing of food products or cosmetics; and manufacturing of components, jewelry, clothing, trimming decorations and any similar item.
MARQUEE: Any permanent roof like structure projecting beyond a theater building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of that building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 490 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
MAXIMUM DENSITY: The number of dwelling units allowed per gross acre of land as controlled by an individual or joint ownership group.
MEAN GROUND LEVEL: The elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. Grade shall be the mean level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the buildings.
MICRO DISTILLERY: A distillery that produces 40,000 proof gallons of liquor or less annually.
MULTIPLE-TENANT SITE: Any site which has more than one (1) tenant, and each tenant has a separate ground level exterior public entrance.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The program for issuing, modifying, revoking, reissuing, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act (Sections 301, 318, 402, and 405) and United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33, Sections 1317, 1328, 1342, and 1345.
NATURAL DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All land surface areas which by nature of their contour configuration, collect, store and channel surface water run-off.
NATURAL OBSTRUCTION: Means any rock, tree, gravel, or analogous natural matter that is an obstruction and has been located within a water body, watercourse, or wetland by a non-human cause.
NEXT AVAILABLE AGENDA: The next meeting at which an application can be heard by a reviewing body after consideration of the anticipated time for review and other items already scheduled for future agendas. The Community Development Department has full discretion to select the best future meeting date that will accommodate the administrative and official review of an item provided the overall timeframe for review will comply with all state mandated review deadlines.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING: A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4, or on the effective date of any amendment to this ordinance, but that fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use lawfully being made of any land, building, or structure not otherwise abandoned, existing on effective date of this ordinance as denoted in Section 1.4 Section 1.4: Effective Date
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 491
or on the effective date of any amendment of this Ordinance, that does not comply with the use regulations of this Ordinance or the amendment.
NURSING HOME (CONVALESCENT HOME): A facility that provides nursing services and custodial care generally on a 24-hour basis for two or more unrelated individuals who for reasons of illness, physical infirmity, or advanced age, require such services; but not including hospitals, clinics, sanitariums, or similar institutions.
OBSTRUCTION (in relation to flood plains): Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel modification, culvert, building, wire, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood plain which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water.
OFFICE USE: An establishment primarily engaged in providing professional, financial, administrative, clerical, and similar services.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE: A space accessible from the street, alley or way, in a building or on the lot, for the use of trucks while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. Such space shall be of such size as to accommodate one (1) truck of the type typically used in the particular business.
OPACITY (OPAQUE): A measurement indicating the degree of obscuration of light or visibility. An object that is 100% opaque is impenetrable by light.
OPEN SALES: Any open land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling, and/or renting merchandise and for the storing of same prior to sale. This use includes all outdoor sales and display of goods and/or materials that are not specifically addressed as Outdoor Storage, Sidewalk Sales & Display, or Off-Street Vehicle Parking.
OPEN SPACE: An area on a lot not occupied by any structure or impervious surface.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE: A required ground area or terrace area on a lot which is graded, developed, landscaped, and equipped and intended and maintained for either active or passive recreation or both, available and accessible to and usable by all persons occupying a dwelling unit or rooming unit on the lot and their guests. Such areas shall be grassed and landscaped or covered only for a recreational purpose. Roofs, driveways, and parking areas shall not constitute usable open space.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 492 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
ORDINARY HIGH WATER (new shoreland district code): The boundary of public waters which may include wetlands, and shall be an elevation delineating the highest water level which has been maintained for a sufficient period of time to leave evidence upon the landscape, commonly that point where the natural vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial. For watercourses, the ordinary high water level is the elevation of the top of the bank of the channel. For reservoirs and flowages, the ordinary high water level is the operating elevation of the normal summer pool.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The keeping, in an un-roofed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours. This shall not include the display of vehicles for sale in a new or used car sales lot.
OUTPATIENT CARE: Medical examination or service available to the public in a hospital. This service is provided without overnight care and shall be considered a separate, independent, principal use when combined or operated in conjunction with a hospital.
OWNER: The person or entity with a legal or equitable interest in the land on which the construction activities will occur.
PARAPET: A low wall which is located perpendicular to (extension of front wall) a roof of a building.
PARK FACILITY, ACTIVE: A park or recreation facility that includes one or more of the following: buildings, lighting, ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, skate parks, golf courses, or other active sports facilities. Active park facilities will commonly include benches, picnic areas, trails, sidewalks, and other similar features.
PARK FACILITY, PASSIVE: A park or recreational facility that does not include the construction of facilities, lighting, or development of ball fields or other active sports facilities. Passive parks may include benches, picnic areas, trails and sidewalks.
PARKING, OFF-STREET: The act of keeping a passenger vehicle as defined herein and/or small commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles and emergency vehicles as defined herein, on an approved parking space, properly surfaced, for a period of less than twenty-four (24) hours.
PARKING BAY: The parking module consisting of one or two rows of parking spaces or stalls and the aisle from which motor vehicles enter and leave the spaces.
PARKING ISLAND: Landscaped areas within parking lots used to separate parking areas and to soften the overall visual impact of a large parking area from adjacent properties.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 493
PARKING LOT DRIVE AISLE: A vehicular accessway located within an off-street parking or vehicular use area which serves individual parking stalls and driveways.
PARKING SPACE/STALL: An area enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed sufficient in size to store one (1) automobile which has adequate access to a public street or alley and permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile.
PARKING STRUCTURE: A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building. This definition includes parking garages, decks, and ramp parking.
PARKING, SURFACED: A parking space or storage space which is paved, or surfaced with crushed rock, such as Class V limestone, crushed or decomposed granite, “con-bit”, or landscaping rock of adequate durability to support the load parked or stored thereon.
PARKING, UNSURFACED: A storage space which is covered by vegetation, such as grass or other landscaped cover, and which is mowed or trimmed to meet the City’s weed control regulations. Unsurfaced space may not include bare ground which may be subject to erosion, tracking of mud onto the roadway, or drainage of silt into a public drainage easement or waterway.
PASSENGER TERMINAL: A place that receives and discharges passengers which generally includes facilities and equipment required for the operation. Examples include terminals for bus, taxi, railroad, shuttle van, or other similar vehicular services. This definition does not include bus stops or similar transfer points for passengers at which no facilities (excluding a bench or shelter) are provided.
PAVED: A parking space or storage space which is surfaced with only the following materials: Asphalt, concrete, and natural or man-made paving stones such as brick, granite, or concrete pavers, provided such pavers have a flat surface area of no less than nine square inches.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: Criterion established to control and limit the impacts generated by, or inherent in, uses of land or buildings. The term “performance standard” shall be synonymous with “finishing standard.”
PERIMETER SEDIMENT CONTROL: A barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin.
PERMANENT COVER: Final stabilization.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 494 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
PERMITTED USE: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and performance standards (if any) of such districts.
PERMITTEE: Applicant for and recipient of an approved permit.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or organization of any kind.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments that primarily engage in providing services generally involving the care of the person or person’s possessions. Personal services may include but are not limited to: laundry and dry-cleaning services, barber shops, beauty salons, health and fitness studios, music schools, informational and instructional services, tanning salons, body art (including tattooing), and portrait studios.
PHASING (in relation to grading): Clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase completed before the clearing of the next.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY: An institution or facility that congregations of people regularly attend to participate in or hold meetings, workshops, lectures, civic activities, religious services, and other similar activities, including buildings in which such functions and activities are held. Places of public assembly are characterized by individuals arriving and departing at regularly scheduled times and do not include event centers.
Common characteristics of places of public assembly, which differentiate such uses from event centers, may include but are not limited to, the following:
1. Regular activity schedules
2. No display and/or sale of retail commercial goods or services
3. The generation of traffic at routine time periods
4. Predictable traffic volumes during activities
5. Locations that may be in commercial, industrial, or residential zoning districts.
PLAN REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES: Manual detailing City specifications for all plan requirements.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A type of development which may incorporate a variety of land uses planned and developed as a unit. The planned unit development is distinguished from the traditional subdivision process of development in that zoning standards such as density, setbacks, height limits, and minimum lot sizes may be altered by negotiation and agreement between the developer, the municipality, and the Commissioner of Natural Resources as may be required.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 495
PLANTING STRIP: Areas intended for the placement of vegetation within the interior of vehicular use areas or along street right-of-way edges, typically between the back of the curb and the inside edge of the sidewalk.
PORTABLE CONTAINER: A large container designed and rented or leased for the temporary storage of commercial, industrial, or residential household goods that does not contain a foundation or wheels for movement.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from subordinate or accessory uses.
PRODUCTION BREWERY: A facility that manufactures, processes and warehouses beer for wholesale distribution in off-sale packages to retail liquor establishments and may retail beer product for on-site consumption in a taproom for off-site consumption as growlers. A production brewer may not have an ownership interest in a brewery licensed under Minnesota Statutes Section 43-A.409, Subd. 6, clause (d).
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE – SERVICES: A commercial use involving administrative, clerical, or professional operations, and routinely including direct transactions or consultations with clients for such services. Such uses commonly include legal, financial, insurance, or real estate services, among others, but do not include retail sales of stock-in-trade goods.
PUBLIC BUILDING OR USE: Any facility, including but not limited to buildings and property that are leased or otherwise operated or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
PUBLIC WATERS: Any waters as defined in Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.005, Subd. 15, 15a.
REACH (in relation to flood plains): A hydraulic engineering term to describe a longitudinal segment of a stream or river influenced by a natural or man-made obstruction. In an urban area, the segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would most typically constitute a reach.
REAL ESTATE OFFICE/MOBILE SALES HOME: A dwelling temporarily used as a sales office for a residential development under construction for on-site sales
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE CAMP SITE: A lot or parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by recreational vehicles for travel, recreational, or vacation usage for short periods of stay subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 496 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
RECYCLING AND SALVAGE CENTER: A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, resale, or reuse of recyclable and recovered materials.
REGIONAL FLOOD: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in Minnesota and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of the 100-year recurrence interval. Regional flood is synonymous with the term "base flood" used in the Flood Insurance Study.
REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The regulatory flood protection elevation shall be an elevation no lower than one foot above the elevation of the regional flood plus any increases in flood elevation caused by encroachments on the flood plain that result from designation of a floodway.
REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair services for TV’s, bicycles, clocks, watches, shoes, guns, canvas products, appliances, and office equipment; including tailor; locksmith; and upholsterer.
RESTAURANT: An establishment where meals or prepared food, including beverages and confections, are served to customers for consumption on or off the premises. Such a facility may include indoor and outdoor seating and/or drive through services.
RETAIL COMMERCIAL USES (OTHER): Establishments primarily engaged in the sale of goods and materials to the general public not otherwise specifically defined in code. Retail commercial uses may include by are not limited to bookstores, antique stores, grocery stores and similar uses; but do not include sales from moveable motorized vehicles.
RIVER, AGRICULTURAL: Rivers that run through intensively cultivated areas, mainly in the southern and western area of Minnesota.
RIVER, FORESTED: Rivers that are in forested, sparsely to moderately populated areas with some roads; typically found in northeast, southwest and north-central Minnesota
RIVER, REMOTE: Rivers that are primarily in roadless, forested, sparsely populated areas in northeastern Minnesota.
RIVER, TRANSITION: Rivers that are in a mixture of cultivated, pasture and forest lands.
RIVER, TRIBUTARY: Rivers in the Protected Public Waters Inventory that are not classified by the DNR as an agricultural, forested, remote or transition river.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 497
ROOF: The exterior surface and its supporting structure on the top of a building or structure. The structural makeup of which conforms to the roof structures, roof construction and roof covering sections of the International Building Code.
ROOT ZONE: The area inside the dripline of a tree that contains its roots.
SCHOOL, Pre-K-12: A public or private school offering general, technical, or alternative instruction at the elementary, middle, or high school level that operates in buildings or structures on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes. Such uses include classrooms, vocational training (including that of an industrial nature for instructional purposes only in middle or high schools), laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution.
SCHOOL, HIGHER EDUCATION: A public or private non-profit institution for post-secondary education or a public or private school offering vocational or trade instruction to students. Such educational institutions operate in buildings or structures on land leased or owned by the educational institution for administrative purposes. Such uses include classrooms, vocational training (including that of an industrial nature for instructional purposes only), laboratories, auditoriums, libraries, cafeterias, after school care, athletic facilities, dormitories, and other facilities that further the educational mission of the institution.
SCROLLING TEXT: A type of dynamic sign movement in which the letters or symbols move horizontally across the sign in a continuous scroll, permitting a viewer to observe the message over time. Scrolling shall not include flashing or other types of video movement.
SEDIMENT CONTROL: Measures and methods employed to prevent sediment from leaving the site.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY: A building or group of buildings that contains equal or varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized, and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of residential or commercial customer’s goods or wares.
SEDIMENT: The product of an erosion process; solid material both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved by water, air or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either above or below water level.
SEMIPUBLIC USE: The use of land by a private, nonprofit organization to provide a public service that is ordinarily open to some persons outside the regular constituency of the organization.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 498 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
SENIOR HOUSING: A multiple-family structure, 80 percent of whose occupants shall be 65 years of age or over, or a multiple-family structure where each unit is occupied by at least one person who is 55 years of age or over and is retired. The facility may include common areas for the congregation of occupants for activities or meals. Senior housing shall typically consist of multiple-household attached dwellings, but may include detached dwelling units as part of a wholly owned and managed senior project.
SENSITIVE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT: The preservation and management of areas unsuitable for development in their natural state due to constraints such as shallow soils over groundwater or bedrock, highly erosive or expansive soils, steep slopes, susceptibility to flooding, or occurrence of flora or fauna in need of special protection.
SETBACK: The horizontal distance between a structure and the lot lines of the lot on which it is located; or the minimum horizontal distance between a structure, sewage treatment system or other facility and an ordinary high water level, sewage treatment system, top of a bluff, road, highway, property line, or other facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM: a septic tank and soil absorption system or other individual or cluster type sewage treatment system as described and regulated in Minnesota Rules Chapter 7080.
SEWER SYSTEM: Pipelines or conduits, pumping stations, and force main, and all other construction, devices, appliances, or appurtenances used for conducting sewage or industrial waste or other wastes to a point of ultimate disposal.
SHADE TREE: A tree planted or valued chiefly for its shade from sunlight; this term usually applies to large trees with spreading canopies.
SHELTER, FALLOUT: An accessory building specifically designed and used for the protection of life from radioactive fallout.
SHELTER, STORM: An accessory building specifically designed and used for the protection of life from weather events.
SHORE IMPACT ZONE: Land located between the ordinary high water level of a public water and a line parallel to it at a setback of 50 percent of the required structure setback.
SHORELAND: Land located within the following distances from public water:
(A) 1,000 feet from the ordinary high water mark of a lake, pond, or flowages.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 499
(B) Three hundred (300) feet from a river or stream, or the landward extent of a flood plain designated by ordinance on such river or stream, whichever is greater. The limits of shorelands may be reduced whenever the waters involved are bounded by topographic divides that extend landward from the waters for lesser distances and when approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources or the commissioner’s designated representative.
(C) The area included in the recreational land use districts for the Mississippi River as defined in Minnesota Rules Chapter 6105.0800-0950.
SHRUB: A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems emerging from the ground, or small branches near the ground. Shrubs may be deciduous or evergreen.
SIDEWALK SALES & DISPLAY, OUTDOOR: Outdoor sale and display, conducted as an accessory, incidental activity by the proprietor, of products normally sold inside a retail establishment, subject to the limitations identified in this ordinance.
SIGN: Any letter, word or symbol, poster, picture, statuary, reading matter or representation in the nature of advertisement, announcement, message or visual communication, whether painted, posted, printed, affixed or constructed, including all associated brackets, braces, supports, wires and structures, which is displayed for informational or communicative purposes.
SIGN FACE: The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited.
SIGN STRUCTURE: Any structure including the supports, uprights, bracing and framework which supports or is capable of supporting any sign.
SIGN, ABANDONED: Any sign and/or its supporting sign structure which remains without a message or whose display surface remains blank for a period of one (1) year or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change in ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of one (1) year or more. Any sign remaining after demolition of a principal structure shall be deemed to be abandoned. Where a sign has received a special permit or other City approval, such approval shall run with the principal use of the property, and such a sign shall be considered to be abandoned under this definition when it meets the conditions specified in this section, notwithstanding the prior special approval.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 500 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
SIGN, AREA IDENTIFICATION: A freestanding sign which identifies the name of a neighborhood, a residential subdivision, a multiple residential complex consisting of three (3) or more structures, a shopping center consisting of five (5) or more separate business concerns, an industrial area, an office complex consisting of three (3) or more structures, or any combination of the above located on contiguous property.
SIGN, AWNING: A building sign or graphic printed on or in some fashion attached directly to the awning material.
SIGN, AREA: A sign identifying a series of related parcels or uses, rather than a specific parcel or use.
SIGN, BALLOON: A sign consisting of a bag made of lightweight material supported by helium, hot, or pressurized air which is greater than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: See definition of Off Premises Sign.
SIGN, BUILDING: Any sign attached or supported by any building.
SIGN, CANOPY: Any sign that is part of or attached to a canopy, made of fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door or entrance. A canopy sign is not a marquee and is different from service area canopy signs.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign or portion thereof that has a reader board for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic or symbol is defined by objects not consisting of an illumination device and may be changed or rearranged manually or mechanically with characters, illustrations, letters or numbers that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign structure.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY (ELECTRONIC): A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, non-pictorial text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or objects. Electronic changeable copy signs do not include official signs. Electronic changeable copy signs may also be dynamic display signs if the definition of dynamic display sign is met.
SIGN, DYNAMIC DISPLAY: Any characteristics of a sign that appear to have movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign
Canopy Sign
Changeable Copy Sign
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 501
structure or any other component of the sign. This includes displays that incorporate technology or methods allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components as well as any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, digital ink or any other method or technology that allows the sign face to present a series of images or displays. All dynamic displays are changeable copy signs, but not all changeable copy signs are dynamic displays.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC GRAPHIC DISPLAY: A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, static images, static graphics or static pictures, with or without text information, defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area where the message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of fade, repixalization or dissolve modes. Electronic graphic display signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic or digital displays. Electronic graphic display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
SIGN, FLASHING: A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden transitory bursts and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by streaming, graphic bursts showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming, twinkling or sparkling.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any sign which has supporting framework that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and which is independent from any building or other structure.
SIGN, HEIGHT OF: The height of the sign shall be computed as the vertical distance measured from the crown of the adjacent street surface at centerline to the top of the highest attached component of the sign.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: Signs in all districts which identify the business or owner, or manager, or resident, and set forth the address of the premises where the sign is located and which contain no other material.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign which contains an element designed to emanate artificial light internally or externally.
Sign Height
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 502 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
SIGN, MARQUEE: Any building sign painted, mounted, constructed or attached in any manner, on a marquee.
SIGN, MONUMENT: Any freestanding sign with its sign face mounted on the ground or mounted on a base at least as wide as the sign and which has a total height not exceeding fourteen (14) feet.
SIGN, MULTI-VISION: Any sign composed in whole or part of a series of vertical or horizontal slats or cylinders that are capable of being rotated at intervals so that partial rotation of the group of slats or cylinders produces a different image and when properly functioning allows on a single sign structure the display at any given time one (1) of two (2) or more images.
SIGN, OFF PREMISES: A commercial speech sign which directs the attention of the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location not on the same lot where such sign is located. For purposes of the Sign Ordinance, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be outside such lot and any sign located or proposed to be located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an off premises sign.
SIGN, OFFICIAL: Signs of a public noncommercial nature including public notification signs, safety signs, traffic signs, direction to public facilities when erected by or on behalf of a public official or employee in the performance of official duty – See also “Public Sign”.
SIGN, POLE: See definition of Pylon Sign.
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support is converted to another sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground since this characteristic is based on the design of such a sign.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign which is affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than two (2) feet beyond the surface of such building or wall face.
SIGN, PUBLIC: Any sign posted by a governmental agency of a public, non-commercial nature, to include signs indicating scenic or historical points of interest, memorial plaques, and the like, and signs for civic interest groups within the City of Monticello when signs are erected by or on order of a public officer or employee in the performance of official duty – See Also “Official Sign”.
Marquee Sign
Projecting Sign
Monument Sign
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 503
SIGN, PYLON: Any freestanding sign which has its supportive structure(s) anchored in the ground and which has a sign face elevated above ground level by pole(s) or beam(s) and with the area below the sign face open.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and above the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
SIGN, ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL: Any building sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, so that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and so that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6) inches.
SIGN, ROTATING SIGN: A sign or portion of a sign which turns about on an axis.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD: A sign placed near the entrance of a business, usually on the public or private sidewalk, advertising particular aspects of the business goods or services.
SIGN, SHIMMERING: A sign which reflects an oscillating sometimes distorted visual image.
SIGN, SUSPENDED: Any building sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is connected to such surface.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign which is erected or displayed for a specified period of time, including, but not limited to, banners, search lights, portable signs, streamers, pennants, inflatable devices.
SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE: A sign that displays only current time and temperature information.
SIGN, VIDEO DISPLAY: A sign that changes its message or background in a manner or method of display characterized by motion or pictorial imagery, which may or may not include text and depicts action or a special effect to imitate movement, the presentation of pictorials or graphics displayed in a progression of frames that gives the illusion of motion, including, but not limited to, the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes, not including
Pylon Signs
Sandwich Board Sign
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 504 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
electronic changeable copy signs. Video display signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects.
SIGN, WALL: Any building sign attached parallel to, but within two (2) feet of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one (1) sign surface.
SIGN, WINDOW: Any building sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
SIGNIFICANT HISTORIC SITE: Any archaeological site, standing structure, or other property that meets the criteria for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places or is listed in the State Register of Historic Sites, or is determined to be an unplatted cemetery that falls under the provisions of Minnesota Statutes, section 307.08. A historic site meets these criteria if it is presently listed on either register or if it is determined to meet the qualifications for listing after review by the Minnesota state archaeologist or the director of the Minnesota Historical Society. All unplatted cemeteries are automatically considered to be significant historic sites.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event which plans for or can reasonably expect to attract more than 100 persons at any one time such as cultural events, musical events, celebrations, festivals, fairs, carnivals, etc.
SPEECH, COMMERCIAL: Speech advertising a business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment.
SPEECH, NON-COMMERCIAL: Dissemination of messages not classified as commercial speech which include, but are not limited to, messages concerning political, religious, social, ideological, public service and informational topics.
SITE LANDSCAPING: Required vegetative material consisting of trees and shrubs that are placed on a development site to soften built edges and provide transitions. [See Section 4.1(H)]
SHOPPING CENTER: An integrated grouping of commercial stores under single ownership or control. See also “RETAIL COMMERCIAL USES”
Window Signage
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 505
SLOPE: Means the degree of deviation of surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy (direct, diffuse, and reflected) received from the sun.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A set of devices whose primary purpose is to collect solar energy and convert and store it for useful purposes including heating and cooling buildings or other energy-using processes, or to produce generated power by means of any combination of collecting, transferring, or converting solar-generated energy. Solar Energy Systems are allowed only as accessory structures in any zoning district other than Planned Unit Development Districts, subject to the requirements of Chapter 5.3 of this Ordinance.
SPECIALTY EATING ESTABLISHMENTS: Establishments selling specialty food items that normally do not constitute a full meal, including but not limited to: ice cream parlors, dessert cafes, snack shops, juice and coffee houses, and bakeries.
STABILIZATION / STABILIZED: The exposed ground surface has been covered by appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blanket, or other material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is not stabilization.
STABLE: A building in which horses are sheltered; may be accessory to a residential or other use or a freestanding principal use.
STABLIZED: The exposed ground surface after it has been covered by appropriate materials such as mulch, staked sod, riprap, wood fiber blankets, or other material that prevents erosion from occurring. Grass seeding is not considered stabilized until it has established and meets the definition of Final Stabilization.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading, excavation and filling;
STEEP SLOPE: Land where agricultural activity or development is either not recommended or described as poorly suited due to slope steepness and the site’s soil characteristics, as mapped and described in available county soil surveys or other technical reports, unless appropriate design and construction techniques and farming practices are used in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Where specific information is not available, steep slopes are lands having average slopes over 12 percent, as measured over horizontal distances of 50 feet or more, which are not bluffs.
STORM WATER: Defined and shall have the meaning given to it by Minn. R. 7077.0105, subp. 41(b)
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 506 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): A plan for stormwater discharge that includes erosion prevention measures and sediment controls that, when implemented, will minimize soil erosion on a parcel of land and minimize off-site nonpoint pollution to the maximum extent practicable.
STORY: [see section 8.2(B)(5)]
STREET FRONTAGE: [see section 8.2(B)(1)(f)]
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. This includes a fixed or movable building which can be used for residential, business, commercial, or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes, but is not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, sheds, docks, and similar accessory construction.
STRUCTURE, PUBLIC: A building or edifice of any kind which is owned or rented, and operated by a federal, state, or local government agency.
SUBDIVISION: Any real estate, wherever located, improved or unimproved, which is divided or proposed to be divided for the purpose of sale or lease, including sales or leases of any timeshare interest, unit in a common interest community, or similar interest in real estate.
SURFACE WATER OR WATERS: All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, wetlands, reservoirs, springs, rivers, drainage systems, waterways, watercourses, wells, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private.
SURFACE WATER-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL USE: the use of land for commercial purposes, where access to and use of a surface water feature is an integral part of the normal conductance of business. Marinas, resorts, and restaurants with transient docking facilities are examples of such use.
SWIMMING POOL: A structure, whether above or below grade level, designed to hold water more than 24 inches deep to be used for recreational purposes
TAPROOM: A room that is ancillary to the production of beer at a production brewery where the public can purchase and /or consume only the beer produced on site.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 507
TARP GARAGE: A portable or permanently anchored structure defined mainly by a steel or PVC frame over which a cover made from plastic, tarp, or other similar type fabrics or materials is placed.
TATTOO, TATTOOING: Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other mark upon, under or in the skin with ink or any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instruments which puncture any portion of the skin to any degree.
TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas.
TEMPORARY EROSION PROTECTION: Short term methods employed to prevent erosion. Examples of these methods include: straw, wood fiber blanket, wood chips and erosion netting.
TEMPORARY MOBILE CELL SITE: Any mobile tower, pole, or structure located on a trailer, vehicle, or temporary platform intended primarily for the purpose of mounting an antenna or similar apparatus for personal wireless services, also commonly referred to as cellular on wheels (COW).
TOE OF BLUFF: The lower point of a 50-foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent.
TOP OF BLUFF: The higher point of a 50-foot segment with an average slope exceeding 18 percent.
TOTAL SITE SIGNAGE: The maximum permitted combined area of all signs allowed on a specific lot.
TOWNHOUSES: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of two or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to the roof and having open space on at least two sides of each unit. Each single-family dwelling unit shall be considered to be a separate building. No single structure shall contain in excess of eight (8) dwelling units, and each dwelling unit shall have separate and individual front and rear entrance.
TRASH HANDLING AND RECYCLING COLLECTION AREA: Areas designated for the accumulation, storage and pick-up of refuse and recyclable material associated with multi-
Tarp Garage
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 508 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
family home sites, civic and institutional uses, office uses, commercial uses, and industrial uses. This definition does not include trash and recycling containers associated with single family dwellings, or townhome units which do not utilize a communal location for trash and recycling.
TREE, CANOPY: A tree that has an expected height at maturity of 30 feet or more.
TREE, ORNAMENTAL: A small tree that has high visual impact typically grown for the beauty of its foliage and flowers rather than its functional reasons.
TREE, SPECIMEN: Any canopy tree with a DBH of 36 inches or more and any understory or ornamental tree with a DBH of 10 inches or more that is not exempted as a specimen tree by this ordinance.
TREE, UNDERSTORY: A tree that has an expected height at maturity of no greater than 30 feet.
TREE SAVE AREA: The area around a specimen tree that extends one linear foot around the tree’s dripline.
TRASH HANDLING AND RECYCLING COLLECTION AREA: Areas containing large dumpsters or compactors used to temporarily store trash and recycling materials prior to a regularly scheduled pick up. Such facilities are typically associated with multi-family buildings of more than four units, commercial operations and industrial sites.
TRUCK OR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A use where buses, trucks, and cargo are stored, where loading and unloading is carried on regularly, and where minor maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed.
UNDERSTORY TREE: A tree that has an expected height at maturity of no greater than 30 feet.
UPLAND: Means all lands at an elevation above the ordinary high water mark.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designated, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized, or maintained, and shall include the performance of such activity as defined by the performance standards of this ordinance.
UTILITIES – MAJOR: Major utilities shall include the following:
(A) Public infrastructure services providing regional or community-wide service that have regular employees on site during common working hours, and entail the construction of
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 509
new buildings or structures such as waste treatment plants, potable water treatment plants, and solid waste facilities.
(B) Commercial wind energy conversion systems (public or private).
(C) Electrical substations.
VARIANCE: The waving by board action of the literal provisions of the zoning ordinance in instances where their strict enforcement would cause undue hardship because of physical circumstances unique to the individual property under consideration.
VEGETATION: Means the sum total of plant life in some area, or a plant community with distinguishable characteristics.
VEGETATION, NATIVE: Any indigenous tree, shrub, ground cover or other plant adapted to the soil, climatic, and hydrographic conditions occurring on the site.
VEHICLE, EMERGENCY: For the purpose of evaluating vehicles which may be parked in residential areas, the term emergency vehicle shall include ambulances, police and sheriff’s department vehicles, fire protection vehicles, emergency towing vehicles, and other law enforcement vehicles.
VEHICLE, PASSENGER: A vehicle capable of moving under its own power which is licensed and operable for use on public roadways, and shall include the following vehicles: Passenger automobiles, pick-up trucks and sport-utility vehicles of less than 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, pick-up trucks and sport-utility vehicles of between 9,000 pounds and 13,000 pounds with no visible commercial messages, commuter vans of a capacity up to 16 persons, and motorcycles.
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL:
(A) A vehicle that is used primarily for recreational or vacation purposes, and which is licensed and operable for use on public roadways, whether self-propelled, carried on, or towed behind a self-propelled vehicle.
(B) Operable recreational equipment that is not licensed for used on the public roadway, but used off-road, such as all-terrain vehicles, boats, off-road motorcycles, race vehicles, snowmobiles, or similar equipment. Such equipment shall be properly licensed if the State of Minnesota provides for such licensing.
(C) Licensed, operable trailers which may be used to tow recreational equipment, whether such trailers are loaded or unloaded, including utility trailers. Where a trailer is loaded with recreational equipment, such trailer and equipment shall be considered to be one (1) piece of equipment for the purposes of this section.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 510 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
VEHICLE, LARGE COMMERCIAL: A vehicle used for commercial purposes which is a semi-tractor and/or semi-trailer, dump truck, or any other commercial vehicle that does not qualify under the definition of a “Small Commercial Vehicle”.
VEHICLE, SMALL COMMERCIAL: A vehicle used primarily for commercial purposes, including pick-up trucks and sport-utility vehicles larger than 9,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, but less than 13,000 pounds gross vehicle weight which display a commercial business message, and all other commercial vans or trucks, regardless of commercial message which are no greater than any of the following dimensions: 22 feet in length, 8 feet in height, and 8.5 feet in width.
VEHICLE FUEL SALES: Buildings and premises where gasoline, oils and greases, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail (or in connection with a private operation where the general public is excluded from use of facilities), and where in addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made, and no other:
 “Automotive Repair – minor” as defined by this ordinance
 Sales of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for filling station customers, as accessory and incidental to principal operation;
 Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers; and
 Provision of restroom facilities, but not including showers.
Uses permissible at a vehicle fuel sales establishment do not include “Automobile Repair – major” as defined by this ordinance, major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in filling stations. Vehicle fuel sales establishments are intended for the servicing and delivery of goods to passenger vehicles and small commercial vehicles. Facilities for sales to large trucks may be included, but shall not include activities that would constitute uses most commonly found at a truck stop, such as showers, truck washes, truck parking or truck storage for more than temporary periods necessary to purchase and pay for retail goods.
VEHICLE SALES OR RENTAL: Establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of new and used—in operating condition—automobiles, noncommercial trucks, motor homes, recreational vehicles or farm machinery; including incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing.
VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING, INTERIOR: Vegetative material, structures (walls or fences), berms, and associated ground cover located within the interior of a parking lot, or other vehicular use area for the purposes of providing visual relief and heat abatement. [See Section 4.1(F)]
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 511
VEHICULAR USE AREA LANDSCAPING, PERIMETER: Vegetative material, structures (walls or fences), berms, and associated ground cover located around the perimeter of a parking lot, or other vehicular use area when such areas are adjacent to a street right-of-way or land in a residential district or residentially developed lands, used property for the purposes of screening the vehicular use area from off-site views. [See Section 4.1(F)]
VETERINARY FACILITIES – RURAL: An establishment for licensed practitioners engaged in practicing veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for all animals.
VETERINARY FACILITIES – NEIGHBORHOOD: An establishment for licensed practitioners engaged in practicing veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for small household pets only.
VISIBLE: Capable of being seen by a person of normal visual acuity (whether legible or not) without visual aid.
WALL: Any structure which defines the exterior boundaries or courts of a building or structure and which has a slope of sixty (60) degrees or greater with the horizontal plane.
WASTE DISPOSAL & INCINERATION: A use which focuses on the disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, or other means and for whatever purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or nontoxic waste material of any kind.
WATER BODY: Means a body of water (lake, pond) in a depression of land or expanded part of a river, or an enclosed basin that holds water and surrounded by land.
WATER-ORIENTED ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR FACILITY: a small, above ground building or other improvement, except stairways, fences, docks, and retaining walls, which, because of the relationship of its use to a surface water feature, reasonably needs to be located closer to public waters than the normal structure setback. Examples of such structures and facilities include boathouses, gazebos, screen houses, fish houses, pump houses, and detached decks.
WATERCOURSE: Means a channel or depression through which water flows such as rivers, streams, or creeks and may flow year-round or intermittently.
WATERSHED: The area drained by the natural and artificial drainage system bounded peripherally by a bridge or stretch of high land dividing drainage areas.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 512 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
WATERWAY: A channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
WAYSIDE STAND: A temporary structure or vehicle used for the seasonal retail sale of agricultural goods produced by the operator of the wayside stand; the stand being clearly a secondary use of the premises which does not change the character thereof.
WETLANDS:
(A) Lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this ordinance, wetlands must:
(1) Have a predominance of hydric soils;
(2) Be inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and
(3) Under normal circumstances, support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation.
(B) "A wetland" or "the wetland" means a distinct hydrologic feature with characteristics of item A, surrounded by non-wetland and including all contiguous wetland types, except those connected solely by riverine wetlands. "Wetland area" means a portion of a wetland or the wetland.
(C) Wetlands do include public waters wetlands unless reclassified as shoreland by the commissioner under Minnesota Statutes, section 103G.201.
(D) The wetland size is the area within its boundary. The boundary must be determined according to the United States Army Corps of Engineers Wetland Delineation Manual (January 1987). The wetland type must be determined according to Wetlands of the United States, (1971 edition). Both documents are incorporated by reference under part 8420.0112, items A and B. The local government unit may seek the advice of the technical evaluation panel as to the wetland size and type.
WETLANDS, EXCEPTIONAL QUALITY: Exceptional quality wetlands contain an abundance of different plant species with dominance evenly spread among several species. Such wetlands may support some rare or unusual plant species. Invasive or exotic plant species are either absent or limited to small areas where some disturbance has occurred. This higher level of plant species variety generally provides high wildlife habitat value and may also support rare wildlife species. The shorelines of exceptional quality wetlands are natural and unaffected by erosion. These wetlands exhibit no evidence of significant man induced water level fluctuation. Exceptional quality wetlands provide excellent water quality
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance Page 513
protection, high aesthetic quality, and provide excellent opportunities for educational and scientific activities within the community.
WETLANDS, HIGH QUALITY: High quality wetlands are still generally in their natural state and tend to show less evidence of adverse effects of surrounding land uses. Exotic and invasive plant species may be present and species dominance may not be evenly distributed among several species, however, a minimum of twenty (20) different species can be found within the basin. There tends to be little evidence of water level fluctuation due to storms and their shorelines are stable with little evidence of erosion. The combination of these factors result in these wetlands being judged as providing a greater level of water quality protection and significantly better wildlife habitat. They show little if any evidence of human influences and their greater levels of species variety, wildlife habitat and ecological stability results in higher aesthetic quality. These characteristics also offer opportunities for educational or scientific value to the community.
WETLANDS, LOW QUALITY: Wetlands included in this category have been substantially altered by agricultural or urban development that caused over nutrification, soil erosion, sedimentation and water quality degradation. As a result of these factors, these wetlands exhibit low levels of plant species and a related reduction in the quality of wildlife habitat. These wetlands may also tend to exhibit extreme water level fluctuations in response to storms and show evidence of shoreline erosion. While these wetlands do provide for water quality and serve an important role in protecting water quality downstream, the combination of these characteristics cause these wetlands to provide low levels of water quality protection and to have poor aesthetic quality. They often exhibit evidence of significant human influences and they are deemed to be of little educational or scientific value to the community.
WETLANDS, MEDIUM QUALITY: Medium quality wetlands have a slightly higher number of plant species present than low quality wetlands, often with small pockets of indigenous species within larger areas dominated by invasive or exotic species. Their relatively greater species variety results in slightly better wildlife habitat. They exhibit evidence of relatively less fluctuation in water level in response to storms and less evidence of shoreline erosion. As a result of these characteristics, these wetlands provide somewhat better water quality protection. They also exhibit relatively less evidence of human influences and therefore, tend to be of a higher aesthetic quality. These wetlands are still judged to be of limited educational or scientific value to the community.
WETLAND BUFFER: An area of non-disturbed ground cover abutting a wetland left undisturbed to filter sediment, materials, and chemicals.
CHAPTER 8: RULES & DEFINITIONS
Section 8.4 Definitions
Subsection (B) Lots
Page 514 City of Monticello Zoning Ordinance
WHOLESALE SALES: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers. Wholesale establishment does not include contractor’s materials or office or retail sales of business supplies/office equipment.
WHOLESALER: Any person engaged in the business of selling alcoholic beverages to retail dealers.
WILDLIFE: All free living animals.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS): A wind-driven machine that converts wind energy into electrical power for the primary purpose of resale or off-site use
WINE: The product made from the normal alcoholic fermentation of grapes, including still wine, sparkling and carbonated wine, wine made from condensed grape must, wine made from other agricultural products than sound, ripe grapes, imitation wine, compounds sold as wine, vermouth, cider, sherry and sake, in each instance containing not less than one half of one percent nor more than 24% alcohol by volume for nonindustrial use.
WRECKER SERVICE: An establishment operated for the purpose of temporary storage on-site of no more than nine wrecked or inoperable vehicles for a period no longer than 90 days. If an establishment has 10 or more inoperable vehicles located on-site, stores inoperable vehicles for more than 90 days, stacks vehicles top to bottom, or portions of the vehicles are dismantled or removed for sale, it shall be considered a junkyard.
YARD [see Section 8.2(B)(3)(a)]
 YARD Related Definitions (e.g. front yard, corner yard, side yard, etc): [see section 8.2(B)(3)(a)(vii)]


Davidson, Fair, Gabler, Hilgart, and Stumpf
None.
None.

ANIMAL CONTROL
Boarding Fee: $16/per day + tax
Boarding Access Fee $250 per entity
Dog License: $20 - 2 years
$10 - 1 year
Late Fee $5
Replacement Tag $2+ tax
Disposal Fee $190 (euthanized animal)
$40 (adopted animal)
Licensed Unlicensed
Fine: Running at Large $50 $75
If impounded Add boarding fee (plus tax)
Permit for Keeping Fowl on Premises $50
Annual renewal for current permit $25
Permit for Keeping Honeybees on Premises $50
Annual Renewal of Permit $25
CEMETERY
Cremation Disinterment - weekday $200
Cremation Disinterment - weekend $250
Companion urn grave excavation - weekday $300
Companion urn grave excavation - weekend $400
Bronze memorial Marker setting with 4" concrete $450
border
Frost Charge: (excavations December through March) $100
Grave Excavation Fee:
Weekday $400
Weekend $450
Infant Grave Excavation - Weekday $100
Infant Grave Excavation - Weekend $125
Cremation Grave Excavation - Weekday $150
Cremation Grave Excavation - Weekend $200
Grave Purchasing Fee: Resident Non-Resident
Full Grave (4'x12') Flush Marker Area $1,075 $1,275
Full Grave (4'x12') Raised Marker Area $1,175 $1,375
Infant Grave (2'x6') $350 $375
Cremation Grave (4'x4') $590 $690
Columbarium (includes 2 interment niche covers w/name, YOB, Resident Non-Resident
YOD, *if pre-planning additional fee for death date)
Bottom niche row (row E) - 2 remains max $2,500 $2,600
Middle niche rows (rows C & D) - 2 remains max $2,700 $2,800
Top niche row (row A) - 2 remains max $2,900 $3,000
*Death Date (individual) $150 $150
*Death Date (double) $175 $175
Ossuary
Co-mingle urn placement (includes inscription and urn bag) $1,000
Veteran-co-mingle urn placement (includes inscription $950
and urn bag)
Service emblem $200
Urn Box $65
Satin Bag $80
Grave Staking Fee for burials: $150
Staking for Monument/Marker Placement $60
Grave Transfer Fee: $15
Memorial Plaque (Bronze) Stone: Cost + $10 + sales tax
TITLE 20 - CHAPTER 1
2020 FEE SCHEDULE - CITY OF MONTICELLO
Fee Schedule Rates supersede amounts shown in city ordinances or policies which are dated prior to the fee schedule.
Overtime Fee (burials outside of business hours) $125
Plant Stand $45 (includes tax)
Opening and closing/Re-opening of Niche: $150 Weekday
$200 Weekend
Perpetual Care Fee:
New Grave Sales Included in grave price (Maintenance not taxable - Plant Care taxable)
Grave Sold Pre-1960 $100
COMMUNITY CENTER
Membership Fees: (for new members) Resident Rate Regular Rate
Daily Pass
Junior/Senior $7 $8
Adult $8 $9
3 Month Membership
Junior/Senior $91.50 $111.50
Adult $128 $156.50
Dual Senior $150 $184
Family $226 $255.50
Dual Adult $205 $232
Annual Membership (Paid in full Options)
Junior/Senior $249 $331
Adult $340 $440
Dual Senior $411 $527
Family $578 $689
Dual Adult $526 $636
Continuous Membership (Monthly Payment Option**)
Junior/Senior $24.25 $30.50
Adult $36.75 $43
Dual Senior $41 $52.50
Family $59 $64.50
Dual Adult $53.50 $58
Collection Fee - applies if sent to a collection service
for delinquent payments (automatic withdrawal) $50
**Automatic Withdrawal
Administrative fee for start-up of new monthly
memberships (one time fee) if membership is not
cancelled $30 $30
Cancellation fee - applies if within 12 months of joining $50 $50
Childcare - option with Membership
$20/month for each
child or $40/month
for family
Childcare Hourly Fees $4 per child/per hour
$37.50 for 10 hour pass
$70 for 20 hour pass
All current MCC members, including charter members, will see an increase of 5% on their membership fees.
Corporate Memberships (Quarterly Rate) JR/SR ADULT FAMILY
Level 1 $63 $84 $137
Level 2 $58 $77 $126
Level 3 $55 $73 $119
Special Passes: Resident Rate Regular Rate
Daily Pass (10 visits) $66 $77
Special Rates:
Indoor Play Area $4.25 $5.25
Public Skate - Individual -- $5
Public Skate - Family $20
Twilight Swim Rates - Junior/Adult -- $5
Group Rates - Junior -- $6.50
Group Rates - Adult -- $7.50
Shower Only -- $4
Group X Class Drop-In $17
Silver Sneakers Drop-In -- $9
Swimming Lessons/Birthday Parties
Private Swimming Lessons
$30/Lesson for
Members
$40/Lesson for
Nonmembers
Additional rates available for
more than one student or 4
lesson packages
Swimming Lessons (Group) $48 for Members
$58 for
Nonmembers
Birthday Party Room Rental Packages
Resident Rate/Child
$12-$15 depending
on package
Regular Rate/Child
$13-$16 depending
on package
Gymnasium Rental Rates:
Gym - Regular $68/hour
Gym - Non-Profit $48/hour
Full Kitchen $105/hour
Energy Fee $96/hour
Early set up fee $67/hour
Damage Deposit 1/2 of rental fees
Pool Rental $111/hour
Hourly Room Rental Rates (2 hour minimum required): Resident Regular Non-Profit
Boom Island Room $19 $21 $17
Bridge Room (full) $29 $34 $25
N. or S. Bridge Room $18 $20 $15
Warehouse Room Weekday $33 $39 $25
Prairie Center $39 $48 $33
Warehouse Room - Weekend $39 $48 $33
Mississippi Room: Private Resident Private Regular Business Resident Business Regular
Half Room Rental $61 $74 $48 $67
Full Room Rental $85 $102 $72 $94
Rental event with alcohol (not weddings): Resident Regular Organization
(2 hour minimum - reserve within 3 months of event) $168/hour $183/hour $155/hour
Add Chapel Rental $458 for 6 hours $486 for 6 hours Then $50 each additional hour
Hostess Fee: $30/hour
Locker fees: $10 per month per locker
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - BUILDING
County Assessor Fees: Building Valuation $499,999 or less $50
Building Valuation $500,000 or more $150
Basement Finish 106% of 1997 State recommended schedule
Building Inspection (non-permit related): $60/hour
$15 minimum charge for 15 minutes or less
Building Permit Fees: 106% of 1997 State recommended schedule
Building Permit Surcharge: use state-mandated fee
Contractor License Check Fee: $5
Building Permit/Records - Duplicate $60/hour
$15 minimum charge for 15 minutes or less
Blight Processing Fee $60 (per parcel)
Demolition Permit: 106% of 1997 State recommended schedule
Permit is issued under a building permit (follow same procedures as issuing a building permit). Prior to demolition permit issuance
verify with Public Works. Contractor must arrange disconnection: 1) Sanitary sewer; 2) City water & retrieve water mater; and 3) approve
routing for trucks and heavy equipment, (if applicable). Excavation permit may also be required.
Fire Alarm/Fire Sprinkler System 106% of 1997 State Recommended Schedule or $100 minimum + state surcharge
Master Plan Review: 25% of building permit fee
Mechanical Permits: Residential $50 base + $9/fixture + state surcharge
Commercial 1.5% of valuation or $100 minimum + state surcharge
Mobile Home Permit $180
Moving Buildings: $150 + expense + demolition permit
Plan Review: 65% of building permit fee
Plumbing Permits: Residential $50 base + $9/fixture ("Fixture" includes such things as traps, toilets,
floor drains, sinks, showers)
Commercial 1.5% of valuation or $100 minimum + state surcharge
Rental Housing License Fee: $45/per building + $15 for each dwelling unit within the building
Rental Housing License Application/Late Fee: Double the standard license fee
Rental Housing License Transfer Fee: $35
Residential Building Escrow: $2,000 (Held for completion of as-built survey, boulevard trees, turf
establishment. Secures street sweeping, lot erosion control & any damage to
public improvements if all items not complete/satisfied at certificate of
occupancy)
Re-roof (residential) $150 + state surcharge
Re-side (residential) $150 + state surcharge
Window replacement (residential) $100 + state surcharge
Sign Permits: Permanent $50 for first $1,000 of value (minimum fee $50)
$10 each additional $1,000 of value
Sign Permits: Temporary $50
State Surcharge on Building Permits:
Valuation of Structure Addition or Alteration Surcharge Computation
$1,000,000 or less .0005 x valuation
$1,000,000 to $2,000,000 $500 + .0004 x (Value - $1,000,000)
$2,000,000 to $3,000,000 $900 + .0003 x (Value - $2,000,000)
$3,000,000 to $4,000,000 $1200 + .0002 x (Value - $3,000,000)
$4,000,000 to $5,000,000 $1400 + .0001 x (Value - $4,000,000)
Greater than $5,000,000 $1500 + .00005 x (Value - $5,000,000)
Surveys: $15
Utility Locate Fee: Residential $50
Commercial/Industrial $65
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Business Subsidy Application $200
GMEF Loan Application $550 minimum or 1.5% of loan amount, whichever is greater
SCDP Loan Application $550 minimum or 1.5% of loan amount, whichever is greater
TIF Application $10,000 Escrow Deposit
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT - PLANNING/ZONING
Administrative Home Occupation Permit $50
Community Garden Plot $30
Comprehensive Plan Amendment $200 + escrow (per chart)
Conditional Use Permit $200 + Escrow (per chart)
Escrow Chart - Land Use Application Plan Review Commercial Residential
0-3 acres $2,000 1 unit $500 (single family)
4-10 acres $6,000 2+ units $1000 base +
11+ acres $8,000
$100 per unit (up to
$10,000)
*reconciled to actual costs for staff/consulting time after decision
Escrow Chart - Development & Subdivision Project Planning Review & Administration
2% of estimated public
improvement cost or $2,000
minimum, whichever is greater
Review and Inspection Legal Review & Administration
2% of estimated public
improvement cost or $2,000
minimum, whichever is greater
City Review & Administration
2% of estimated public
improvement cost or $2,000
minimum, whichever is greater
Engineering; grading - Review & Inspection
3% of estimated public
improvement cost or $2,000
minimum, whichever is greater
Engineering streets & utilities review and inspection
4% of estimated public
improvement cost or $2,000
minimum, whichever is greater
Iron Monuments $300/lot
Interim Use Permit: $200 + Escrow (per chart)
Labor (for Community Development/Projects):
Planner $170/hour
Engineer $166/hour (maximum)
Construction Inspector $111/hour (maximum)
Landscaping Security Letter of credit or cash based on statement of value of landscaping x 125%.
(held for 1 full year or 2 growing seasons)
Park Dedication (residential) An amount of land equal to eleven percent (11%)
of the total gross land area of the plat shall be
presumptively defined as "reasonably commensurate."
In the event that the subdivider objects to the eleven
percent (11%) standard, the City shall, at the
developer's request and expense, conduct a
specific dedication study of the park system and
the demand placed on the system by the proposed plat.
Cash-in-Lieu: 11% of fair market value of the raw land to be
platted at the time of final plat. The city may require an
appraisal to determine market value of subject land being platted.
Parking Fund (CCD District) $4,500 per stall
Plat Subdivisions:
Preliminary Plat $300 + escrow (per chart) $2,000 minimum
Final Plat $50 + escrow (per chart)
Sketch Plat $50 + $1000 escrow
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs): Concept:
Development:
Final:
Adjustment $50 + $1,000 escrow
Public ROW or Easement Vacation $200 + Escrow (per chart)
Rezoning Request: $200 + Escrow (per chart)
Simple Subdivision/Administrative Lot Combination/
Lot Line Adjustment $200 + Escrow (per chart)
Wetland Delineation Review $50 application fee/$500 escrow
Special Home Occupation Permits: $200 + Escrow (per chart)
Special Planning Commission Meeting $350
Temporary Use Permit (waived for parades only) $50
Variance:
Single Family - Application Fee $200
- Deposit $700
NOTE: When multiple land use applications are run concurrently, only one application fee and escrow deposit
shall be required per meeting cycle, until escrow is depleted. New escrow required per escrow chart once depleted.
ENGINEERING
Driveway Permit $35
GPS Locate Fee (New subdivisions) $70/unit
Grading Permit:
Existing Single-Family Residential $75 per permit + $1,500/acre restoration surety bond.
New Single-Family Residential Development, No drainage calculation review required:
$150 per permit plus restoration surety bond of $3000/per acre;
$3,000 minimum escrow
Multi-Dwelling, Commercial & Industrial Properties Drainage calculation review required:
$350 per permit plus restoration surety bond of $3000/first acre;
$1500 each additional acre.
Erosion and Sediment Control Inspection Escrow $300 x weeks of construction - sites disturbing 1 acre or more
w/NPDES construction stormwater permit
Land Reclamation/Mining Permit (requires Fee determined by City Council resolution + 100%
subdivision development agreement or CUP) of land restoration costs as determined by City Engineer
Public Improvement Security Letter of credit or cash based on statement of construction cost of
improvements x 125%
$50 + escrow (per chart)
$200 + $2,000 escrow
$200 + escrow (per chart) $2,000 minimum
Right-of-Way Permits
Drops - no drawing required unless origination occurs more than 10 feet from property to be served:
Fee without drawings $30/25 addresses (maximum)
Fee with drawings $30/5 addresses with drawings (maximum)
Permit Extension Fee: $20.00
Pavement Hole Fee: $55
Trunk Line Fee:
Base Fee (first 100 feet) $45
Trenching (over 100 feet) $.10/lineal foot
Boring (over 100 feet) $.05/lineal foot
Obstruction Fee: $45
Small Cell Wireless Fee $45
Collocation Fees
Escrow - document Review $1,500
Wireless Support Structure Rent $150/year
Wireless Support Structure Maintenance $25/year
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Apparatus Rate per Hour (billed in hour increments)
Engine (up to 4 personnel) $275
Ladder/aerial (up to 4 personnel) $275
Water tender (up to 2 personnel) $200
Command vehicle/utility truck/grass truck (up to 2
personnel) $85
ATV/UTV with water tank (up to 2 personnel) $50
Extra Personnel $15/hour
Controlled/Prescribed Burns:
Building $2,500
Prairie or Wildland, less than 20 acres $750/hour
Prairie or Wildland, 20 acres or more $1,000/hour
County-wide response teams
Special response unit $500
Fire investigation team $300
False Alarm Policy* - First Time No charge
Second Time $250
Third Time or More $350
* Per calendar year
Fire Lock Box Fee: Cost + 10% + sales tax
Home Fire Safety Inspections (i.e. daycare/foster care) $50
LICENSES/PERMITS
Burning Permit: $250 deposit
(to cover expenses, if PW/Fire Dept. are called to burn site)
Cigarette License: Tobacco licenses are issued by Wright County
Gambling License: Licensed through State of Minnesota; Requires Council approval
Liquor Administrative Fines:
First violation $500
Second violation, within 2 years $1,000
Third violation, within 2 years $2,000 (no mandatory revocation of license)
Liquor Licenses:
1-Day Consumption & Display $25
3.2 Beer, On-Sale $275/year
3.2 Beer, Off-Sale $100/year
Brew Pub Off-Sale $200/year
Brewer Taproom $500/year
Taproom, Sunday Sales $0
Liquor, On-Sale $3,750/year
On-Sale Liquor, Sunday Sales $200 (Statutory limit)
Liquor, Setups $250/year
Liquor, Club (Veteran's Org).
Membership
200 or less $300 (Statutory limit)
201-500 $500 (Statutory limit)
501-1000 $650 (Statutory limit)
1001-2000 $800 (Statutory limit)
2001-4000 $1,000 (Statutory limit)
Over 4000 $2,000 (Statutory limit)
Micro distillery $500/year
Temporary On-Sale (Beer) $10/day
Wine, On-Sale $275/year
Wine/Strong Beer Comb. On-Sale $1,200/year
Wine/3.2 Beer Com. On-Sale $500/year
Mobile Food Unit
Temporary Permit $10
Annual Permit $50
Pawn Shop:
Annual license, initial $50
Annual renewal of current license $25/year
Transaction fee $1.00 per transaction
Peddler/Solicitor Permit:
Peddler Merchant/Business Application $25
Peddler Merchant Permit - per person $25
Background Check $25
Special Event Permit $50
$25 (For non-profit/charitable organization)
(fee may be waived by Administration for non-profit organizations not
utilizing City services)
Therapeutic Massage License
Massage Enterprise License $100/year
Massage Therapist License $50/year
Massage Enterprise/Therapist - owner operates as
therapist - one fee $100/year
Background Investigation Fee $25
Transient Merchant:
Annual permit, private premise $75/year
Daily Fees, operating under annual permit $10/day (with annual permit)
Daily fees, independent merchant $50/day
Daily fees, farm/garden fruits & vegetables No fee from 6/15 to 9/15 (state mandated)
Fireworks Sale $350/year
Traveling Shows $100/first day; $50/day for each day thereafter
MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS
Assessment/Property Search - full $30
City Labels $.50/sheet + sales tax
Comprehensive Guide Plan - Entire $32 plus tax
Downtown Revitalization Plan $15 plus tax
Transportation Plan $50 plus tax
Copies: copy machine $.25 per copy + sales tax
Engineering copier $.50/square foot + sales tax ($2 minimum)
Emailed $35.00/hour + sales tax (minimum 1/4 hour)
Electronic media $10.00 + cost of media + sales tax
Delinquent Certification Processing Fee: $75 per parcel
Minimum Account Balance of $75
Processed once a year
Delinquent List $10 + tax (each)
Deposits on City Repair Projects $100-$300 (depending on est. value of work)
Library Room Rental $30 per rental
Maps: City map (24" X 36") $3 + sales tax
City map (11" X 17") $1 + sales tax
Zoning map (24" X 36") $3 + sales tax
State maps $.55 + sales tax
Wright County maps $3 + sales tax
Notary: $3 each
Signs: Current listed price + 10% handling charge + tax
Commercial, non-city initiated proclamations $50
PARKS
Memorials:
Bench $1,500 (includes tax, delivery, installation)
Tree $300 (includes tax, delivery, installation)
Facility Rental Fees:
Baseball/Softball Field Rental* (no lights)
Residents $25 per hour per field
Non-resident $35 per hour per field
Field Lighting*
Residents $15 per hour per field
Non-resident $20 per hour per field
*these fees are for individuals/groups to use the city facility for practice or an informal game.
Tournament Field Rental (includes lights as needed)
- up to 3 days $90 per field
- extended days $10 per field for each additional day
Park Rental Rates: Resident Non-Resident
Ellison Gazebo $110 $135
Ellison Log Shelter $110 for 6 hours $135 for 6 hours
West Bridge Park Shelter/Warming House $110 for 6 hours $135 for 6 hours
West Bridge Picnic Shelter $110 for 6 hours $135 for 6 hours
Pioneer Park $110 for 6 hours $135 for 6 hours
Groveland Park Picnic Shelter $110 for 6 hours $135 for 6 hours
Otter Creek $55 for 6 hours $80 for 6 hours
East Bridge Wedding Gazebo $135 for 6 hours
Lions Den/Gazebo $300
PUBLIC WORKS
Disease Replacement Tree $50 per property
Chipping: $65 + tax per 1/2 hour for the first 2 hours billed in half hour increments
$95 + tax per 1/2 hour or for the next hour billed in half hour increments
No more than 3 hours per year per property
Cone Replacement: Cost + $10 + sales tax
Construction Inspection (City or Engineer) $115/hour
Labor (no equipment): $65.00/hour - regular business hours
$100/hour outside of regular hours
Sidewalk Snow & Ice Control $50.00 per lot - 1st Offence
$75.00 per lot - 2nd Offence
$100.00 per lot - maximum after 2nd Offence
$100.00 Mobilization Charge per Offence at Staff Discretion
Sweeping: $150/hour - includes operator
Utility Excavation Permit Fee (water, wastewater, stormwater) $105
(Bonding and Insurance required)
Vac/Sewer Jet: $365/hour for two operators & machine
Other Equipment (including operator):
Large Front End Loaders $160/hour
Mid Size Loaders $105/hour
Backhoe Loader $160/hour
Motor Grader $170/hour
Skid Steere $105/hour
Dump Truck $105/hour
Pickup or 1-ton Truck $95/hour
SANITARY SEWER
Sewer Rates: 1st 1,000 gallons $9.18 minimum
O v e r 1 , 0 0 O0 vgearl l3o7n4s0 gallons $5.89/1,000 gallons
Sewer Rates: Special Cases $10 per month X number of people in household
Industrial Sewer Rates:
All Usage $3.560/1,000 gallons + sales tax - effective 1/1/2020
$3.660/1,000 gallons + sales tax - effective 7/1/2020
BOD5: $0.384/lb. + sales tax - effective 1/1/2020
$0.395/lb. + sales tax - effective 7/1/2020
TSS: $0.527/lb. + sales tax - effective 1/1/2020
$0.543/lb. + sales tax - effective 7/1/2020
Testing Actual costs + 10%
Sewer and Water Combination Permit: $130 (residential)
$130 plus tax (commercial)
Sewer Access Charge:
Residential - Single Family $4,315/unit
All others per unit equivalent $4,315/unit
Trunk Sanitary Sewer:
Residential Unit $1,555/unit
Non-Residential $3,898/acre
Meadow Oaks Lift Station Trunk Area Charge $2,754/acre
Waste Water Discharge Permit:
10,000 to 15,000 GPD $50 annually
15,001 to 25,000 GPD $100 annually
25,001 to 50,000 GPD $150 annually
50,001 to 100,000 GPD $250 annually
over 100,000 GPD $300 annually
STORM SEWER
Trunk Storm Sewer Fees: $4,164 (net acre)
Alternate Ponding Area - Residential $4,267 per acre
Alternate Ponding Area - Commercial $8,553 per acre
Alternate Ponding Area - Industrial $9,994 per acre
Stormwater Utility
Residential (1 drainage unit per residential unit) $1.50/drainage unit/month effective 1/1/2020 and $2.00 effective 6/1/2020/drainage unit/month
Non-Residenatial (7 drainage units per impervious acre - $1.50/drainage unit/month effective 1/1/2020 and $2.00 effective 6/1/2020/drainage unit/month
minimum 7) (minimum 7)
WASTE ITEMS
Garbage Service Fees
All residential garbage with cart service
1st Container $8.25 + solid waste management tax (currently 9.75% tax per month) effective 1/1/2020
$9 + solid waste management tax (currently 9.75% tax per month) effective 6/1/2020
2nd Container $13 + solid waste management tax (currently 9.75% tax per month)
Cart Transfer Fee $30
Garbage Cart Replacement (if lost or stolen):
38 gallon Cost + Tax + $10.00
60 gallon Cost + Tax + $10.00
90 gallon Cost + Tax + $10.00
Recycle Cart Replacement (if lost or stolen):
35 gallon Cost + Tax + $10.00
64 gallon Cost + Tax + $10.00
90 gallon Cost + Tax + $10.00
Recycle Service Fee $0.75 effective 1/1/2020
$1.50 effective 6/1/2020
Recycle
Additional cart pickup $0.00
Storage Bins (red, yellow, blue) $10 includes sales tax (until sold out)
WATER
Hydrant Rates for Contractors:
(#1, #2 and #3 ARE ALL TAXABLE IF COMMERCIAL)
1. All contractors must obtain a permit from the Water Superintendent. The permit fee is $500.
This permit will define the hydrant to be used and provides a tally sheet for water usage.
2. The following rates shall apply:
Up to 3,000 gallons $40 minimum
Over 3,000 gallons $4.09/1,000 gallons
3. The following deposits shall be taken for use of City equipment (no exceptions):
Hydrant Wrench $100
2-1/2" fill hose $150
1-1/2" fill hose with 2-1/2" adapter $150
2-1/2" hydrant meter $1,500
3/4" and small meter $250
Nozzle $75
*If equipment is returned within 10 days of permit expiration in good condition, the full amount of meter deposit less 10% per month
shall be refunded less water consumption at rates shown above.
Industrial Water Rate, Meter 1
All usage $2.110/1,000 gallons + sales tax
Irrigation Water Rate - Residential, Townhomes & Commercial:
first 1,000 gallons $7.10 minimum + sales tax
1,001-10,000 gallons $1.74/1,000 gallons + sales tax
10,001-33,000 gallons $2.02/1,000 gallons + sales tax
over 33,000 gallons $2.21/1,000 gallons + sales tax
(if metered separately, no quarterly minimum base rate is applied to irrigation meters with zero usage)
Final Bill Processing Fee $20
Obsolete or refusal of equipment charge (per month $30
charge until replacement is scheduled)
Delinquent sprinkling meter turn-off $25
Delinquent sprinkling meter turn-on $25
Res/Comm Water : 0-1,000 gallons
first 1,000 gallons $7.10 minimum + sales tax
1 , 0 0 1 - 1 03,704010- 2g9a,l9lo2n0s gallons $1.74/1,000 gallons + sales tax
1 0 , 0 0 1 - 3239,,090201 -g1a0l0lo,0n0s0 gallons $2.02/1,000 gallons + sales tax
o v e r 3 3 ,o0v0e0r g1a0l0lo,0n0s0 gallons $2.21/1,000 gallons + sales tax
Minimum Bill for Malfunctioning Meter $150 after 3rd contact attempt.
Trunk Water Charge: $1,153/residential unit
$2,882/acre non-residential
Little Mountain Booster Station Trunk Area Charge $2,329/acre
Water Access Charge: 1" line $833 + materials
1-1/4" line $1,266 + materials
1-1/2" line $1,518 + materials
2" line $1,997 + materials
3" line $2,498 + materials
4" line $3,291 + materials
6" line $4,143 + materials
8" line $5,440 + materials
Water Availability Charge: $41
(For those who have city water available but (billed in July)
choose not to hook up)
Water main tapping - new services (1 inch only) $250 each + materials
Water Meters: 5/8" meter $373 + sales tax
3/4" meter $410 + sales tax
1" meter $515 + sales tax
1 1/2" meter $830 + sales tax
2" meter + up Cost + $50 + sales tax
1"x3/4" meter valves $58 + sales tax
1"x1" meter valves $63 + sales tax
Water meter replacement due to preventable damage Cost + Labor (1 hour minimum)
Water Shut Off, then Turned On: $50.00 ($25 on/$25off) + delinquency (taxable if non-res.)
Water Violations (sprinkling):
1st Violation No Fee
2nd Violation $50
Each Subsequent Violation $100/per violation
Accounts Receivable
Interest Charge on Miscellaneous Account Receivable 1.5% monthly
Utility Bill
Utility Bill Penalty - Monthly 5% of past due amount, except September penalty 0%
Utility - Ebill Discount $0.50
Utility - ACH Payment Discount $1.25
Minnesota Department of Health
Water Service Connection Fee Currently $9.72 per year ($.81 per month)
 


